$2.00 


quarterly 


FUTURE  VISIONS 


/\T   TT"?  OT"  vol.  II  no.  1 

(J  (J  Jio   I  Summer,  1975 

a  feminist  quarterly 

FUTURE  VISIONS 
and  FANTASIES 

C OYltfZYl  tS 
FEMINIST  VISIONS  of  the  FUTURE 

Jane  Dolkart  and  Nancy  Hartsock  2 

A  WOMAN  BUILT  ENVIRONMENT: 

Constructive  Fantasies 
Noel  Phyllis  Birkby  and  Leslie  Kanes  Weisman  7 

NEW  WOMEN-A  poem 

June  Namias  19 

VISIONS-A  poem 

et  Haight  19 

FREESTANDING:  JACQUA'S  STORY 
Sally  Gearhart  20 

PRIME  TIME:  ART  and  POLITICS 
Alexa  Freeman  and  Jackie  MacMillan  27 

I  '  LECTIONS  on  SCIENCE  FICTION 
An  Interview  with  Joanna  Russ  40 

WITCH  is  to  WOMON  as  WOMB  is  to  BIRTH 


The  ILLUSION  of  ANDROGYNY 

Janice  Raymond 
MATRIARCHY  and  POWER 
on  and  Paula  Webster 
CONCRETE  PLAYGROUNDS  on  my  MIND 

Cvnthia  Washinot, 


50 


57 


67 


73 


ight   ©    1975  by  Quest:   a  feminist  quarterly,   Inc.   All 

1.    Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  pro- 

ninist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in 

y,  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly, 

N.W.  Washingt.  0009,  U.S.A.  Applica- 

md-class  postage  rates  is  pending  at  Washington 

Diana  Press,  Baltimore,  Maryland,  U.S.A.  Subscrip- 
$7.00/ycar  (4   issues)  to  individuals;  $8.00/year  in 
Mexico;  $10.00/year  overseas;  $12.00/year  to  institu- 
2.00/sample  copy.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a 
S843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003.  Bulk 
st.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available 


staff 


Copy  Editor 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Managing  Editor 
Beverly  Fisher 

n  Editor 
Alexa  Freeman 

Promotion  Editor 
Karen  Kollias 

Editors 

Jane  Dolkart 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Mary-Helen  Mautner 
Emily  Medvec 
Gerri  Traina 

advisory 

Dolores  Bargowski 
Rita  Mae  Brown 
Jean  O'Leary 
Juanita  Weaver 


assist  a 


er 

nts 


Sidney  Oliver 
Dorothy  Remy 
Lee  Schwing 


Cover  design  by 
Casey  Czarnik 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua21wash 


i    I 


|P! 

^H^ 

5^^$w- 

WmflkfW/'/*J 

wt 

J$^&*^ 

a 

%m 

mi 

W.iilmwr„,„. 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth 
feminist  political  analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is 
not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the 
women's  movement  possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as 
regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization  or  a  poli- 
tical party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the 
movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached  a  point  where  each 
answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been  through  various 
ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle 
brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power 
for  women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence 
against  women?  Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do 
not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across 
the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


Special  Notice 


If  you  have  not  received  a  previous  issue  of  Quest,  it 
may  be  because  you've  moved  and  never  sent  us  a  change  of 
address.  The  post  office  does  not  forward  second  class 
mail  unless  you  specifically  request  it  and  also  indicate 
that  you  will  pay  for  it.  The  post  office  does  not  return 
the  undelivered  copies  to  Quest.  We,  therefore,  cannot  be 
responsible  for  these  lost  issues.  As  neither  of  us  can 
afford  the  loss,  please  notify  us  of  a  change  of  address 
immediately.  If  possible,  provide  us  with  the  number 
which  appears  above  your  name  on  your  address  label. 


images  from  a  Past  Life' 


photograph  by  Caroline  Vaughan 


Feminist  Visions 
of  the  Future 

by  Jane  Dolkart  and  Nancy  Hartsock 


The  development  of  feminist  ideo- 
logy requires  a  clear  sense  of  the  fu- 
ture: a  sense  of  where  we  are  going  and 
what  we  want.  Feminists  have  attacked 
capitalism,  patriarchy,  and  white  su- 
premacy as  institutions  which  oppress 
women.  Now  that  we  are  trying  to 
build  a  new  society,  we  need  a  different 
kind  of  energy— energy  grounded  in  our 
visions  of  the  future.  The  relationship 
between  vision  and  struggle  is  at  the 
core  of  the  Movement's  development. 
Visions  can.  structure  our  priorities, 
provide  a  measure  of  our  successes, 
hold  a  source  of  energy  for  change. 
The  white  male  power  elite  has  recog- 
nized the  need  to  plan  for  the  future 
and  has  generated  much  material  on 
futurism.*  It  is  important  to  under- 
stand the  elite  vision  to  show  why,  as 
feminists,  we  must  reject  it  and  create 
our  own  visions  of  the  future. 

♦The  work  of  Daniel  Bell,  The  Coming 
of  Post-Industrial  Society,  Alaine  Touraine, 
The  Post-Industrial  Society,  Jacques  Ellul, 
The  Technological  Society,  are  a  few  of  the 
most  influential  sources  for  ideas  about  the' 
post-industrial  society.  Others  who  have  been 
concerned  with  similar  problems  are:  Theo- 
dore Roszak,  The  Making  of  the  Counter 
Culture,  Andre  Gorz,  Strategy  for  Labor, 
and  Alvin  Toffler,  Future  Shock. 


Definitions  of  the  kind  of  change 
feminists  seek,  the  structure  of  our 
organizations  and  strategies,  questions 
of  leadership-all  these  must  be  placed 
within  the  context  of  our  visions,  with- 
in the  contest  of  a  world  where  women 
have  power.  What  will  this  world  look 
like?  This  is  the  question  our  visions 
and  fantasies  must  respond  to.  We  need 
to  think  not  only  in  concrete  terms; 
we  also  need  to  dream.  Dreams  are  an 
act  of  faith  in  ourselves,  an  impetus  to 
continued  struggle. 

This  issue  of  Quest  can  only  begin 
the  task  of  envisioning  a  "new  society." 
Our  future  visions  and  fantasies  are 
constantly  evolving,  changing,  and 
growing  as  we  learn  from  our  exper- 
iences, our  struggles  to  reformulate 
theory  and  build  the  organizations  and 
structures  of  a  movement.  When  we 
ask  specific  questions  about  what  we 
want  society  to  be  like,  we  develop 
a  better  sense  of  the  kind  of  changes 
feminists  need  to  create.  It  is  easy  to 
state  that  we  want  an  end  to  oppress- 
ion, class  distinctions, '  capitalism,  rac- 
ism, heterosexism,  and  sexism.  It  is 
much  harder  to  lay  down  in  con- 
crete terms  the  implications  of  those 
changes. 


2/ Quest,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


The  Elite  Vision 


The  Technological  intellectuals 
who  work  for  and  represent  those  in 
power  are  particularly  important  for 
us  to  analyze.**  They  do  not  challenge 
the  existence  of  a  capitalist  society 
but  only  attempt  to  explain  where  it 
is  at  present,  and  where  it  can  go.  They 
take  as  their  premise  that  we  in  the 
United  States  are  entering  a  phase  of 
social  organization  they  call  post-in- 
dustrial society.  Those  who  have  tried 
to  see  into  the  future  of  the  U.S.  have 
almost  totally  disregarded  the  concerns 
of  feminists.  Their  work  may  be  chal- 
lenged on  two  grounds:  1)  their  failure 
to  include  the  interests  of  women, 
minorities,  and  lower  and  working  class 
people  in  their  analysis,  and  2)  a  more 
fundamental  failure,  their  acceptance 
of  political,  economic,  and  social  in- 
stitutions as  they  exist  today. 


The  theorists  of  the  post-indus- 
trial society  assume  that  the  major 
question  to  be  addressed  is  how  tech- 
nology will  change  social  life  within  an 
advanced  capitalist  society.  They  re- 
cognize that  the  development  of  sci- 
ence and  technology  led  to  an  enor- 
mous increase  in  productivity  in  this 
century.  This,  they  argue,  has  changed 
social  life  in  important  ways:  First,  the 
increase  in  productivity  has  freed  num- 
bers of  workers  from  the  necessity  to 
produce  goods  and  made  them  available 
for  other  work  (mostly  in  service  in- 
dustries). Second,  they  argue  that  the 
demand  for  services,  particularly  health 
and  education,  has  grown  in  part  be- 
cause the  increase  in  productivity  is 
tied  to  an  increasing  affluence.  People, 
they  claim,  now  have  enough  income 
to  spend  on  personal  services.  Third, 
in  part  as  a  result  of  the  increasing 
affluence  and  increased  importance  of 
service  (consumption)  industries,  social 
conflicts  increasingly  occur  in  the 
realm  of  consumption.  Finally,  because 
of  the  centrality  of  science  and  tech- 
nology, the  role  of  the  professional, 
the  expert,  is  greatly  expanded.  Let  us 
look  at  what  all  this  means  for  women. 
The  post-industrial  society  is  a  soc- 
iety in  which  services  are  very  im- 
portant. Daniel  Bell  and  others  have 
pointed  out  the  growth  of  service  in- 
dustries relative   to  manufacturing,  in 


**Most  of  the  members  of  the  American 
Academy's  Commission  on  the  Year  2000 
fall  into  this  category.  See  Daniel  Bell,  ed., 
Toward  the  Year  2000:  Work  in  Progress 
(Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1967). 


Feminist  Visions  of  the  Future/3 


that  the  percentage  of  workers  em- 
ployed in  service  industries  has  risen 
from  about  30%  of  the  work  force  in 
1900  to  60%  in  1968  to  a  projected 
70%  in  1980.*** 

The  futurists  ignore  the  special 
problems  women  will  face  in  such  a 
society.  Women  now  predominate  in 
service  work,  and  expansion  of  this 
area  has  meant  increased  employment 
of  women.  At  the  same  time,  most 
women  work  in  a  sex  segregated  labor 
market- female  jobs  tend  to  have  low 
wages,  poor  working  conditions,  low 
status,  few  prospects  for  advancement, 
and  require  the  employer  to  make  only 
a  minimal  investment  in  on-the-job 
training.  If  a  service-oriented  economy 
means  more  of  these  kinds  of  jobs 
for  women,  what  future  can  we  see 
for  women's  employment? 

The  theorists  of  post-industrial  so- 
ciety claim  that  we  are  a  society  in- 
creasingly centered  on  consumption 
rather  than  production,  and  that  in 
the  area  of  production  and  work,  we 
are  moving  from  an  era  of  exploitation 
of  labor  to  a  time  when  alienation  of 
labor  is  a  larger  problem.  Only  a  few  of 
those  who  work  for  wages  now  can  be 
equated  with  the  poor  (most  of  them 
concentrated  in  service  industries);  a 
worker's  problems  are  more  related 
to  the  size  and  complexity  of  industry 
and  bureaucratization  of  society  gen- 
erally. Poverty,  they  argue,  has  be- 
come a  problem  only  for  families 
headed  by  the  aged,  the  handicapped, 
women,  and  minority  group  men,  and 
therefore  poverty  is  now  unimportant 
in  the  United  States.  Thus,  although  an 


affluent  society  is  predicted  for  the 
very  near  future,  many  women  and 
minority  people  are  overlooked  in 
that  prediction.  Moreover,  the  argu- 
ment that  we  live  in  an  affluent  society 
ignores  the  way  that  capitalism  domi- 
nates the  world.  The  populations  of 
third-world  countries  are  not  simply 
alienated    but    exploited    as   workers. 

Post-industrial  society  is  not  simply 
a  matter  of  economics,  but  has  to  do 
with  political  structures,  forms  of 
bureaucratic  organization,  and  with 
psychological  orientations  as  well.  For 
centuries,  women  have  been  defined  by 
our  role  in  the  family  rather  than  as 
wage  workers.  This  has  meant  that 
women  have  been  given  a  major  share 
of  responsibility  for  family  consump- 
tion. If  conflicts  shift  from  issues  of 
production  to  issues  of  consumption 
and  distribution  in  post-industrial  so- 
ciety, what  impact  will  this  have  on 
women's  power  in  society?  Can  this 
give  women  in  their  traditional  roles 
more  leverage  to  affect  the  distribution 
of  wealth  in  advanced  capitalist  so- 
ciety? 

Those  who  write  about  post-in- 
dustrial society  also  have  argued  that 
knowledge  and  information  rather  than 
production  of  goods  have  become  fun- 
damental sources  of  power.  Post-indus- 
trial society  depends  on  the  expert, 
and  the  individual  must  grant  the 
expert  power  to  make  decisions  about 
her  own  life.  Post-industrial  society  is 
technocratic  and  bureaucratic,  a  so- 
ciety of  red  tape  and  information. 
Women  traditionally  have  been  ex- 
cluded  from  access  to  high  levels  of 


4/Quest 


information,  and  from  developing  ex- 
perience in  dealing  with  bureaucracy. 
Women's  education  has  discouraged 
familiarity  with  science  and  techno- 
logy. As  it  is  now  defined,  women's 
participation  in  the  technological  so- 
ciety would  allow  us  little  power. 

The  theorists  of  post-industrial  so- 
ciety have  recognized  important  issues. 
As  an  advanced  capitalist  society,  the 
United  States  is  indeed  undergoing 
tremendously  important  changes.  The 
continually  expanded  technical  control 
over  nature  and  human  beings,  the 
interlocking  relationship  of  science, 
technology,  industry,  and  government, 
the  increased  importance  of  knowledge 
and  information  as  a  factor  in  pro- 
ducing social  life,  the  changing  struc- 
ture of  the  work  force-all  these  factors 
make  it  possible  to  ask  fundamental 
questions  about  possibilities  for  social 
change,  about  changes  in  the  role  of 
women  and  the  family,  and  about  pos- 
sibilities for  a  different  political  and 
economic  system. 

But  the  futurists  have  considered 
these  possibilities  primarily  in  terms  of 
the  interests  of  the  white  male  ruling 
class.  The  human  side  of  these  question 
usually  has  been  neglected.  When  social 
change  is  addressed  it  is  treated  as  a 
problem  to  be  controlled  by  creating 
institutions  to  manage  these  changes. 
Moreover,  while  the  theorists  recognize 
that  prediction  of  technological  change 
is  subject  to  unexpected  discoveries, 
changes  of  direction,  etc.,  they  treat 
predictions  of  social  change  simply  as 
extensions  into  the  future  of  our 
capitalist,    racist,    patriarchal   society. 


Feminist    Visions 


Feminist  visions  of  the  future  op- 
pose those  of  the  theorists  of  the  post- 
industrial  society  not  only  for  their 
failure  to  address  the  problems  of  wom- 
en but  also  for  their  acceptance  of  so- 
cietal institutions  as  they  exist  today. 
The  futurists  project  certain  dislo- 
cations within  existing  institutions,  and 
and  raise  a  new  set  of  questions 
and  problems;  but  they  do  not  build  a 
new  society.  They  are  blinded  by  their 
admiration  for  what  is  technically 
possible.   Even  social  relations  among 

***Bell,  The  Coming  of  Post-Industrial 
Society  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1973), 
p.   129. 


Feminist  Visions  of  the  Future/ 5 


people  become  something  to  be  manip- 
ulated through  new  techniques  of  be- 
havior control,  "managed"  with  the 
latest  advertising  techniques. 

Women's  exclusion  from  techno- 
logical expertise,  as  well  as  from  pol- 
itical and  economic  power  is  evident 
in  the  kind  of  visions  women  usually 
have.  Feminists  have  concentrated  our 
fantasies  and  visions  on  people.  The 
major  questions  we  take  up  in  this  issue 
center  on  the  way  people  will  live 
together.  The  focus  is  on  human  rather 
than  technical  problems,  on  changes  in 
social  structures  and  the  quality  of  life. 
Technical  questions  related  to  the 
economic  and  political  structures  re- 
main hazy. 

In  our  visions,  feminists  seek  to 
eliminate  the  present  patriarchal  defi- 
nition of  power  as  domination.  How- 
ever, to  realize  our  visions  we  must 
also  gain  some  control  or  power  in 
society.  What  are  the  political  impli- 
cations of  a  world  in  which  women 
have  power?  We  do  not  wish  merely  to 
substitute  a  female  elite  for  the  present 
male  elite,  retaining  oppression  of  men 
and  most  women.  What  kind  of  or- 
ganizations must  we  develop  to  sup- 
port a  different  kind  of  power  and 
decision-making?  Must  women  dom- 
inate or  might  it  be  possible  to  share 
power  with  men  once  we  have  ob- 
tained it?  Will  a  feminist  society  have 
leaders  at  all?  if  so,  how  will  they  be 
chosen?  Is  it  possible  to  envision  a 
society  in  which  there  is  no  power, 
where  there  are  no  leaders?  Are  wom- 
en  ready  to  work  collectively?  With 


Questions  about  power  cannot  be 
separated  from  the  economic  and  so- 
cial system  as  a  whole.  We  must  exam- 
ine how  to  restructure  work  and  the 
economy,  and  particularly  how  these 
structures  will  affect  women.  Can  the 
work  place  revolve  around  decentraliz- 
ed industrial  units?  Can  small  autono- 
mous communities  provide  the  basic 
support  systems  for  growing  and  dis- 
tributing food,  health  care,  education, 
and  entertainment?  Can  we  create  a 
society  in  which  women  are  free  to 
engage  in  a  variety  of  living  arrange- 
ments and  in  which  there  is  group  re- 
sponsibility for  child  care?  How  can 
we  utilize  technology  and  science  to 
expand    our    visions    of    the    future? 

Feminists  cannot  ignore  the  theor- 
ists of  post-industrial  society.  We  can- 
not, as  they  do,  celebrate  the  growth  of 
advanced  capitalist  society.  But  we 
must  recognize  the  importance  and 
usefulness  of  technology  and  science, 
while  retaining  a  humanistic  approach 
to  the  future.  The  futurists  project  a 
capitalist  society  ruled  by  middle  and 
upper  class  white  males.  Feminists  pro- 
ject a  world  which  is  not  patriarchal, 
not  capitalist,  not  dominated  by  an 
elite.  .  .a  fundamentally  changed  world. 


Jane  Dolkart  is  an  assistant  profes- 
sor at  Catholic  University  Law  School 

Nancy  Hartsock  is  an  assistant  pro- 
fessor at  Johns  Hopkins  University. 


graphics  by  Alexa  Freeman 


6IQuest 


^k!ic^r^ 


by 

Noel  Phyllis  Birkby 

and 

Leslie  Kanes  Wei  smart 


The  process  [of  a  women's  revolu- 
tion] involves  the  creation  of  new 
space,  in  which  women  are  free  to  be- 
come who  we  are,  and  in  which  there 
are  real  and  significant  alternatives  to 
the  prefabricated  identities  provided 
within  the  enclosed  spaces  of  patri- 
archal institutions.^ 

On  New  Year's  Eve  of  1971, 
seventy-five  women  took  over  an  aban- 
doned building  on  Fifth  Street  owned 


by  the  City  of  New  York.  They  under- 
stood that  architecture  and  physical 
environments  are  a  political  issue  for 
women  and  the  Women's  Movement: 
Because  we  want  to  redevelop  our  own 
culture.  .  . 

Because  we  want  to  overcome  stereo- 
types. .  . 

Because    we    refuse    to    have    'equal 
rights'    in    a    corrupt    society.   .  . 
Because  we  want  to  survive,  grow,  be 
ourselves.  .  . 


A  Woman  Built  Environment/7 


We  took  over  a  building  to  put  into 
action  with  women  those  things  essen- 
tial to  women:  health  care,  child  care, 
food  conspiracy,  clothing  and  book 
exchange,  gimme  women's  shelter,  a 
lesbian  rights  center,  interarts  center, 
feminist  school,  drug  rehabilitation. 
We  know  the  city  does  not  provide  for 
us.  Now  we  also  know  the  city  will  not 
allow  us  to  provide  for  ourselves.  For 
this  reason  we  were  busted.  We  were 
busted  because  we  are  women  acting 
independently  of  men,  independently 
of  the  system.  .  .in  other  words,  we 
are  women  being  revolutionary.* 

These  women  were  being  political 
in  acting  out  their  environmental  fan- 
tasy which  directly  incorporated  their 
personal  and  social  needs  not  being 
met  by  reality.  The  reality  of  the  situa- 
tion was  described  by  a  woman  passer- 
by: "Anyone  who  wants  to  Stop  wom- 
en from  having  a  child  care  center, 
from  having  a  building  not  in  use-what 
kind  of  selfishness,  what  kind  of  sick- 
ness is  that?"3 

It  is  the  sickness  of  environmental 
oppression,  an  architecture  which  in- 
corporates values  that  are  male,  white, 
middle  class  and  based  upon  the  struc- 
ture of  the  nuclear  family.  Although, 
the  patriarchal  power  structure  may 
slowly  be  nodding  yes  to  the  Equal 
Rights  Amendment  and  abortion  re- 
form, if  it  continues  to  perpetuate  the 
architectural  status  quo,  the  facts  will 
contradict  the  words.  Consequently, 
we  must  begin  by  evaluating  our  man- 
made  environment  from  a  feminist  per- 
spective. Our  physical  environment, 
whether  it  is  buildings,  communities  or 


cities,  reflects  the  nature  of  our  institu- 
tions and  the  priorities  of  the  decision 
makers.  Our  present  and  future  com- 
munities are  the  living  archeology 
through  which  we  can  extract  the  ac- 
tual values  held  by  society. 

At  the  very  foundation  of  the  Wom- 
en's Movement  lies  the  analysis  and 
exposition  of  values  oppressive  to  wom- 
en. In  our  continuing  search  for  origins 
and  expressions  of  sexism,  we  must 
develop  and  project  our  own  imagery 
and  values  into  environmental  forms. 
What  are  women's  architectural  and 
environmental  priorities?  What  are 
women's  needs?  How  are  they  op- 
pressed by  our  man-made  environ- 
ment? What  kinds  of  forms  would 
validate  women's  experience?  In  an 
attempt  to  discover  the  perceptions 
women  have  about  the  design  of  their 
environments  we  have  tried  to  cut 
through  sexist  conditioning  by  going 
deeply  into  the  origin  of  the  creative 
process-fantasy.  We  feel  that  this  pro- 
cess will  increase  our  awareness  of  the 
powerful  nexus  between  fantasy  and 
reality.  In  this  way  our  dreams  and 
visions  can  become  tools  for  the  crea- 
tion of  actual  change. 


■rint- 


S/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


Environmental  Oppression 

The  study  and  expression  of  wom- 
en's experience  within  the  man-made 
environment  will  be  most  credible  if  it 
is  defined  by  us  ourselves.  Architecture 
is  also  a  physical  language  and  can  be 
used  in  the  same  way  as  the  spoken 
language  to  condition  us  to  sexism.  It 
communicates  a  limitless  range  of  meta- 
phorical messages  about  one's  exper* 
iences  of  self  and  self  in  relation  to 
others.  Expressions  such  as  the  "mas- 
ter" bedroom,  the  "family"  room  and 
the  "powder"  room  reinforce  role 
stereotyping  and  teach  us  about  our- 
selves. To  quote  a  woman  who  recent- 
ly reminded  us  of  this  oppressive  con- 
ditioning in  a  sentiment  similarly  ex- 
pressed by  Virginia  Woolf:  "Give  me 
my  space!  I  want  it  to  look  a  certain 
way  but  in  the  end  after  all  it's  space 
in  which  to  exist  freely." 

As  little  girls,  we  are  conditioned  to 
our  inferiority  to  men  through  environ- 
mental discrimination.  Another  woman 
states:  "What  I  really  always  wanted 
from  my  childhood  was  my  brother's 
space.  He  always  seemed  to  get  the 
priority  spaces,  his  own  room,  his  own 
choices."  By  high  school  age,  we  often 
find  fully  equipped  gymnasium  and 
wood  shop  facilities  for  boys,  while  at 
the  same  time,  girls  are  not  permitted 
or  encouraged  to  have  equal  access. 
Boys  and  men  use  many  supportive 
environments  which  enhance  their  po- 
tential at  the  expense  of  girls  and  wom- 
en who  are  allowed  to  relate  to  a  much 
narrower  range  of  directed  environ- 
ments.   We    need   to   research  a  wide 


range  of  environmental  settings  related 
to  women  in  order  to  change  this 
process. 

Another  example  of  our  environ- 
mental oppression  is  the  degree  to 
which  we  are  dependent  upon  rented 
or  borrowed  space  for  meetings  and 
activities  in  the  Women's  Movement 
(frequently  patriarchal  churches)!  We 
can  see  the  effect  of  this  stereotyping 
in  the  kinds  of  spaces  we  are  "sup- 
posed" to  occupy  within  the  male  spa- 
tial hierarchy  which  expresses  our  sec- 
ond class  status  and  powerlessness. 
Men  own  the  streets  and  sit  at  the  head 
of  tables.  We  may  appropriately  be 
seen  in  grocery  stores  but  less  so  in 
engineering  buildings.  Even  the  women 
who  make  up  the  approximately  four 
percent  of  all  architects  in  this  country 
have  been  conditioned  to  male-defined 
processes  and  criteria  in  the  traditional 
male  dominated  schools  of  architec- 
ture. Although  there  is  a  slowly  in- 
creasing advocacy  and  feminist  con- 
sciousness among  women  architects, 
four  percent  is  hardly  enough  to  top- 
ple the  male  power  base. 

Lack  of  input  is  another  form  of 
environmental  oppression.  Women  con- 
stitute over  fifty  percent  of  the  users 
of  our  environment,  yet  we  have  had  a 
negligible  input  into  the  architectural 
forms  our  environments  express.  For 
example,  we  must  demand  our  right  to 
design  women-owned-and-operated  a- 
bortion  clinics  that  do  not  necessarily 
adhere  to  the  male  defined  standardized 
programs  for  abortion  facilities.  These 
standardized  criteria  often  are  inap- 
propriate, depersonalized,  and  unrelat- 


A  Woman  Built  Environment/9 


f,ta£<t  flATfOtt^^ 


10/Qwest 


GG.P.S.y. 

(mK  60DDES5 
TEHCOUATiOhl  SY5TEM) 

FOWftSCS  GO  TO 

mCCLATlCN  PoiNr  At® 

Get  oj  S&V5  and  ihJ 

GET  FERKED  TO  TUB 
G0DO&,  pMTTORM.  7KA/ 

UmML  OF   WIR 
PESriMAnohJ  POINT  AHO 

Mf  PERKEP  POM  faM 
{yOOCAti  hAMB  \C£CREA»i 
OR/AHD  C*kB  AND  COFFEE 
MM  100  ARE  ON  TW 
60DPI5S  PLATFORM)  pel 
CAN  60  MyWEfc  is  THE 
COVNTpS  /A/   iSHWIMS. 
M0  6HS  (ROL  &QM&. 


A  Woman  Built  Environment/ 11 


ed  to  the  intimacy  of  the  experience. 
The  structure  and  plumbing  codes 
which  usually  increase  costs  often  are 
beyond  what  is  necessary  to  operate  a 
physically  safe  facility.  These  high 
costs  make  it  impossible  for  individuals 
or  groups  with  low  budgets  (usually 
women)  to  operate  abortion  facilities. 
This  perpetuates  the  domination  of  the 
male  establishment  over  women's 
health  care  needs. 

A  specific  case  arose  in  Detroit  at 
the  Feminist  Women's  Health  Center. 
There  the  women  had  created  a  psycho- 
logically supportive  environment  (per- 
sonal, cheerful,  clean)  out  of  what  was 
a  dreary,  abandoned  house  which  had 
been  used  previously  as  a  doctor's 
office.  A  representative  from  the  Health 
Department  inspected  the  facility  in 
order  to  determine  how  well  it  met  the 
guidelines  for  on-site  abortion  clinics. 
The  changes  he  recommended  were 
physically  and  psychologically  impos- 
sible. They  included  enlarging  the  door 
openings  and  corridors  to  six  feet  wide 
for  the  transportation  of  hospital  beds, 
changing  the  diameter  of  the  plumbing, 
expanding  the  size  of  procedure  rooms 
and  converting  the  lounge  which  in- 
cluded a  fireplace,  shag  carpeting  and 
sofas  into  a  sterile  recovery  room. 
None  of  these  were  required  for  a  sim- 
ple first  trimester  abortion.  These  cri- 
teria expressed  an  attiutde  toward  a- 
bortion  which  denied  its  relative  sim- 
plicity and  relationship  to  the  lives  of 
women.  Instead,  it  assumed  women 
would  best  be  aborted  in  a  surgical, 
onerous,  mystified  and  impersonal  en- 
vironment. 


The  abortion  case  underlined  again 
the  extricable  relationship  between 
power  and  territory  and  between  phy- 
sical space  and  self  concept  which  is 
the  core  of  environmental  oppression. 
As  we  change  and  expand  our  roles, 
work  identities  and  life  styles,  we  will 
require  new  architectural  forms  which 
support  these  choices  and  activities. 
As  women,  we  cannot  fully  actualize 
ourselves  without  environments  which 
free  us  from  limited  expectations  of 
ourselves.  We  need  spaces  which  sup- 
port our  creativity  and  productivity 
and  provide  us  with  a  wider  range  of 
personal  and  communal  options.  We 
need  spaces  for  self-help  health  clinics, 


feminist  credit  unions,  women's  re- 
source centers,  women's  presses,  les- 
bian centers,  child  care  centers,  femi- 
nist schools,  women's  coffee  houses, 
restaurants,  record  companies  and  worn-, 
en's  workspaces.  Their  existence  means 
political  and  social  spaces  for  women 
which  are  critical  for  the  longevity  and 
growth  of  the  Women's  Movement  and 
cohesiveness  among  women. 

If  the  future  vision  for  the  built 
environment  is  to  be  one  in  which  the 
totality  of  women's  needs  are  environ- 
mentally supported,  then  each  woman 
must  become  her  own  architect,  that 


121  Quest 


A  Woman  Built  Environment/ 13 


FEMINIST  TRANSIT    g>YST£M5>  \hlC 


CCHHUNAU 


TP  WCM-5    tifL/CQPfgg  C&fyj\ct    J> 


lAIQuest 


is,  she  must  become  aware  of  her 
ability  to  exercise  environmental  judge- 
ment and  make  decisions  about  the  na- 
ture of  the  spaces  in  which  she  lives 
and  works. 

Environmental  Fantasy 

What  would  happen  then  if  we  be- 
gan to  fantasize  about  environmental 
solutions  which  were  nonsexist,  per- 
sonally and  socially  supportive  of  wom- 
en's needs,  nurturant,  humane,  har- 
monious, unobtrusive  if  necessary? 
What  if  we  overcame  the  cultural 
blocks  to  using  fantasy,  and  asserted 
it  as  positive,  just  as  we  have  with  so 
many  other  attributes  associated  nega- 
tively with  the  image  of  women?  What 
if  we  began  to  share  our  fantasies? 
What  if  we  let  our  minds  run  wild? 
What  if  we  realized  the  true  creative 
power  of  our  dreams  and  visions  as  a 
real  force  for  change? 

We  believe  that  fantasy  is  the  basis 
for  creativity  and  the  foundation  for 
reality.  It  is  a  way  of  dealing  with  real- 
ity and  problem  solving,  not  an  escape 
from  it.  It  is  a  productive  and  useful 
method  for  creating  change.  However, 
we  are  conditioned  to  believe  that  fan- 
tasy and  reflection  are  a  waste  of 
time,  lazy,  even  crazy.  Our  culture 
values  reason,  logic  and  practicality. 
"Daydreaming"  is  considered  unpro- 
ductive and  impractical.  Children  fan- 
tasize quite  freely  and  many  psycholo- 
gists believe  them  to  be  more  creative 
than  adults.  Our  ability  to  fantasize, 
be  playful  and  reflective  are  trained 
out  of  us  as  we  grow  up.  We  are  made 


to  feel  guilty  and  embarrassed  about 
our  fantasies  for  they  are  seen  as  child- 
ish and  immature. 

Usually  women's  sexual  fantasies 
are  repeatedly  emphasized  in  the  ex- 
ternal world  as  though  we  had  no 
others.  Fantasy  dwells  within  us  all 
and  this  preoccupation  with  women's 
sexual  fantasies  has  only  served  to  re- 
inforce women's  present  sexually  de- 
fined role  in  this  society.  Women  have 
fantasies  and  dreams  about  things  like 
power,  color,  cities,  space,  textures, 
transitions,  order  and  disorder,  revela- 
tions of  a  purely  spiritual  nature,  math- 
ematics, structure,  systems  of  all  kinds. 
Most  of  these  fantasies  have  been  con- 
signed to  internalized,  unspoken  images 
with  little  or  no  outlet.  One  of  the 
most  oppressive  aspects  of  today's  ac- 
tual built  environment  is  that  it  is  a  to- 
tally male  fantasy,  a  projection  of  their 
monumental  egos  in  concrete  and  cur- 
tain wall,  each  building  shouting  for 
individual  recognition.  This  male  vision 
has  been  based  largely  upon  right- 
handed  thinking,  determined  by  the 
left  brain  hemisphere,  which  is  linked 
with  law,  order,  reason,  control,  logic 
and  mathematics.  Whereas  women 
whose  conditioning  has  encouraged 
left-handed  thinking  (right  brain  hemi- 
sphere usage)  encourage  sensitivity, 
playfulness,  feeling,  openness,  subjec- 
tivity and  imagery  in  problem  solving. 
Primary  creativity  or  "the  creativeness 
which  comes  out  of  the  unconscious- 
ness and  which  is  the  source  of  new 
discovery,"  is  a  result  of  left-handed 
thinking.4  Right-handed  thinking  rep- 
resents secondary  creativity  which  is 


A  Woman  Built  Environment/ 15 


based  upon  what  already  exists.  We 
believe  that  although  in  actual  crea- 
tive problem-solving  there  is  a  syn- 
thesis of  primary  and  secondary  pro- 
cess, a  truly  feminist  solution  for  fu- 
ture environment  will  require  an  em- 
phasis on  primary  creativeness  to  ac- 
complish a  completely  fresh  vision 
rather  than  a  mere  re-ordering  of  the 
"givens"  of  the  past  and  present.  As 
women,  we  may  well  represent  the 
richest  and  most  immediate  potential 
source  for  incorporating  primary  crea- 
tivity in  problem  solving.  Every  effort 
that  can  be  made  to  validate  women  as 
creative  and  whole  human  beings  is 
urgent  in  a  patriarchal  society  that  con- 
tinues to  obscure  the  essential  nature 
of  women. 

Why  do  we  berate  this  primary 
source  of  creativity?  Authority  after 
authority  has  described  the  fact  that 
most  men  in  the  dominant  white  male 
culture  are  severely  threatened  by 
anything  they  regard  as  "feminine" 
within  themselves  for  fear  of  being 
called  homosexual.  Softness,  fantasy, 
childishness,  emotion,  poetry,  imagina- 
tion, tenderness  are  all  repressed  in  the 
"normal"  male  adjustment.  Women 
also  are  victims  of  the  repression  of 
this  innate  creative  potential.  A  femi- 
nist photographer  described  her  own 
environmental  fantasy: 
J  chose  in  my  fantasy  elements  of 
bullshit  Spanish  southern  California 
'architecture'  that  I  felt  nostalgically 
at  home  with— I  look  for  the  sense  of 
home  and  familiarity  and  something 
that  won't  be  uprooted-it  is  interesting 
to  me  that  this  is  also  nostalgic.  I  have 


no  fantasy  of  a  living  space  for  myself 
that  could  be  in  any  sense  'modern' 
or  designed  solely  for  use.  I  imagine 
only  apartments  to  which  we  must  con- 
form. Flexible  spaces  make  me  feel 
lost-not  solid  enough.  I  adapt  myself 
to  what  I  can  afford—even  in  my  fan- 
tasies. I  cannot  "imagine"  -I  take  photo- 
graphs of  what  is  there,  I  do  not  think 
of  altering  it  or  putting  there  what  I 
could  want.  The  failure  of  the  imagina- 
tion is  a  result  of  a  kind  of  acceptance, 
or  a  lack  of  hope  or  despair,  in  con- 
junction with  the  discipline  of  straight 
black  and  white  photography.  It  is 
strange  to  imagine  a  beautiful  world.  I 
have  become  flexible?  I  have  no  idea 
of  what  I  could  want— not  even  the  per- 
fect darkroom— I  can  only  imagine 
adapting  to  inappropriate  space. 
Thus,  although  it  is  more  permissible 
for  women  to  fantasize,  many  wom- 
en's fantasies  reflect  conditioning  to 
the  values  of  the  dominant  culture. 

We  believe  that  environmental  fan- 
tasies can  provide  an  alternative  for 
the  conditioned  need  to  "adapt  to 
inappropriate  space."  By  thinking  a- 
bout  ideal  environments,  our  fantasies, 
we  can  raise  our  expectations  of  what 
supportive  environments  might  and 
should  be.  This  will  help  develop  our 
imagination  which  is  a  major  source 
from  which  we  can  generate  new 
visions  and  concepts  which  go  beyond 
our  current  ones.  Rising  expectations 
is  one  of  the  first  stages  in  the  process 
of  change.  The  more  that  we  under- 
stand our  environmental  needs,  the 
more  we  will  be  able  to  determine  and 
demand  solutions. 


161  Quest 


Women's  fantasy  drawings  are  a 
tool  for  us  to  use  in  creating  our  own 
imagery.  Doodles  and  drawings  are  a 
form  of  communicating  to  yourself  and 
others.  We  have  used  the  spoken  lan- 
guage in  consciousness  raising  groups 
as  a  way  of  expressing,  analyzing  and 
gaining  fresh  insights  into  the  nature  of 
our  experiences  in  the  social  world. 
Drawing,  as  a  physical  and  visual  lan- 
guage, is  a  useful  mode  for  under- 
standing, sharing  perceptions  and  in- 
creasing our  consciousness  about  the 
physical  world.  One  woman  expresses 
it  this  way:  Underlying  the  fantasies  is 
a  common  kind  of  understanding.  I 
know  the  sources  from  which  these 
needs  arise.  I  feel  them  too.  I  can 
relate  to  the  messages  in  these  draw- 


ings  because  I've  experienced  so  many 
of  the  same  frustrations  or  needs  or 
daydreams.  They  seem  to  reflect  me  in 
them  too.  It  makes  me  feel  really 
connected  to  other  women. 

Drawing  "skills"  are  not  necessary 
to  use  environmental  fantasies  as  a 
means  of  raising  consciousness.  As  one 
woman  emphasizes,  it  is  the  participa- 
tion in  the  drawing  that  is  important 
rather  than  the  ability  to  articulate 
graphically: 

If  it's  your  fantasy  and  you're  given 
permission  to  fantasize  as  much  as  you 
want,  if  you're  given  approval  for 
doing  it,  it  doesn't  have  to  conform  to 
anything.  That  kind  of  opportunity 
for  freedom  really  lets  people  unleash 
and  get  at  their  true  feelings  and  needs. 


A  Woman  Built  Environment/ 17 


It's  non-judgmental  It's  non-intellec- 
tual 

This  freedom  to  fantasize  is  crucial 
when  we  are  constantly  bombarde4  by 
images  of  the  male  fantasy  in  our  daily 
lives.  Fantasy  drawings  represent  a 
graphic  expression  of  our  fears,  hopes, 
values,  humor  and  rage  as  we  project 
them  into  environmental  forms.  We  as 
women  need  to  see  our  own  imagery 
in  the  visible,  external  world  as  a  mir- 
ror for  validating  and  affirming  these 
internalized  experiences. 

In  conclusion,  we  suggest  adopting 
insights  from  these  environmental  fan- 
tasies into  a  re-ordering  of  architectural 
form  for  creating  our  future  environ- 
ments that  are  generated  from  women's 
processes  and  priorities.  Women  must 
have  input  into  the  creation  of  physical 
environments  because  environments  in- 
timately influence  the  ways  in  which 
we  interact  with  others,  with  whom 
we  interact  with,  and  how  we  exper- 
ience ourselves.  Controlling  our  own 
lives  and  creating  our  own  modes  of 
expression  is  an  important  part  of  the 
Women's  Movement.  We  must  project 
our  own  images  into  environmental 
forms  so  that  we  might  begin  to  ex- 
perience and  create  the  woman-identi- 
fied environment. 

Footnotes 

^Mary   Daly,  Beyond  God   the  Father, 
(Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1973),  p.  40. 
2"The  Militant,"  January  29,  1971. 

^Abraham  Maslow,  "Emotional  Blocks 
to  Creativity,"  in  [Parnes  and  Harding,  eds.,] 
A  Source  Book  for  Creative  Thinking,  (New 
York:  Charles  Scribner  &c  Sons,    1962). 


We  have  been  asking  women  of  all 
ages  and  backgrounds  to  describe  their 
environment  fantasies  both  verbally 
and  graphically.  The  drawings,  quotes 
and  text  in  this  article  are  part  of  a 
book  on  Women's  Environmental  Fan- 
tasies. Please  share  with  us,  as  other 
women  have  done,  your  insights  and 
dreams  about  the  environment  for  in- 
clusion in  our  book.  Send  your  fantasy 
drawings,  written  comments,  ideas,  or 
any  other  information  about  woman 
defined  spaces.  We  will  be  traveling 
to  talk  with  as  many  women  as  pos- 
sible; let  us  know  if  we  can  include  a 
visit  with  you  and  women  in  your 
area.  Write  us  at  51  Market  St.,  New 
York,  New  York,  10002. 


Noel  Phyllis  Birkby,  registered  ar- 
chitect in  New  York,  has  been  a  design 
critic  at  Pratt  Institute,  C.  U.N.  Y.,  and 
the  University  of  Detroit. 

Leslie  Kanes  Weisman,  architec- 
tural consultant,  is  Professor  of  Archi- 
tecture and  Environmental  Studies  at 
the  University  of  Detroit.  Both  are 
long-time  feminist  activists. 


18  /Quest 


New  Women 


We  embark  on  a  strange  uncharted  voyage 

Masses  of  us,  and  for  the  first  time  in  history. 

No  need  to  read  Ulysses  with  envy 

His  terror  will  be,  is,  ours. 

Temptations,  treasures,  giddiness  beyond  belief 

And  horrors. 

But  our  quest  is  the  opposite  of  his. 

Not  home  and  hearth  after  death,  pillage  and  destruction. 

But  continual  quest,  continual  struggle,  continual  voyage 

For  an  unmapped  perhaps  nonexistent  territory 

A  free  land  inside  and  outside  our  heads. 


by  June  Namias 


Visions 


Utopia?  Isn't  that  a  subway  stop  in  Queens? 

A  barrio  on  an  island  in  the  Philippines? 

Didn't  they  make  a  movie  of  the  book  with  Ronald  Colman? 

I  know.  It's  a  new  Parker  Bros.  Game. 

A  new  substitute  for  hamburger? 

Norell's  putting  it  out  as  a  line  of  men's  toiletries? 

What  do  you  mean,  a  state  of  mind  after  the  revolution? 

Whose  revolution? 

When? 

Revolution,  smevolution.  I  don't  have  enough  to  eat. 

I  can't  afford  to  go  to  the  dentist. 

Got  no  time  to  think  about  tomorrow.  Gotta  survive  today. 

You  got  time? 

You  think  about  it. 


by  Janet  Haight 


freestanding: 

dacqua's  Story, 


by  Sally  Gearhart 


graphics  by  Scarlet  Cheng 


20/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


WJWAi 


©    1975  Sally  Gearhart 


Jacqua  stood  gazing  at  the  high 
meadow.  Far  below  her,  anger  was  be- 
ing spoken  but  she  could  grasp  no 
words— only  intentions.  She  heard  in 
her  head  the  clang  of  armor.  How  did 
she  know  it  was  armor?  Who  in  the 
world  wore  armor  anymore?  It  sound- 
ed as  if  the  wearer  walked  at  a  good 
pace.  With  each  step  the  armor  sighed 
and  creaked,  rattling  a  bit.  In  the  back- 
ground were  the  spring  forest  noises. 
She  listened  harder.  It  was  two,  per- 
haps three,  miles  away.  No  mind  invi- 
tation. She  attempted  to  move  to  vis- 
ual. No  luck.  Too  far  for  taste  and 
smell,  still  so  comparatively  underde- 
veloped anyway  in  her  and  among  all 
her  sisters.  All  she  could  do  was  listen. 
The  armor  seemed  to  be  moving  faster 
now,  the  squeaks  coming  more  fre- 
quently. 

Then  suddenly,  nothing.  Silence. 
She  checked  her  listen-spread  and  found 
it  still  operating.  The  forest  noises  con- 
tinued. The  person  had  stopped-not 
sat  down  or  fallen,  but  stopped  short. 
Could  the  person  have  heard  her  hear- 
ing her?  No  chance.  Was  her  own 
breathing  too  loud?  Was  the  armor- 
wearer  breathing?  If  so,  why  couldn't 
she  hear  her? 

Still  she  waited.  Minutes  went  by. 
Silence.  Then  it  seemed  an  hour.  Jac- 
qua grew  impatient.  She  was  only  be- 
ginning to  train  herself.  Perhaps  she 
was  making  some  mistake. 

"No.  You're  doing  fine."  The 
thought  slipped  into  her  body  by  way 
of  her  chest,  it  seemed. 

"Diana?"  she  asked. 

"Yes.  I've  been  worry-reading  you. 


I  ask  your  forgiveness  for  seeping  in. 
But  what  you're  hearing  is  happening." 

"In  your  covenant  with  me  is  for- 
giveness," Jacqua  chanted*  Then,  "Can 
you  hear  it,  too?" 

"I  did.  I  don't  now.  I'd  call  up  a 
waiting  ear  and  pay  attention  else- 
where. A  person  can  stand  still  only  so 
long.  Particularly  in  regalia  like  that." 
Diana  passed  off  and  away. 

Jacqua  was  relieved.  Gingerly  she 
summoned  her  waiting  ear— not  like  the 
more  deliberate  fanlike  spread,  but 
nevertheless  a  field  sensitive  to  unusual 
noises.  She  opened  it  toward  the  ar- 
mor's sounds.  Still  the  silence.  Now  she 
was  free  to  revisit  her  own  thoughts. 
Could  it  be  that  it  wasn't  a  woman  at 
all,  but  a  man?  One  from  the  men's  na- 
tion, standing  stock  still  there  at  the 
fringes  of  their  wander  ground?  She 
tried  to  recall  the  lessons  from  the  mem- 
oryroom,  the  stories,  the  mind  pictures, 
the  pain  of  some  not-so-ancient  days 
when  the  men's  nation  was  not  sick 
and  dying.  "It  is  too  simple,"  she  re- 
cited dutifully  to  herself,  "to  condemn 
them  all  or  to  praise  all  of  us.  But  for 
the  sake  of  earth  and  all  she  holds, 
that  simplicity  must  be  our  creed." 

She  dropped  back  into  her  first- 
tellings,  when  she  was  only  a  girlchild 
and  sat  at  gatherings  with  her  mothers. 
Even  in  the  singing  and  the  j  playing  of 
the  tales  of  men  there  ran  the  thread, 
"We  once  had  hope  for  them,  but  even 
that  hope  they  snuffed  out."  Rage. 
Sadness.  All  mixed  with  gentleness  and 
love.  Love  men?  The  idea  did  not  fit. 
It  was  cranky  and  backwards  in  her 
mind.  She  tried  it  on  from  every  angle 


Freestanding:  Jacqua's  Story/ 21 


but  it  would  not  adjust;  some  of  its 
bulk  stuck  out  over  the  sides  while 
other  parts  of  it  were  too  short  to  ap- 
proach the  edges.  Yet  somehow  once 
it  had  been  so.  "Maybe  it  was  a  differ- 
ent kind  of  love,"  she  mused. 

She  remembered,  too,  the  visits 
with  the  gentles  of  the  men's  nation, 
those  who  had  come  to  them  to  die. 
They  had  lived  with  life-loving  for  a 
short  time  at  the  edge  of  the  forest. 
But  they  were  no  longer  strong.  Like 
their  wilder  brothers  they  fought  the 
sickness  in  vain.  They  cried  for  the 
ministrations  of  the  women.  "Minister 
to  yourselves,"  they  were  told.  Yet  al- 
ways the  women  stood  by,  friends  from 
a  distance,  the  midwives  of  death  who 
would  ease  their  passing. 


"Why  can't  we  help  them?"  Jacqua 
had  asked. 

"They  must  help  themselves,"  her 
mothers  answered. 

"But  they're  dying!" 

"Yes.  They  are  dying.  That  is  the 
most  important  thing.  That  is  exactly 
what  they  must  help  themselves  to  do. 
When  they  touch  their  own  bodies  they 
know  that.  Only  when  they  disconnect 
do  they  cry  out  for  help  and  curse  our 
hardness." 

Jacqua  had  seen  them  die  there. 
Four  of  them.  One  by  one  over  the 
days  while  she  and  the  other  women 
talked  with  them  and  sang  with  them 
but  never  touched  them  either  with 
mind  or  hand.  They  had  been  unable  to 
sustain  their  man-ness,  unable  to  grasp 


22/Quest 


their  woman-ness.  It  was  too  late  for 
them  to  reach  down  and  lift  themselves 
up.  And  these  were  the  gentles  of  the 
men.  What  were  the  others  like? 

"They  are  driven,"  Wenadi  would 
say.  "Driven  in  their  own  madness  to 
destroy  themselves  and  us  and  any  liv- 
ing thing." 

"Their  madness.  Is  it  like  Clea's?" 

"No.  Hers  was  the  madness  of  too 
full  a  vessel.  Theirs  is  the  madness  of 
power." 

Jacqua  pondered  all  that.  The  mea- 
dow below  her  was  brown  from  the 
winter.  Yet  there  were  signs  of  life. 
Briefly  she  checked  her  extended  ear. 
Still  no  sound.  It  must  have  been  min- 
utes now.  How  can  a  person  stand  so 
still?  She  turned  toward  the  ensconce- 
ment  from  which  the  anger  and  the 
pain  had  come  from  earlier.  The  rhy- 
thms were  quieter  there.  It  had  been  a 
hard  matter  of  overvisit,  she  knew. 
Two  older  sisters  had  spent  too  many 
days  together  without  speaking  their 
hearts  to  the  rest.  She  knew  the  pat- 
tern, as  young  as  she  was.  In  fact,  prob- 
ably because  she  was  so  young.  It  was 
one  of  the  first  lessons  for  them  all. 
Lightly  in  her  memory  she  touched 
her  longago  warm  soft  days  with 
Ursula,  Ursula  who  had  been  her  learn- 
together.  She  had  not  forgotten  the 
feeling  of  needing  for  life  itself  Ur- 
sula's simple  presence.  They  did  not 
speak  their  warmness  beyond  each 
other  to  their  sisters.  They  had  become 
hidden  with  it.  It  began  to  eat  away  at 
their  freestanding  selves.  Hence  the  say- 
ing, "There  are  no  words  more  obscene 
than  'I  can't  live  without  you.'  Count 


them  the  deepest  affront  to  the  per- 
son." Jacqua  had  not  forgotten.  In  the 
end  she  had  understood  the  importance 
of  never  feeling  that  way  again. 

The  present  matter  was  all  the  more 
difficult,  though,  because  the  two 
women  were  of  the  first  years,  of  the 
time  of  the  purge.  They  had  fled  to- 
gether, been  separated,  and  for  more 
than  a  year  now  had  been  reunited. 
Among  many  of  the  sisters  there  was 
the  feeling  that  they  held  too  hard  to 
each  other  and  to  the  old  ways  of  try- 
ing to  love.  Jacqua  would  be  anxious  to 
know  how  the  talking  had  come  out. 

A  clank  disturbed  her.  The  person 
was  moving  now.  Jacqua  turned  her  lis- 
tening to  the  resumption  of  sound. 
There  was  someone  else  there,  too. 
Again  she  tried  other  senses  and  mind- 
stretches.  No  avail.  She  turned  as  Diana 
came  up  behind  her. 

"Look  with  me,"  said  Diana. 
They    locked   minds,    Diana's   eye- 
seeing    pushing    outward    and    away, 
expanding  her  power.  As  always,  Jac- 
qua was  astonished  and  exhilarated. 

"I'll  never  be  able  to  do  it  alone!" 
She  squeezed  in  the  thought  before 
Diana  could  stop  her.  Diana  chastised 
her  sharply,  calling  her  up  short.  Jac- 
qua took  her  deserts  and  began  to  fo- 
cus with  Diana  to  the  scene  some  miles 
away. 

There  was  the  source  of  the  squeak: 
a  metal  headpiece  whose  raised  visor 
jiggled  with  the  slightest  motion.  Be- 
neath the  armor  and  the  headpiece 
there  was  a  woman.  Fear  tensed  in  her 
eyes  as  she  sighted  a  figure  familiar 
to  Jacqua:  Seja,  from  the  high  nests  of 


Freestanding:  Jacqua' s  Story/ 23 


the  western  ensconce  merit.  Seja  was 
looking  squarely  at  the  stranger.  The 
sudden  noise  of  the  helmet  had  been 
caused  by  the  woman  drawing  her 
arm-and  a  smooth  stick-across  her 
chest.  Seja  stood  only  inches  from  her. 

"You  are  not  open,"  Seja  said. 

The  woman's  eyes  blazed. 

"You  do  not  need  that  armor.  Or 
those  weapons,"  Seja  said. 

There     was     no    word    from    the 


stranger  and  her  eyes  were  hard.  It  was 
clear  to  Jacqua  that  the  woman  had 
been  walking  fast,  as  if  fleeing,  when 
she  encountered  Seja.  The  two  were 
very  different:  Seja  with  her  shortened 
hair,  cotton  shirt,  soft  trousers  and 
sandals,  her  frank  face  and  large  hands 
open  and  reaching  out  to  the  new- 
comer; the  stranger,  larger  in  stature, 
ludicrously  garbed  in  the  costume  of  a 
range  of  eras,  as  if  she  had  robbed  some 


24/Quest 


museum.  She  was  guarded  and  burden- 
ed by  the  weighty  chain  mail  that  clung 
to  her  torso  and  by  the  old-fashioned 
helm.  Her  heavy  pants  were  pulled 
tight  behind  leather  greaves.  At  her 
waist  was  a  hunting  knife  and  in  her 
hand  a  polished  stick  which  she  now 
held  as  if  to  strike  Seja. 

Slowly  Seja  moved.  She  sank  before 
the  other  woman,  knelt  before  her  and 
bowed  her  head.  The  stranger  stared. 

"If  you  do  not  understand  my  words 
or  my  mind,  then  understand  my  body. 
I  do  not  wish  to  harm  you.  You  may 
kill  me  if  you  like.  I  trust  that  you  will 
not." 

Still  the  strange  woman  stared. 
Quietly  Seja  raised  her  head,  looking 
up  into  the  other's  face.  Then  her 
hands  and  head  turned  to  the  leather 
on  the  stranger's  legs.  She  reached  out 
to  untie  one  of  the  thongs  that  held 
the  shin  protection  in  place.  The  wom- 
an let  out  a  cry,  stepped  back  and 
raised  the  stick  above  her  head.  Seja 
stopped.  Then  she  pointed  to  the 
stranger's  knife.  The  woman's  eyes 
narrowed  and  her  head  turned  a  bit  to 
the  left.  She  seemed  to  understand 
something.  Still  holding  the  club  above 
Seja's  head,  she  drew  the  knife  from 
her  belt. 

Jacqua  gasped.  Diana  held  her  and 
with  shortstretch  urged  her  to  silence. 
Now  Seja  was  lying  on  the  ground  on 
her  back.  She  forced  a  piece  of  an  old 
log  beneath  her  head.  Jacqua  was  in- 
credulous. "She  must  be  crazy,"  she 
whispered.  Seja,  in  the  face  of  danger 
and  even  death,  was  lying  down  as  if 
to  sleep.  In  silence  Seja  looked  at  the 


woman  with  the  weapons,  then  with 
deliberate  calm  she  closed  her  eyes  and 
pushed  her  head  back  over  the  wood 
so  that  her  neck  was  fully  exposed. 

How  long  they  stayed  there— the 
armored  woman  and  the  vulnerable 
hillwoman-Jacqua  could  not  tell.  She 
dared  not  breathe  lest  the  stranger 
leap  forward  and  slash  Seja's  waiting 
throat.  She  held  fast  to  Diana. 

Then  it  happened.  There  was  a 
change  in  the  eyes  of  the  larger  wom- 
an. She  lowered  her  hands— the  knife 
to  one  side,  the  club  to  the  other.  Seja 
opened  her  eyes.  At  that,  the  standing 
woman  looked  to  each  of  the  weapons 
and  with  intentional  slowness  dropped 
each  upon  the  ground. 

Seja  rose  to  a  kneeling  position.  The 
woman  did  not  move.  It  seemed  to 
Jacqua  that  they  looked  at  each  other 
for  an  eternity.  Then,  very  deliberate- 
ly, the  stranger  thrust  forward  her  leg 
toward  Seja.  With  like  slowness,  Seja 
untied  the  thong.  The  unburdening 
began.  Piece  by  heavy  piece,  Seja  took 
the  armor  from  the  body  of  the 
stranger:  the  greaves,  the  thick  belt, 
the  monstrous  helmet-so  the  long  hair 
flew  in  the  wind— then  with  some  diffi- 
culty the  chest  mail.  The  woman 
moved  only  to  straighten  her  arms  so 
that  Seja  could  remove  that  vest. 
Seeing  that  she  wore  nothing  beneath 
her  chestpiece,  Seja  immediately  re- 
moved her  own  shirt,  baring  her  breasts 
in  equal  fashion. 

They  stood  looking  at  each  other 
for  a  long  moment.  Then  the  face  of 
the  strange  woman  broke  into  an 
amazing  smile.  It  leapt  from  her  face 


Freestanding:  Jacqua's  Story/25 


to  Seja's  and  back  again.  They  stood 
grinning  at  each  other.  Then  both  be- 
gan picking  up  the  armor  and  weapons 
from  the  ground.  Seja  extended  her 
hand.  The  woman  took  it.  Together 
they  plowed  through  the  underbrush 
toward  the  ensconcement. 

Jacqua  was  breathless.  She  had 
never  seen  so  vividly  or  feared  so 
deeply.  Her  relief  slid  into  exhaustion. 
She  sank  to  her  knees  and  then  curled 


up  on  the  brown  grass. 

"I  may  sleep  a  bit,"  she  said  to 
Diana. 

"May  your  dreams  ease  your  wake- 
fulness," said  Diana.  She  kissed  the 
cheek,  passed  her  hands  over  the  young 
body  and  rose  to  descend  the  path. 


Sally  Gearhart  is  Professor  of  Speech 
Communication  at  San  Francisco  State. 


26/Quest 


Prime 
Time: 

Art  and  Politics 


by Alexa Freeman  &  Jackie MacMillan 


Art  Today 

Art  is  generally  viewed  as  a  divine 
performance,  only  remotely  connected 
to  society.  It  is  an  activity  carried  out 
by  predestined  Geniuses  who  are  desig- 
nated by  God  to  produce  Art.  The 
process  is  personal  and  unanalyzable. 
This  is  not  only  a  static  view  of  art, 
but  pure  myth.  The  Artist  is  not  sent 
from  God  but  is  hand  picked  and  pro- 
cessed by  art  dealers.  Fine  Art  is  big 
business  in  this  society.  1 

However,  most  of  us  are  not  Fine 
Artists  or  Fine  Art  Consumers.  We 
come  into  contact  with  the  visual  arts 
primarily  as  consumers  of  goods  and 
services.  Commercial  art  sells  us  pro- 
ducts. Many  of  these  products  are 
things  we  don't  really  need  or  neces- 


sarily want,  so  we  must  be  persuaded 
to  spend  our  money.  Sophisticated 
technology  and  artistic  ideas  are  used 
to  convince  us  of  our  new  "needs". 
It  is  now  common  knowledge  that 
some  advertising  campaigns  have  used 
subliminal  suggestion. 2  Madison  Ave- 
nue men  talk  about  the  "Soft  Sell"  vs. 
the  "Hard  Sell".  As  women,  we  see 
our  bodies  used  as  primary  visual 
images  to  sell  products.  Music  is  used 
in  much  the  same  way  on  T.V.  and 
radio.  Drink  coke  and  the  world  will 
sing  in  perfect  harmony. 

Thus,  our  major  contact  with  art  is 
our  exploitation,  through  art,  as  con- 
sumers. Our  senses  are  constantly  stim- 
ulated, not  for  our  own  gratification, 
but  for  profit  in  a  consumer  economy. 

Just  as  we  are  exploited  through  art 


photograph  by  Shirl  Smith 

courtesy  of  Feminist  Radio  Network 


Prime  Time:  Art  and  Politics/27 


as  consumers,  we  are  excluded  from 
creative  activity  as  producers.  Our 
work  and  what  we  produce  are  not 
part  of  an  active,  life-supporting  pro- 
cess. Instead,  the  process  of  production 
alienates  us  from  the  products  of  our 
labor:  what  is  produced,  for  whom,  and 
why  is  out  of  our  control.  This  lack  of 
control  exists  even  on  a  management 
level,  where  creativity  is  entirely  di- 
rected toward  developing  clever  selling 
schemes. 

Rather  than  working  to  develop  our 
human  and  societal  potential,  we  work 
to  make  a  profit  for  someone  else.  Our 
time  and  energy  are  depleted  in  mean- 
ingless work,  producing  goods  and  ser- 
vices which  will  sell,  but  which  are  not 
necessarily  socially  beneficial.  The  re- 
sult is  a  proliferation  of  unnecessary 
consumer  items  rather  than  improved 
quality  of  life. 

In  the  Women's  Movement,  self- 
determination  as  a  goal  has  meant  con- 
trol of  our  bodies  and  our  lives.  Issues 
such  as  health  and  abortion,  sexuality, 
and  self-defense  have  been  explored  as 
part  of  this  goal.  The  right  to  self-deter- 
mination must  also  include  control  of 
our  senses.  Exploited  as  they  are  in  a 
consumer  economy,  our  senses  offer 
us  the  potential  for  great  joy  and  crea- 
tive satisfaction  in  our  lives.  They  are 
our  body's  outlets  to  the  world.  But 
like  a  plant  that  is  kept  in  the  dark,  we 
are  not  allowed  the  means  of  exploring 
our  own  sensations. 

Art  is  one  means  of  exploring  our 
sensual  potential,  but  the  opportunity 
to  produce  and  to  enjoy  art  is  available 
only    to   a  few  privileged   individuals. 


Fine  Art  is  an  activity  isolated  from 
the  mainstream  in  our  society.*  Why 
should  art  be  relegated  to  a  handful 
when  we  all  have  sense  organs? 

Art  in  the  twentieth  century  has 
been  primarily  concerned  with  the 
development  of  form  with  little  atten- 
tion to  content.  There  have  been  few 
attempts  to  connect  meaningful  ideas 
or  values  with  the  formal  innovations. 
In  fact,  art  has  been  largely  a  reflection 
of  society,  rather  than  a  forum  for  new 
ideas  or  a  social  force.  Decadence  in 
our  society  is  mirrored  in  various  artis- 
tic "movements"  such  as  minimal  art, 
body  art  and  conceptual  art.  One  exam- 
ple of  this  decadence  is  the  recent 
earth  art  movement  in  which  a  wealth- 
y  person  buys  a  mountain  for  the  artist 
to  either  bulldoze,  or  drape  with  huge 
sheets,  or  to  use  as  a  dumping  ground 
for  deliberately  smashed  automobiles. 
Consider  another  example-a  concep- 
tual art  work  consisting  of  several 
bound  volumes.  On  each  page  was 
typed  (no  doubt  by  a  woman)  a  year; 
from  page  to  page,  year  by  year,  begin- 
ning with  the  year  one,  up  to  1973. 
Its  purpose,  apparently,  was  to  have 
tlie  viewer  reflect  on  the  magnitude  of 
it  all.  Other  "innovative"  art  forms 
have  been  equally  purposeless  and 
wasteful. 

Because  of  the  severe  deprivation  of 
many  people,  it  is  necessary  now  to 
focus  on  survival  needs.  But  our  long 
range  goal  should  go  beyond  survival 


*Folk  arts,  an  "unrecognized"  art  form, 
have  been  integral  to  the  lives  of  people  of 
different  regional  and  ethnic  cultures. 


28/Qwesr,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


to  include  an  improved,  real  quality  of 
life.  The  solution  is  not  for  the  individ- 
ual to  step  outside  society  and  become 
an  artist,  but  to  struggle  for  a  society 
where  we  can  all  develop  our  human 
potential 

Art  As  A  Means  For  Revolution 

While  it  is  easy  to  see  that  art  in  our 
culture  is  largely  a  bourgeois  institu- 
tion, activists  have  been  too  quick  to 
react  against  art  per  se,  and  have  over- 
looked its  revolutionary  potential  and 
the  possibilities  for  art  in  a  future  so- 
ciety. In  order  to  use  art  as  a  means 
toward  revolution,  certain  basic  ele- 
ments need  to  be  included.  This  is  not 
to  say  that  every  work  of  political  art 
has  to  include  all  components.  In  fact, 
an  art  work  that  achieves  one  feminist 
goal  is  something  to  be  proud  of! 

It  is  first  necessary  to  begin  to  re- 
define art  within  a  political  context. 
What  goals  can  feminism  achieve 
through  art?  (How  can  art  help  femi- 
nists to  achieve  our  goals?)  What  kind 
of  content  do  we  want  our  art  to  have? 


What  art  forms  can  best  facilitate  our 
goals?  How  can  we  make  art  accessible? 
How  could  art  contribute  to  a  better 
quality  of  life  for  all  people? 

Content  and  Politics 

Our  most  immediate  problem  in 
developing  political  art  is  to  deter- 
mine the  content  it  will  have.  What  do 
we  want  to  say?  It  is  easy  to  identify 
negative  images  of  women  in  the  arts 
and  media;  it  is  much  more  difficult  to 
develop  images  of  women  that  satisfy 
us,  that  change  us,  that  convince  us  we 
can  fight  and  win.  It  is  even  more  of  a 
challenge  to  develop  future  visions  of  a 
society  that  serves  the  interests  of  its 
people.  By  providing  us  with  a  posi- 
tive vision  of  the  future,  art  can  in- 
spire us  to  struggle  for  that  future. 
By  providing  us  with  a  positive  image 
of  our  selves,  art  can  help  us  develop 
the  strength  to  struggle.  Feminist  art, 
by  definition,  must  be  a  force  for 
change,  rather  than  a  reflection  of 
society  as  it  is. 

Our  art  must  have  meaningful  con- 
tent.   Meaningful    content    could    be 


1^8t«&k%C  t- 


photograph  by  Charlotte  Bunch 


Prime  Time:  Art  and  Politics/29 


achieved  by  helping  women  develop  a 
sense  of  identity  with  each  other, 
rather  than  with  the  oppressor.  Wom- 
en's history  has  begun  to  serve  this 
function.  Drawing  from  our  past  to 
develop  a  women's  culture  can  pro- 
vide a  real  sense  of  identity  today. 
However,  it  is  essential  to  keep  in  mind 
that  women's  history  is  embedded  in 
every  culture  and  every  class  and  is 
not  only  American  and  European,  but 
African,  Asian,  Native,  Latin,  and 
South  American.  Feminist  culture  has 
potential  as  a  force  for  change,  but 
only  as  it  incorporates  the  cultural 
heritages  of  all  women.  Art  should  give 
us  a  sense  of  our  potential  as  human 
beings,  as  women.  We  need  strong  role 
models.  We  need  new  images  of  our- 
selves as  individuals  and  as  revolu- 
tionaries. 3  Art  can  encourage  strengths 
and  skills,  as  well  as  provide  positive 
reinforcement  for  our  successes. 

Another  area  in  which  meaningful 
content  can  be  incorporated  into  art 
is  portrayal  of  revolutionary  struggle. 
Processes  of  change,  including  con- 
crete victories,  should  be  emphasized. 
(No  more  movies  like  "Chinatown" 
where  women  always  lose  in  the  end). 

In  short,  content  in  our  art  must 
be  positive.  We  must  be  able  to  de- 
pict our  oppression  without  being 
overwhelmed  by  it.  By  advocating 
positive  art,  we  are  not  calling  for 
Pollyanas,  but  politics.  Nor  does  this 
mean  rejecting  the  traditional  modes 
of  drama  and  tragedy;  tragedy  can  be 
used  as  an  impetus  to  struggle.  Positive 
art  does  mean  rejecting  "death  wish" 
art,   art  which  can  only   encourage  a 


sense  of  hopelessness  and  despair.  It 
means  embracing  art  which  supports 
and  inspires  change. 

Humor  in  various  forms  can  serve 
as  a  mechanism  for  social  criticism. 
At  its  best  it  can  be  used  to  promote 
radical  ideas.  Humor  can  soften  a  hard 
line.  Lily  Tomlin  is  a  feminist  who  has 
managed  to  incorporate  class  and  sex- 
ual politics  into  her  art,  as  well  as  get 
media  exposure. 

Finally,  feminist  art  should  develop 
visionary  content.  What  are  we  strug- 
gling for?  (We  know  what  we're  strug- 
gling against!)  Our  visions  of  a  future 
society  that  is  non-oppressive,  and 
life-supporting  can  give  sense  and  di- 
rection to  our  movement.  Just  as  it  is 
important  to  have  a  sense  of  identity 
and  know  where  we're  coming  from, 
so  we  must  know  where  we're  going. 
Feminist  art  can  stimulate  new  energy, 
breathe  in  excitement  and  give  us 
hope. 

Science  fiction,  the  major  mode  of 
looking  into  or  fantasizing  the  future, 
is  often  fatalistic  and  negative,  and 
lacks  real  vision. 4  A  majority  of  science 
fiction  portrays  society  becoming  in- 
evitably more  intolerable,  and  shows 
people  either  resigning  themselves  to 
despair,  or  reacting  against  technology 
(back  to  the  earth  movements).  Most 
science  fiction  is  incubated  in  and  re- 
flects a  society  totally  preoccupied 
with  technology  as  an  end  in  itself.  In 
our  experience,  we  have  seen  technolo- 
gy used  to  oppress  and  control  people. 
Many  science  fiction  writers  have  been 
unable  to  free  themselves  of  that  asso- 
ciation: while  they  dream  up  the  most 


30/Quest 


photograph  by  Lynn  Millei 


Prime  Time:  Art  and  Politics/ 31 


amazing  technical  possibilities,  they 
fail  to  develop  parallel  social  changes.** 
We  need  to  develop  feminist  future 
fiction.  We  must  understand  that  the 
growth  of  technology  and  the  social 
change  we  seek  must  grow  together. 
We  need  to  begin  to  examine  how  tech- 
nology could  be  used  to  liberate  peo- 
ple. Feminist  future  fiction  would  be 
an  art  form  that  offers  us  models, 
hope  for  the  future,  and  provides  an 
incentive  to  work  for  change. 

Technology  and  Feminism 

Developing  content  in  art  demands 
incredible  invention  and  creative  in- 
genuity. But  developing  new  forms  in 
art,  and  new  ways  to  use  them,  may  be 
even  more  difficult.  Rather  than  reject- 
ing technology  and  other  sophisticated 
forms  as  tools  of  the  enemy,  we  must 
use  these  tools  to  achieve  political 
goals. 

Human  perceptions  are  changing 
with  advanced  media  technology.  We 
are  becoming  more  responsive  to  more 
sophisticated  art  forms.  This  is  true 
not  only  in  the  areas  of  commercial 
art  where  techniques  such  as  sub- 
liminal suggestion  are  employed,  but 
in  the  popular  arts  as  well.  Television, 
for  example,  has  advanced  enormously 
since  its  beginnings.  We  now  have  more 
channels,  color,  even  instant  play-back 
(on  special  models).  The  increased 
stimulation  and  input  to  our  senses 
adds  dimensions  to  our  lives  that  did 
not    exist  in  the  past.  The   technical 

**  Although  this  is  changing.  See  the  inter- 
view with  Joanna  Russ  in  this  issue. 


advances  made  in  television  and  the 
change  in  our  senses  were  highlighted 
when  producers  brought  back  the  old 
"Mickey  Mouse  Show".  Many  review- 
ers noted  that  the  show  was  too  sim- 
ple and  one-dimensional,  that  it  would 
not  sell  with  children  today. 

Our  reality  is,  then,  expanded  and 
changed  by  media  technology.  This 
change  in  perception  deeply  affects 
how  we  receive  information.  If  color 
makes  T.V.  more  "real",  then  the  con- 
tent, too,  becomes  more  "real".  George 
Orwell,  in  1984,  portrayed  a  movie 
house  with  "feelies".  The  medium  re- 
places life.  Although  Orwell's  book 
is  an  extreme  example,  the  truth  in  it 
is  clear  in  our  own  everyday  exper- 
ience. We  are  accustomed  to  multiple 
images,  stereo,  and  quadriphonic  sound, 
to  three-dimensional  movie  screens. 
Think  of  the  box  office  sales  with  the 
special  effects  and  "sensurround"  in 
"Earthquake."  Or  consider  what  mod- 
ern dance  would  be  like  without  elab- 
orate lighting. 

If  feminists  are  serious  about  reach- 
ing the  majority  of  women,  we  must 
be  concerned  about  form.  We  no 
longer  can  afford  to  put  our  energies 
into  obsolete  and  ineffectual  forms. 
We  must  learn  to  use  media  technolo- 
gy. To  do  this,  feminists  will  have  to 
acquire  new  skills:  technical,  adminis- 
trative and  artistic.  We  must  also  em- 
ploy psychology  and  learn  to  use  sym- 
bolism in  our  work. 

As  feminists  learn  to  use  technologi- 
cal forms,  it  is  important  to  evaluate 
ways  to  use  existing  forms.  Printed 
media  reaches  vast  numbers  of  women. 


32/Quest 


Why  not  write  politicizing  stories  for 
True  Confessions?  Or  work  to  get  a 
feminist  comic  strip  run  in  the  daily 
newspapers?  Doonesbury  is  overwhelm- 
ingly successful.  Imagine  turning  on 
A.M.  radio  and  hearing  women  singing 
about  group  struggle  instead  of  broken 
hearts! 

Accessibility 

A  crucial  criterion  for  evaluating 
the  effectiveness  of  feminist  art  is 
knowing  who  it  reaches.  Without  ex- 
posure, art  is  useless  and  becomes 
merely  an  individual  exercise.  The 
problem  of  accessibility  in  art  is  man- 
ifested both  in  terms  of  content  (is  it 
convincing?)  and  exposure  (what  kind 
of  distribution  will  it  get?). 

In  order  to  create  convincing  politi- 
cal art,  art  that  moves  us,  it  is  essential 
to  understand  and  utilize  the  creative 
process  itself.  This  process  begins  with 
a  set  of  rules  that  an  artist  defines  for 
herself,  either  individually  or  in  affilia- 
tion with  a  school  of  art.  For  example, 
cubism,  surrealism,  impressionism,  etc. 
are  schools.  Many  of  these  schools 
have  manifestos,  acknowledged  leader- 
ship, and  a  philosophy.  The  specific 
rules  used  for  a  work  or  series  of  works 
are  referred  to  as  a  "problem".  Thus, 
the  first  step  is  to  determine  the  na- 
ture of  the  "problem."  In  the  process 
of  defining  the  problem,  the  artist  will 
choose  the  elements  she  will  work 
with.  These  may  be  colors,  materials, 
characters,  etc.  In  the  case  of  music, 
time,  range,  and  variety  of  sound 
(instruments)  are  basic  elements.  An 
unlimited    number    of  problems   and 


elements  are  available  to  the  artist. 
The  problem  can  be  general  or  speci- 
fic: How  will  a  given  set  of  colors 
interact  with  each  other?  How  will  a 
particular  character  respond  to  a  given 
situation?  How  will  she  interact  with 
other  characters? 

Art,  then,  is  a  process  whereby  the 
artist  explores  her  own  responses  to 
the  elements  as  they  relate  to  one 
another  within  a  given  context.  This 
process  involves  intuitive  responses 
to  a  situation  which  the  artist  has 
consciously  established.  It  involves  the 
interaction  of  the  conscious  with  the 
subconscious.  In  choosing  what  to 
produce,  whether  consciously  or  un- 
consciously, the  subject  matter  must 
have  political  potential.  A  still  life  or 
an  abstract  expressionist  painting  ob- 
viously would  have  very  limited  possi- 
bilities. This  is  not  to  say  that  either  of 
these  is  necessarily  bad  or  wrong, 
but  merely  irrelevant.  In  addition,  art 
that  is  based  on  philosophical  prin- 
ciples (such  as  cubism)  has  an  appeal 
that  is  largely  academic.  Very  few 
people  will  be  aware  of  the  conceptual 
premises,  and  therefore  these  forms 
cannot  be  used  for  politicization. 

"Protest  Art"  also  should  be  dis- 
tinguished from  the  art  we  are  advo- 
cating. It  serves  individual  functions 
for  the  artist  rather  than  a  political 
function  for  a  group.  Merely  to  pro- 
test is  to  deny  the  reality  and  impor- 
tance of  power.  To  protest  is  to  dis- 
play disapproval  about  something  with- 
out attempting  to  change  it.  Protest  is 
fundamentally  passive.  No  demands 
are  made  on  the  participant,  nor  does 


Prime  Time:  Art  and  Politics/33 


it  offer  her  anything:  hope,  ideas, 
inspiration.  Protest  art  can  be  a  per- 
sonal act  of  purging  one's  guilt.  A 
well-known  show,  for  example,  which 
toured  the  U.S.  at  the  height  of  the 
Vietnam  war,  was  an  indulgence  in 
day-glo  violence  and  phallic  symbolism. 
It  was  a  personal  rather  than  a  political 
statement,  in  which  the  artist  explored 
his  own  feelings  about  his  manhood 
and  Vietnam.  At  its  worst,  protest  art 
revels  in  the  same  violence  or  deca- 
dence it  presumes  to  criticize.  At  its 
best  it  is  apolitical  art. 

Thus,  our  consciousness,  or  over- 
all perception  of  the  world,  is  a  critical 
element  in  our  art.  Most  art  is  apoliti- 
cal because  it  is  approached  with  an 


apolitical  worldview.  We  must  be  in- 
volved in  political  struggle  in  order  to 
create  political  art. 

The  other  aspect  of  art  and  its 
ability  to  reach  people  is  the  problem 
of  exposure.  This  is  a  critical  dilemma 
for  feminists  working  in  media  and  the 
arts.  When  we  try  to  retain  control 
over  the  content  of  our  art,  we  find 
that  often  our  work  is  not  shown  or 
released.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we 
want  our  work  to  get  maximum  ex- 
posure, we  are  forced  to  compromise 
if  not  to  completely  delete  our  politics. 

Making  art  accessible,  both  in  terms 
of  exposure  to  a  mass  audience  and 
control  of  content,  requires  long  term 
changes  in  society.  Short  term  possi- 


34/Quest 


photograph  by  Dolores  Neuman 


bilities  include  efforts  to  gain  access 
to  UHF  and  cable  television  and  radio. 
Pressure  could  be  brought  on  the  FCC 
to  change  regulations  prohibiting  cer- 
tain types  of  programming.  Television 
networks,  both  local  and  national, 
could  be  pressured  to  use  feminist  and 
minority  group  consultants.  Organized 
groups  could  demand  previewing  privi- 
leges. Lawsuits  could  be  filed  against 
networks  for  offensive  programs,  and 
equal  time  could  be  demanded.  As 
we  work  towards  the  goal  of  control, 
we  must  be  realistic  in  recognizing  the 
value  of  using  existing  strucutres. 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  essential 
that  we  develop  an  alternative  feminist 
media.  5  Feminist  media  and  art  enter- 
prises are  the  only  way  we  can  assert 
uncompromising  control.  The  establish- 
ment of  feminist  businesses,  such  as 
radio  and  television  networks  and  sta- 
tions, film  distribution  companies, 
theaters,  and  publishing  houses  are  all 
strategic.  In  addition  to  enabling  wom- 
en to  control  production  and  distribu- 
tion, feminist  media  and  art  enter- 
prises could  become  political  pressure 
groups  against  the  male-controlled  in- 
dustry. 

The  struggle  for  power  in  the  media 
requires  long  term  visions  and  goals. 
Feminist  activity  needs  to  be  critically 
evaluated  with  the  goal  of  radical 
change  in  mind.0  In  addition,  there  is 
a  need  to  establish  a  structure  of  ac- 
countability to  specifically  feminist 
political  organizations.  One  aspect 
of  accountability  that  could  be  built 
into  a  structure  is  feminist  criticism. 
Feminist  art  critics  would   provide  a 


means  of  clarifying  for  the  artist  what 
she  is  doing  and  what  she  needs  to  do, 
as  well  as  holding  her  responsible  to 
the  movement  as  a  whole.  Feminist 
criticism  can  help  make  artistic  and 
political  connections:  intellectual  with 
sensual,  emotional  with  external  real- 
ity, and  vision  with  ideology. 

Several  well-known  art  works  con- 
tain some  of  the  elements  we  have  dis- 
cussed. While  these  works  are  not  fem- 
inist, nor  exclusively  about  women, 
they  do  deal  with  political  struggle 
and/or  change.  "State  of  Seige"  and 
"Burn"  are  films  depicting  the  process 
of  revolutionary  struggle.  In  "Burn," 
a  slave  uprising  is  successfully  put 
down  by  a  European  mercenary.  How- 
ever, at  the  conclusion  of  the  film,  he 
is  assassinated  and  the  audience  is  left 
with  a  sense  of  hope.  The  assassination 
is  symbolic.  It  implies  that  the  struggle 
will  continue  and  the  people  will  even- 
tually win.  The  oppressed  are  battered, 
but  unlike  a  lot  of  art  about  oppres- 
sion, they  are  not  defeated.  "State  of 
Seige"  also  depicts  struggle,  which,  in 
spite  of  defeats,  leaves  the  audience 
with  a  sense  of  hope  for  continuing 
struggle.  The  individuals  involved  oper- 
ated as  a  team.  Empathy  for  them 
comes  primarily  from  identification 
with  their  political  struggle  rather 
than  their  individual  personalities. 
Women  are  presented  as  strong,  cour- 
ageous characters.   However,   they  do 


***This  is  another,  fundamentally  impor- 
tant subject.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the 
Movement  must  work  to  develop  and  imple- 
ment organization  and  party  structures. 


Prime  Time:  Art  and  Politics/35 


not  occupy  primary  leadership  roles 
in  either  of  these  films. 

"Hearts  and  Minds"  uses  a  different 
mode-the  documentary.  It  is  one  of 
the  few  revolutionary  artworks  dis- 
tributed on  a  national  level  to  exploit 
the  potential  of  this  form.  Since  docu- 
mentaries usually  are  propaganda 
pieces  made  by  and  for  the  ruling 
classes,  this  Hollywood  film  was  a 
slip-up.  The  film  addresses  the  struggle 
of  the  Vietnamese  people  against  A- 
merican  imperialism.  It  asserts  by  im- 
plication that  the  Vietnamese  will  not 
be  conquered  and  that  this  is  precisely 
the  reason  for  American  "withdrawal" 
(a  people's  victory). 

Not  all  change-oriented  art  has  to 
address  itself  to  direct  political  action. 


Consciousness-raising  art  that  rein- 
forces group  identification  while  de- 
stroying negative  stereotypes  is  equally 
crucial.  "The  Autobiography  of  Miss 
Jane  Pitman"  on  television  is  an  exam- 
ple of  such  a  work.  It  is  the  story  of  a 
freed  black  slave  and  her  struggle  to 
survive.  A  woman  of  incredible  strength 
Jane  Pitman  was  a  role  model,  both  to 
others  in  her  life  and  to  the  audience. 

While  we  are  emphasizing  film  and 
television  because  they  are  the  public 
media,  other  examples  of  political  art 
should  be  mentioned.  A  group  of  two 
working  class  women,  called  "Hazel 
and  Alice",  have  travelled  cross-coun- 
try singing  their  musia  It  is  strong  and 
gutsy,  providing  not  only  a  moving 
portrayal  of  the  lives  of  miners  but 


36/Quest 


photograph  by  Evelyn  Pugh 
courtesy  of  Diana  Press 


also  advocating  change.  They  succeed 
in  incorporating  political  analysis  with- 
out compromising  the  aesthetic  quality 
of  their  music.  Music  and  marching 
tunes  have  been  deeply  rooted  in  the 
U.S.  labor  movement.  The  lyrics  of 
the  "Bread  and  Roses"  marching  song 
sung  by  women  strikers  at  Lowell  is  a 
powerful  example  of  women's  collec- 
tive strength  and  visions  for  a  better 
life. 

Art  In  A  Revolutionary  Society 

The  idea  that  unlimited  opportun- 
ity exists  under  capitalism  is  absurd. 
The  most  that  society  offers  us  now  is 
the  ability  to  accumulate  material 
wealth  at  the  expense  of  others.  Mater- 
ial wealth  is  the  gauge  for  measuring 
our  human  value.  Even  the  wealthy 
rarely  find  it  possible  to  develop  then- 
own  potential,  because  they  are  so  im- 
mersed in  developing  the  potential  of 
their  capital.  Artists  are  not  immune 
to  this  problem.  Fine  Arts  is  a  highly 
competitive  field.  Rather  than  judge 
themselves  and  their  art  in  their  own 
terms,  artists  constantly  measure  them~ 
selves  against  each  other.  Personal 
"recognition"  is  very  important.  By 
contrast,  art,  in  a  future  society,  would 
be  part  of  life,  not  a  remote,  myster- 
ious activity  for  the  elite.  A  reinterpre- 
tation  of  art  as  part  of  life  calls  for  a 
new  concept  of  what  the  "artist"  is. 

Under  a  new  economy,  production 
would  exist  for  the  self  and  others 
equally.  Rather  than  our  senses/our- 
selves being  drained,  producing/ putting 
"out"   work  would  be  a  constant  pro- 


cess of  revitalization.  With  a  new 
sense  of  mutuality,  the  fusion  of  self 
with  society  as  a  whole  (all  for  one  and 
one  for  all),  the  concept  of  abuse 
would  be  absurd.  Work  that  creates 
new  modes  of  life,  that  is  mutually 
supportive  and  gratifying,  must  be  seen 
as  "artistic".  In  this  sense,  everyone 
would  be  an  "artist".  Some  people 
may  choose  to  develop  art  as  a  disci- 
pline, but  everyone  will  be  involved  in 
revitalization. 

We  envision  a  society  where  the 
education  process  would  no  longer  be 
isolated  from  the  community.  Work, 
health,  education,  art,  science,  politics, 
etc.  would  be  integrated  aspects  of  the 
whole,  and  would  operate  in  the  inter- 
est of  society  as  a  whole.  We  envision 
a  society  where  everyone  would  have 
the  means  to  develop  talents  for  her- 
self and  society.  No  individual  would 
develop  herself  at  the  expense  of 
others.  Time  consumed  by  survival 
tasks  could  be  shortened  in  a  techno- 
logically advanced  society.  With  the 
elimination  of  the  profit  motive,  the 
need  for  ever-increasing  production 
and  sales  would  be  eliminated.  Work 
could  become  creative  and  exciting  in 
a  society  where  production  existed  for 
the  people,  and  where  work  itself  met 
the  needs  of  individuals.  People  would 
have  more  chance  to  explore  and 
develop  new  interests:  status  no  longer 
would  be  a  determinant  in  choosing 
those  activities.  Material  consumption 
would  cease  to  be  a  major  pastime. 

Under  a  restructured  economic  sys- 
tem, art  supplies  would  be  available 
to    those   who   wished   to    make    art. 


Prime  Time:  Art  and  Politics/ 37 


Video  equipment,  cameras,  printing 
presses,  etc.,  could  be  made  accessible 
to  people  through  community  centers, 
which  would  also  provide  workspace. 
The  centers  could  provide  performance 
space  for  dance  and  theatrical  produc- 
tions, concerts,  and  films  as  well. 
Artistic  skills  and  technical  skills  could 
be  taught  at  the  centers,  or  shared 
through  training  and  information  ex- 
change workshops. 

Education  would  no  longer  create 
and  perpetuate  false  ideas  of  isolated 
disciplines.  Rather  than  the  competi- 
tive divisions  which  exist  today,  var- 
ious disciplines  would  complement 
each  other.  Artists,  educators  and 
health  workers  would  work  together, 


for  example,  in  designing  a  happy, 
healthy  and  stimulating  environment 
for  school  children. 

Through  the  conscious  merging  of 
art  with  other  aspects  of  society,  we 
envision  a  greatly  improved  quality  of 
life.  Cities  would  be  redesigned  with 
priority  placed  on  human  needs.  Using 
art  and  psychology,  architects  could 
develop  environments  which  would 
enhance  feelings  of  freedom  and  com- 
fort. Health,  safety  hazards,  and  crime 
could  be  discouraged  by  new  forms  of 
building  design.  The  idea  of  Muzak 
could  be  turned  around  by  playing 
real  music  in  public  places  and  work 
environments. 

Athletics  would  emphasize  develop- 
ment of  physical  beauty  and  health 
over  the  fiercely  competitive  sports 
which  are  now  popular.  Sports  such  as 
gymnastics,  skating,  or  swimming 
would  be  more  prominent,  and  would 
make  it  possible  for  every  person  to 
participate  without  having  to  qualify 
and  compete.  Everyone  has  a  body 
which  she  or  he  should  be  allowed  and 
encouraged  to  develop.  Those  who  ex- 
celled would  be  appreciated  for  their 
skill  and  beauty  and  ability  to  teach 
others,  but  no  one  would  be  excluded. 
Team  sports  would  not  be  character- 
ized by  competition  and  physical  vio- 
lence but  by  cooperation.   Yoga  and 


photograph  by  Jeb 


3&lQuest 


similar  disciplines  could  enhance  our 
ability  to  work  creatively  and  increase 
our  sense  of  well-being. 

Crafts,  as  objects  of  beauty  and 
function,  could  be  used  in  the  home  to 
renew  a  sense  of  contact  with  the  pro- 
ducts of  our  labor  which  we  lost  with 
the  advent  of  industrial  capitalism. 
It  is  not  necessary,  desirable,  or  even 
possible  to  revert  to  pre-industrial 
technology  in  order  to  experience  the 
joy  of  making  something  for  ourselves 
or  a  friend. 

In  a  future  society,  art  can  be  used 
as  an  ongoing  tool  to  maintain  and 
strengthen  our  successes.  By  providing 
us  with  a  historical  and  cultural  sense 
of  continuity,  a  sense  of  connecting 
the  past  with  the  present  with  the 
future,  it  can  remind  us  that  history  is 
a  dynamic  process  of  change.  The  past 
will  remind  us  that  we  must  continue 
to  struggle  for  the  present  and  the 
future. 

Art,  as  part  of  life,  will  bring  new 
dimensions  to  our  world.  It  will  be  a 
celebration  of  our  victories.  Our  new 
shared  existence  will  be  applauded 
through  art,  as  it  will  provide  a  means 
for  group  and  individual  strength  and 
pride.  It  will  be  a  source  of  joy  and 
gratification  and  reward.  It  will  be  a 
source  of  respect  for  life. 


Footnotes 

!See  Sophie  Burnham,  The  Art  Crowd 
(New  York:  McKay,  1973). 

^See  Wilson  Bryan  Key,  Subliminal  Se- 
duction (Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice- 
Hall,  1973). 

^Karen  Kollias,  "Class  Realities:  Create 
a  New  Power  Base,"  Quest,  Vol  I,  No.  3, 
Winter,  1975  discusses  this  issue. 

^See  for  example,  Ray  Bradbury,  Fahren- 
heit 451  (New  York:  Ballantine  Books, 
1953)  or  Aldous  Huxley,  Brave  New  World 
(New  York:  Harper  and  Row,  1932). 

^Groups  such  as  Olivia  Records  or  the 
Feminist  Radio  Network  are  important 
examples. 

^See  Charlotte  Bunch,  "The  Reform 
Tool  Kit,"  Quest,  Vol  I,  No.  1,  Summer, 
1974  for  some  criteria. 


Alexa  Freeman  has  been  an  activist 
in  the  Women's  Movement  in  Washing- 
ton, D.C.  and  is  presently  Design  Editor 
of  Quest. 

Jackie  MacMillan  is  a  co-founder  of 
the  Feminist  Alliance  Against  Rape  and 
former  member  of  the  D.C.  Rape  Crisis 
Center. 


=XK 


XK 


XKZ 


Errata: 

Quest  regrets  the  error  which  appeared  in 
the  response  by  Thelrna  P.  Catalano,  in  Cri- 
tique and  Commentary  (vol  I,  no.  3),  p.  19, 
last  paragraph,  which  should  read:  Just  as 
Feminist  Psychotherapy  can  become  as  ir- 
relevant for  women  as  traditional  and  classi- 


cal treatment  forms,  without  collective  Fem- 
inist action,  so  too  is  it  not  possible  to 
correct  individual  pathology  without  ade- 
quate professional  assistance  whereby  wom- 
en can  unlearn  male-defined  oppressive  be- 
havior patterns,  and  relearn  "woman-identi- 
fied-woman"  behavior  patterns. 


Prime  Time:  Art  and  Politics/39 


REFLECTIONS 

ON 

SCIENCE 
FICTION 


AN 

INTERVIEW 
WITH 


JOANNA 
RUSS 


The  following  is  a  Quest  interview 
with  Joanna  Russ  who  has  written  three 
science  fiction  novels:  Picnic  on  Para- 
dise (1968),  And  Chaos  Died  (1970), 
and  The  Female  Man  (1975,  Bantam). 
She  has  also  written  short  fiction-bo th 
science  fiction  and  other  fiction.  She 
has  won  the  Science  Fiction  Writers  of 
America  1972  Nebula  Award  for  the 
best  short  story  for  her  story,  "When 
It  Changed."  She  recently  won  the 
Florence  Howe  Criticism  Award  for  an 
essay  entitled  "What  Can  A  Heroine 
Do?"  She  is  currently  teaching  crea- 
tive writing  and  science  fiction  at  the 
University  of  Colorado  in  Boulder. 


Q,  How  did  you  begin  writing  sci- 
ence fiction? 

A  I  started  writing  science  fiction 
in  my  last  year  of  graduate  school  after 
three  years  of  doing  nothing  but  play 
writing  for  an  M.F.A.  from  Yale  Drama 
School.  I  had  never  written  any  science 
fiction  before,  but  had  read  it  since  I 
was  twelve  and  loved  it. 

Q  Why  did  you  choose  this  particu- 


40/ Quest,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


larform?  Did  you  see  it  as  having  polit- 
ical, social,  or  moral  implications  for 
contemporary  life? 

A  First  of  all,  science  fiction  is  a 
mode  rather  than  a  form  (a  form  would 
be  something  like  the  sonnet,  the  short 
story,  etc.).  It  is,  basically,  anything 
that  is  about  conditions  of  life  or 
existence  different  from  either  what 
typically  is,  or  what  typically  was, 
or  whatever  was  or  is.  It  is  al- 
lied to  fantasy  (which  I  also  write) 
but  is  not  fantasy-which  incorpor- 
ates as  part  of  its  pleasure  the  im- 
possibility of  its  material.  Science  fic- 
tion is  about  the  possible-but-not-real. 
Secondly,  I  do  not  believe  that  any 
artist  (as  opposed  to  hack)  chooses  a 
form;  the  form  chooses  the  artist,  if 
anything.  I  did  not  "choose"  s.f.  be- 
cause I  saw  it  as  having  "political, 
social,  or  moral  implications  for  con- 
temporary life."  I  did  not  choose  s.f. 
at  all.  I  had  always  loved  it.  I  read  it 
because  horror  stories  and  s.f.  seemed 
to  me,  from  the  age  of  11-12  on,  to  be 
about  real  life  in  a  way  that  the  Clas- 
sics we  were  assigned  at  school  were 
not.  Both  horror  stories  and  s.f.  seem 
to  me  in  many  ways  freer  and  more 
imaginative  than  "straight"  fiction  (al- 
though most  avant-garde  fiction  has 
abolished  the  distinction  between  real- 
ism and  fantasy,  something  nobody 
taught  us  in  high  school).  Does  s.f. 
have  "moral  implications?  Good  Lord, 
is  there  anything  that  doesn't  have 
moral  implications?  I  don't  want  to  go 
into  the  old,  idiot  song-and- dance  rou- 
tine   about    s.f.    being    prophetic    (it 


isn't)  or  wonderful  for  developing  the 
imagination  (it  rarely  succeeds  after 
the  first  addiction  wears  off). .  .yet  I'm 
still  addicted  to  it.  Possibly  it's  the 
appeal  of  the  utterly  impossible,  for  a 
truly  first-rate  s.f.  novel  would  have 
to  be  a  great  novel,  period,  and  in  addi- 
tion have  to  surmount  the  most  extra- 
ordinary technical  difficulties.  Forty 
years  ago  those  who  cried  out  that  s.f. 
was  Good  were  voices  crying  in  the 
wilderness.  Now  there  are  ghastly  text- 
books put  out  by  Prentice-Hall. 

Q  Have  your  ideas  about  the  role 
and  importance  of  science  fiction 
changed? 

A  What  has  changed  in  my  feelings 
about  s.f.  is  the  result  of  reading  it  for 
25  years.  So  little  of  it  really  reaches 
the  potential  of  the  mode  that  reading 
most  of  it  is  becoming  a  chore.  Let's 
say  that  like  a  great  many  critics  and 
readers  I  remain  faithful  to  the  ideal, 
but  deplore  most  of  the  practice.  Now 
that  s.f.  is  beginning  to  be  academical- 
ly respectable,  my  feelings  about  its 
"role"  (whatever  that  is)  are  mixed. 
S.f.  should  ideally  be  able  to  say  more 
about  more  than  other  fiction. 

Q  Do  you  view  your  science  fiction 
writing  as  feminist?  How  do  your  femi- 
nist views  affect  the  science  fiction 
you  write? 

A  I  am  a  feminist.  Therefore  all  my 
writing  comes  from  2t.gesta.lt  or  ground- 
of-being  which  includes  my  feminism. 
I  say  "feminism"  as  if  it  were  a  set  of 


Reflections  on  Science  Fiction/41 


explicable  beliefs,  which  in  part  it  is, 
but  there  is  also  a  kind  of  basic  exper- 
ience of  which  I  was  aware  most  of  my 
life  but  which  did  not  find  political 
expression  or  a  vocabulary  until  about 
seven  years  ago.  If  you  want  to  call 
both  of  these  "feminist,"  then  yes,  of 
course  my  writing  (all  of  it,  including 
non-s.f.  fiction)  is  feminist.  And  it  af- 
fects what  I  write,  just  as  everything 
else  I  am  or  have  been  or  have  exper- 
ienced affects  what  I  write.  I  am  cur- 
rently being  beaten  over  the  head  in 
an  s.f.  magazine  by  a  reviewer  of  The 
Female  Man  for  just  this  reason.  The 
novel  has  a  great  deal  of  rage  in  it, 
which  discomforts  not  only  this  one 
reviewer,  but  some  women  who  read 
and  write  s.f.  The  novel  is  even  treated 
as  a  blueprint  for  the  future,  despite 
the  fact  that  none  of  the  conditions  I 
describe  in  the  novel  exist  now  or  prob- 
ably ever  will.  But  of  course  the  real 
target  is  the  taboo  against  rage,  specifi- 
cally rage  against  men.  Long  before  I 
became  a  feminist  in  any  explicit  way, 
(my  first  reaction  upon  hearing  Kate 
Millet  speak  in  1968  was  that  of  course 
every  woman  knew  that  but  if  you 
ever  dared  to  formulate  it  to  yourself, 
let  alone  say  it  out  loud,  God  would 
kill  you  with  a  lightning  bolt)  I  had 
turned  from  writing  love  stories  about 
women  in  which  women  were  losers, 
and  adventure  stories  about  men  in 
which  the  men  were  winners,  to  writing 
adventure  stories  about  a  woman  in 
which  the  woman  won.  It  was  one  of 
the  hardest  things  I  ever  did  in  my  life. 
These  are  stories  about  a  sword-and- 
sorcery  heroine   called  Alyx,  and  be- 


fore writing  the  first  I  spent  about 
two  weeks  in  front  of  my  typewriter 
shaking,  and  thinking  of  how  I'd  be 
stoned  in  the  streets,  accused  of  penis 
envy,  and  so  on  (after  that  it  is  obliga- 
tory to  commit  suicide,  of  course). 

It  was  shifting  my  center  of  gravity 
from  Him  to  Me  and  I  think  it's  the 
most  difficult  thing  an  artist  can  do-a 
woman  artist,  that  is.  It's  OK  to  write 
about  artist-female  with  feet  in  center 
of  own  stage  as  long  as  she  suffers  a  lot 
and  is  defeated  and  is  wrong  (the  last  is 
optional).  But  to  win,  and  to  express 
the  anger  that's  in  all  of  us,  is  a  taboo 
almost  as  powerful  as  the  taboo  against 
being  indifferent  to  The  Man.  Some 
criticisms  I've  heard  about  my  latest 
novel  are,  for  example,  that  there  are 
no  sympathetic  male  characters  in  it. 
Actually  the  people  in  it  (of  both  sexes) 
are  not  a  choice  lot,  objectively  con- 
sidered, but  then  I  do  not  think  it  any 
artist's  business  to  pretend  to  a  false 
objectivity.  Objectivity  is  for  God  and 
She's  not  telling.  Actually  the  book  is 
somewhat  more  complex,  inasmuch  as 
the  women  in  it  (except  for  Laur)  are 
really  parts  of  one  woman,  and  the  two 
men  (leaving  out  the  spear-carriers)  are 
the  extremes  of  sexism  as  it  impinges 
on  women's  lives.  The  shift  of  sym- 
pathy is  what's  being  complained  about. 
There  are  no  men  portrayed  sympa- 
thetically because  when  you  are  writing 
about  what  amounts  to  a  sex  war,  it  is 
tempo  rubato  to  get  all  misty-eyed 
about  the  poor  oppressor,  as  well  as 
uneconomical,  aesthetically  speaking. 

As  you  can  see,  I  respond  to  criti- 
cism as  every  writer  I  know  does:  by 


42/Quest 


"1 

l^'fif'             .,* 

'  W.    \    .;■,,,. 

■« 

:m/n£-T«  f°  h<*cH> 

f 

#*?£<  "f'^fe  c^r^ 

Bi 

>jU1srr/o& 

,1 

screaming  blue  murder.  But  it  is  hard 
to  convey  a  distinction  that  I  think 
very  important:  that  The  Female  Man 
and  "When  It  Changed"  are  explicitly 
feminist  because  that's  what  they  are 
about,  but  that  everything  else  I  write 
must  of  necessity  bear  the  imprint  of 
the  consciousness  and  sensibility  it 
came  from,  and  that  is,  of  course  femi- 
nist. I  spent  three  years  after  The  Fe- 
male Man  trying  to  get  together  some 
theory  of  propaganda  or  persuasion  or 
social  analysis  in  art  and  haven't  man- 
aged yet;  I  only  hope  I  built  some  of 
the  difficulties  and  ambiguities  into 
the  novel  itself,  as  I  had  tried  to  do. 

Mind  you,  writing  what  I  call  propa- 
ganda is  no  different  from  writing  any- 
thing else.  But  the  specific  problems 
(for  example,  the  unconscious  picture 


writers  have  of  the  reader)  are  differ- 
ent. 

In  the  end,  The  Female  Man  came 
over  as  possibly  the  only  kind  of  propa- 
ganda there  can  be:  either  a  celebration 
(to  those  who  agree)  or  a  construct 
which  forces  you  through  a  certain 
cluster  of  experiences  and  states  of 
mind.  If  you  do  not  agree  with  the 
assumptions  underlying  the  "portrait" 
of  this  experience,  reading  the  book 
will  be  torture  and  it  will  make  you 
very  angry,  but  perhaps  the  only  propa- 
ganda there  can  be  for  a  forbidden 
feeling  or  belief  or  existence  is  simply 
to  present  it,  as  Rita  Mae  Brown  and 
Jean  Genet  do.  Social  analysis  or  argu- 
ment (as  in  Brecht,  Ibsen,  Shaw)  is 
infinitely  more  difficult  in  narrative, 
and  may  do  much  better  on  stage, 
where  the  dialectic  of  argument  is  live 
and  much  easier  to  make  compelling, 
or  comic,  or  at  least  interesting. 

To  be  blunt,  I  wrote  my  explicitly 
feminist  work  in  the  same  way  and  out 
of  the  same  motives  and  ground  I  write 
everything.  I  did  not  "decide"  to  do  it. 
It's  an  attempt  to  get  my  head  to- 
gether-literally,  in  the  novel,  where 
there  are  at  least  four  women  with  one 
head  apiece,  none  of  whom  is  a  whole 
woman  until  they  finally  do  get  to- 
gether. .  .for  Thanksgiving  dinner.  I 
still  think  that  was  a  witty  bit,  you 
know,  Thanksgiving.  Hm.  Anyway. 

Q.  How  important  is  it  to  emphasize 
female  characters  as  strong  and  inde- 
pendent? 

A  The  crucial  question  about  the 


Reflections  on  Science  Fiction/43 


feminism  of  a  work  is  not  whether  the 
women  in  it  are  strong  and  independent 
(though  I  understand  your  concern 
perfectly,  having  been  subjected  to 
generations  of  Supersimps  myself  in 
literature)  but  whether  the  assump- 
tions underlying  the  entire  narrative 
are  feminist.  A  sexist  story  can  exist 
in  which  all  the  characters  are  crystal- 
line life  forms  living  on  a  planet  of 
Betelguese—yes,  and  a  racist  one,  too— 
because  although  the  characters  aren't 
human,  the  writer  and  readers  are. 
What's  important  is  who  wins  and  who 
loses;  a  remake  of  Madam  Butterfly, 
with  lots  of  tears,  is  not  a  feminist 
piece  of  art,  no  matter  who's  written  it 
and  no  matter  what  sympathy  is  ex- 
tended to  the  poor  victim.  Many  wom- 
en are  guilty  of  this  kind  of  thing  as 
writers.  (I  like  to  call  it  the  Joan  Didion 
Syndrome.)  Whatever  its  worth  as  art 
(and  I  think  its  sentimentality  inevi- 
tably vitiates  it)  feminism  it  ain't.  Art 
is  not  simple. 

Q.  Does  the  women's  movement 
need  science  fiction  and  fantasy?  Do 
you  think  the  women's  movement  has 
had  difficulties  in  fantasizing,  has  suf- 
fered from  an  inability  to  dream? 

A  May  the  Heavenly  Couple  bless 
me,  I  don't  know  enough  about  "the 
women's  movement"  per  se  to  know  if 
we  should  be  dreaming  more.  The  in- 
ability to  dream  is  just  what  s.f.  is  sup- 
posed to  remedy-and  not  like  pure 
fantasy.  No,  I  shouldn't  say  that  about 
fantasy;  fantasy  is  inner  space.  Most  of 
what  publishers  call  "fantasy"  has  been 


written  either  by  men  or  by  women 
simply  imitating  the  tradition  of  what 
already  existed.  There  have  always  been 
some  women  writing  s.f.  but  now  that 
Marge  Piercy  is  doing  it,  and  there  is 
the  novel  about  Ishtar  returning  as  a 
Bronx  housewife,  it  does  seem  to  be 
thriving.  Fantasy  is  extremely  difficult 
in  another  way,  though;  there  is  in  it 
(as  Ursula  LeGuin  points  out,  at  least 
in  the  heroic-romance  form)  nothing 
but  words. 

Inability  to  dream—well,  everybody 
needs  to  dream.  It  is  our  spiritual  and 
moral  guide.  Politics  certainly  can't  be 
divorced  from  ultimate  goals  or  ideas 
about  possibilities.  The  only  difficulty 
I  ever  encountered  with  feminists  over 
s.f.  was  several  years  ago  in  the  Labyris 
Bookstore,  into  which  I  barged  cheer- 
fully (a  perfect  stranger)  and  proposed 
to  give  the  woman  there  a  list  of  s.f. 
titles.  She  seemed  rather  suspicious  and 
probably  with  reason— I  would  imagine 
they'd  had  considerable  hassling  in 
their  existence-yet  I  learned  later  they 
simply  could  not  keep  LeGuin's  The 
Left  Hand  of  Darkness  in  stock.  It  al- 
ways sold  out.  I  say  very  angry  things 
about  Ursula  LeGuin  quite  often,  but 
it's  the  anger  of  disappointed  adoration; 
in  some  daughterly  part  of  me  I  feel 
she's  capable  of  writing  something  like 
War  and  Peace  about  women,  damn  it, 
and  I  keep  nipping  her  feet  to  get  her 
to  do  so.  But  The  Left  Hand  of  Dark- 
ness is  the  nearest  thing  we  have  to  an 
androgynous  vision.  I  would  like  to 
think  that  The  Female  Man  is  a  gynan- 
drous  vision,  so  if  you  put  the  two  into 
a   blender    (that   is,   into    your   head) 


44/Quest 


and  mix  well,  you  may  end  up 
with  something.  To  reutrn  to  your 
question,  some  of  the  distrust  some 
feminists  may  have  for  s.f.  is  quite 
reasonable,  since  a  great  deal  of  s.f. 
is  a  kind  of  misogynist  power-tripping 
of  a  very  absurd  and  adolescent  kind. 
And  since  it  is  s.f.  and  not  realism, 
this  shows  far  more  baldly  than  in  real- 
istic fiction.  The  mode  contains  per- 
haps 100  serious,  full-time  writers  and 
altogether  perhaps  300  from  neophyte 
aspirants  to  old  professionals,  so  that 
every  range  of  quality  and  content  is 
there.  A  feminist  who  goes  to  the  novel 
rack  (under  "s.f.")  and  picks  at  random 
is  likely  to  be  not  only  bored  but  gen- 
uinely insulted.  I  can  only  account  for 
my  early  addiction  by  adducing  the 
other,   mind-expanding  quality  of  the 


'Ufaire.  are  o/( 


*& 


s.f.  works  available  to  me,  then,  and 
the  fact  that,  whatever  its  faults,  s.f. 
does  present  possibilities  per  se. 

Q  How  do  you  see  the  relationship 
between  the  visions  you  have  described 
and  possibilities  for  political  change, 
for  example,  in  the  different  worlds 
you  see  in  The  Female  Man? 

A  Impossible  question!  Books  are 
not  blueprints.  They  are  experiences. 
The  worlds  in  The  Female  Man  are  not 
futures;  they  are  here  and  now  writ 
large.  One  ma^  just  wrote  me  a  lovely 
fan  letter  in  which  he  not  only  describ- 
ed the  structure  of  the  book  with  a  pre- 
cision that  astonished  me  ("an  inward 
descending  spiral");  he  also  mentioned 
casually  that  Manland/Womanland  was 
here-and-now.  A  flat  statement  of  it 
would  be  that  Jeannine's  world  is  the 
past  (but  still  very  much  present);  that 
Janet's  world  is  a  kind  of  ideal  (into 
which  I  put  all  sorts  of  quirky  things  I 
happen  tb  like,  like  public  comic  sta- 
tuary); and  that  JaePs  world  is  here- 
and-now  carried  out  to  its  logical  ex- 
treme. Joanna  keeps  running  from  one 
to  the  other.  Janet's  world  is  the  po- 
tential one,  not  JaePs.  I've  been  asked 
why  there  are  no  men  in  Whileaway, 
and  my  only  answer  is  that  I  tried  but 
the  Whileawayans  wouldn't  let  me. 

I  can't  imagine  a  two-sexed  egalitar- 
ian society  and  I  don't  believe  anyone 
else  can,  either,  though  Samuel  Delany 
comes  closer  in  Trouble  on  Triton  than 
anything  else  I've  ever  read.  Well,  here 
you  have  the  whole  thing  about  s.f. 
Where  else  could  one  even  try  out  such 


Reflections  on  Science  Fiction/45 


*  ^  Hm  uTjre*  f  hurt  km-  v^u 

i,e  fus*   of  aoJ! 


~~~TM& 


Me  mm 


46/Quest 


visions?  Yet  in  the  end  we  will  have  to 
have  models  for  the  real  thing  and  I 
can  find  none  yet,  and  that  is  why 
Whileaway  is  single-sexed.  So  is  Gethen 
in  The  Left  Hand  of  Darkness,  really. 

Q  What  should  women  science  fic- 
tion writers  be  doing? 

A  Why,  writing  s.f.,  of  course,  Ob- 
viously work  which  deals  with  sexism 
and  feminism  will  have  an  effect  on 
feminism,  on  anti-feminism,  and  (one 
would  think)  on  all  its  readers.  The 
effect  could  easily  be  reactionary; 
there  seems  to  have  been  a  mini-upsurge 
in  anti-feminist  s.f.,  some  quite  naive— 
for  example,  John  Boyd's  "Pollinators 
of  Eden"  in  which  a  frigid  female  biol- 
ogist is  converted  to  love  and  orgasm 
by  making  it  with  a  giant  sentient  or- 
chid. She  later  gives  birth  to  a  pod.  (I 
have  never  been  able  to  figure  out  quite 
how  serious  Boyd's  work  is,  by  the 
way.  Yes,  I  know  it's  intended  to  be 
funny,  but  how  funny?)  Or  even  his 
Sex  and  the  High  Command,  an  ex- 
tremely sexist  book  in  which  women 
win  the  sex  war  and  exterminate  men. 
That's  what  I  mean  about  carefully 
watching  a  book's  assumptions,  not 
just  its  obvious  statements.  You  don't 
have  to  "mean"  sexism;  all  you  have  to 
do  is  remain  comfortable  and  unthink- 
ing, if  you're  male. 

By  the  way,  James  Blish  says  he 
invented  the  words  "hard  science"  to 
mean  correct  science,  as  in  "hard 
copy."  Popular  usage-"hard"  means 
the  masculine  range  of  physics,  chemis- 
try, astronomy,  engineering,  and  "soft" 


means  the  social  sciences-is  as  neat  an 
example  of  sexist  language  as  I  have 
ever  heard.  Phallus  worship  invades  the 
domain  of  Sacred  Reason.  Even  "hard" 
to  indicate  "correct"  or  "precise"  sug- 
gests the  same  thing.  (I  prefer  "winged" 
myself.) 

To  be  female  or  feminine  or  inac- 
curate or  sloppy  is  to  be  "soft".  Sexual 
excitement  makes  women  physically 
mushy  and  probably  does  the  same  to 
their  minds,  if  they  ever  had  any.  All 
of  Western  history  (and  probably  Asia- 
tic, too)  is  in  that  pair  of  words!  The 
horrors  of  the  swamp,  the  split  between 
mind  and  body,  between  power  and 
emotion.  Oh  dear. 

This  is  the  effect  of  reading  sex  war 
books  written  by  men.  In  one  of  them 
God  invents  a  specific  form  of  syphilis 
(which  doesn't  show  up  on  a  Wasser- 


audio  production* 

cassette  or  reel-to-reel 

•  tape  duplication 

•  location  recording 

•  production  &  editing 


of 


>  music 
» drama 
> poetry 


•  seminars 

•  speeches 

•  conferencaa 


DISCOUNT  TO  FEMINIST  PROJECTS 
3CE3US    audio  productions 

1722  38  th  ST  ST 

norsx..  a.g.  2002  0 

(202)  582-0500 


Reflections  on  Science  Fiction/47 


mann  test)  to  give  5000  insurgent 
American  businesswomen  (who  have 
masculinized  themselves  via  androgens 
because  they  can't  get  raises  and  pro- 
motions any  other  way,  and  who  im- 
mediately do  take  over  American  busi- 
ness, since  they  are  far  more  intelli- 
gent than  their  male  colleagues)  termi- 
nal paresis.  Well,  that  one  dates  back 
to  the  'teens.'  The  frequency  with 
which  these  books  drag  in  God  or 
"love"  (woman  falls  on  knees,  melts- 
see,  "soft"~confesses  sins,  licks  toesies, 
is  converted)  suggests  to  me  that  men 
are  very  uneasy  about  being  able  even 
to  hold  their  own  without  divine 
intervention. 

Q  What  has  been  the  role  of  wom- 
en and  feminism  in  science  fiction 
writing? 

A  Women  have  been  in  the  minority 
in  s.f.  from  the  beginning  (if  you  char- 
acterize the  beginning  as  the  1920's  or 
as  the  Wells/ Verne  period).  This  is 
hardly  surprising.  The  only  literary 
genre  in  which  women  have  reached 
anything  like  a  substantial  number  of 
writers  working  is  in  the  detective 
story.  I  don't  know  why.  Perhaps 
1920's  s.f.,  with  its  emphasis  on  pulp, 
he-man  adventure  and  (later)  on  the 
"hard"  sciences  which  were  assumed 
to  be  a  closed  book  to  women,  simply 
did  not  attract  women  writers.  There 
were  always  some,  though  to  my  slop- 
py historical  memory,  they  wrote  ei- 
ther (generally)  adventure  stories  about 
he-men  or  sexless  stories  about  phe- 
nomena in  engineering  or  strange  gim- 


48/Quest 


micks/inventions,  just  as  the  men  did. 
There  have  been  a  few  sentimental 
ladies'  magazine  story  writers  and 
stories.  Pulp  fiction  was  not  a  place 
for  any  artist;  the  assumption  was  that 
the  product  was  (within  limits)  stan- 
dard and  that  one  ought  not  to  be  able 
to  tell  a  man's  work  from  a  woman's.  .  . 
as  if  Dickens  ought  to  sound  like 
Thackeray  and  both  of  them  be  indis- 
tinguishable from  Tolstoy,  on  the 
grounds  that  little  things  like  a  writer's 
era  or  nationality  ought  not  to  "show"! 
This  commerical  attitude  still  persists. 
After  all,  you  can't  tell  from  the 
kleenex  box  whether  the  assembly 
line  was  staffed  by  women  or  men,  so 
why  should  a  story  be  different? 

Women  are  still  in  the  minority. 
In  1973  the  membership  of  the  Science 
Fiction  Writers  of  America  was,  rough- 
ly, two  women  to  eleven  men.  How- 
ever, the  women  have  been  winning  a 
disproportionate  number  of  the  prizes 
given  in  the  field.  This  suggests  to  me 
that  (as  in  many  other  fields)  women 
s.f.  writers  are  more  rigorously  self- 
selected  than  the  men. 

Q  Can  women  science  fiction  wri- 
ters play  a  political  role  in  the  field  of 
science  fiction  and  within  the  wom- 
en's movement? 

A  Of  course  they  can  have  a  politi- 
cal role  within  science  fiction-if  you 
mean  by  this,  the  internal  politics  of 
the  field.  It  is  happening  now.  One 
young  man  has  started  "The  Pig  Run- 
ner's Digest"  to  flout  and  attack  sexism 
(and    its   more  easily-spottable  symp- 


l 


torn,  misogyny)  in  s.f.  Equal  pay  is 
another  mztter-everybody  is  poor  and 
publishers  generally  print  any  novel 
that  holds  together  (as  long  as  they 
can  underpay  you  for  it).  On  the  other 
hand,  I  have  heard  stories  of  "Oh,  we 
can't  print  that;  women  s.f.  writers 
don't  sell,"  and  so  on.  As  in  any  free- 
lance field  where  the  machines  are 
always  hungry  for  cotton  to  be  woven, 
nobody  cares  who  picks  it.  At  least  I 
hope  so.  If  things  get  much  more  lucra- 
tive, they  may  change.  Then  again  I  am 
in  no  position  to  be  told  to  my  face 
that  X  won't  print  my  novel  because 
I'm  female.  Or  because  the  novel  is 
feminist.  Or  it  scared  the  hell  out  of  the 
senior  editor. 

Within  the  women's  movement,  cer- 
tainly women  s.f.  writers  can  provide 
spiritual  nutriment  and  visions  and 
(probably)  annoyance  and  everything 
else  to  women's  movement  readers. 
That  is,  as  writers.  As  private  citizens 
they  can  do  all  sorts  of  things,  obvious- 
ly. Some  women  s.f.  writers  will  un- 
doubtedly continue  to  write  about 
Superduperman  (but  even  there  he  will 
be  more  likely  to  have  a  stubborn  "girl 
side-kick")  and  some  won't.  The  new- 
est generation  of  s.f.  writers  of  both 
sexes  is  largely  a  generation  trained 
primarily  in  literature,  not  science  (or 
science  only  secondarily),  and  since 
the  concerns  of  science  fiction  are 
shifting  from  "hard"  science  to  social 
structures  and  psychology/anthropolo- 
gy, it  is  easier  for  women  (since  most 
women  are  not  trained  in  science)  to 
enter  s.f.  What  I  would  like  to  see,  for 
the  health  of  feminism  and  the  health 


of  s.f.,    is    an   influx  of  new  women 
writers. 


WOMEN  & 
LITERATURE 

a  scholarly  journal  of  women 
writers  and  the  literary 
treatment  of  women 
up  to  1900. 

Forthcoming  issues  will  include: 


•  articles  on  known  and  lesser  known  women 
writers  such  as  Jane  Austen,  Charlotte 
Bronte  and  Mary  Leadbeater. 

•  articles  on  the  literary  treatment  of  women 
in  works  such  as  Christabel  and  Paradise 


•  book  reviews  and  notes  of  work  in  progress. 

•  annual  bibliography  of  women  and  English 
and  American  literature  of  the  eighteenth 
and  nineteenth  centuries. 

Janet  M.  Todd,  Editor. 


Please  enter  my  subscription. 
Name 


Address. 


Mail  with  check  of  $7  to:  The  Editor,  Women  & 
Literature,  Department  of  English,  Douglass 
College,  Rutgers  University,  New  Brunswick, 
N.J.  o8903. 


Reflections  on  Science  Fiction/49 


witch 

is  to 
womon 

as  womb 
is  to 


birth 


by  Z.Budapest 


graphics  by  Carol  Clement 

Feminist  witches  are  wimmin  who 
search  within  themselves  for  the  female 
principle  of  the  universe  and  who  re- 
late   as    daughters    to    the    Creatrix. 

We  believe  that  just  as  it  is  time  to 
fight  for  the  right  to  control  our 
bodies,  it  is  also  time  to  fight  for  our 
sweet  womon  souls. 

We  believe  that  in  order  to  fight  and 
win  a  revolution  that  will  stretch  for 
generations  into  the  future,  we  must 
find  reliable  ways  to  replenish  our  en- 
ergies. We  believe  that  without  a  secure 
grounding  in  womon's  spiritual  strength 

*The  word  "women"  has  been  spelled  dif- 
ferently to  separate  it  from  the  male  deriva- 
tive, wo  -  men. 


Edited  by  Annie  Doczi 

there  will  be  no  victory  for  us. 

We  believe  that  we  are  part  of  a 
changing  universal  consciousness  that 
has  long  been  feared  and  prophesized 
by  the  patriarchs. 

We  believe  that  Goddess-conscious- 
ness gave  humanity  a  workable,  long- 
lasting,  peaceful  period  during  which 
the  Earth  was  treated  as  Mother  and 
wimmin  were  treated  as  Her  priestesses. 
This  was  the  mythical  Golden  Age  of 
Matriarchy. 

We  believe  that  wimmin  lost  supre- 
macy through  the  aggressions  of  males 
who  were  exiled  from  the  matriarchies 
and  formed  the  patriarchal  hordes  re- 
sponsible for  the  invention  of  rape  and 


50/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


the  subjugation  of  wimmin. 

We  believe  that  female  control  of 
the  death  (male)  principle  yields  hum- 
min  evolution. 

We  are  committed  to  living  life  lov- 
ingly towards  ourselves  and  our  sisters. 
We  are  committed  to  joy,  self-love,  and 
life-affirmation. 

We  are  committed  to  defending  our 
interests  and  those  of  our  sisters 
through  the  knowledge  of  witchcraft: 
to  blessing,  to  cursing,  to  healing,  and 
to  binding  with  power  rooted  in  wom- 
on-identified  wisdom. 

We  are  opposed  to  attacking  the 
innocent. 

We  are  equally  committed  to  com- 
munal and  personal  solutions. 

We  are  committed  to  teaching  wim- 
min how  to  organize  themselves  as 
witches  and  to  sharing  our  traditions 
with  wimmin. 

We  are  opposed  to  teaching  our 
magic  and  our  craft  to  men. 

Our  immediate  goal  is  to  congregate 
with  each  other  according  to  our 
ancient  womon-made  laws  and  remem- 
ber our  past,  renew  our  powers  and 
affirm  our  Goddess  of  the  Ten-thou- 
sand Names. 

Wimmin's  Religion 

What  people  believe  (faith-religion) 
is  political  because  it  influences  their 
actions  and  because  it  is  the  vehicle  by 
which  a  religion  perpetuates  a  social 
system. 

Every  new  social  structure  strives 
to  come  up  with  some  kind  of  myth- 
ology of  divine  origin  for  its  values  and 


aims.  The  mythology  is  passed  on  for 
generations,  and  often,  its  validity  goes 
unquestioned  for  centuries.  For  ex- 
ample, a  self-created  male  god  who  has 
no  mother  is  a  totally  unsupportable 
concept.  It  is,  to  say  the  least,  not 
supernatural  but  merely  unnatural.  No- 
thing in  nature  parallels,  let  alone  sub- 
stantiates, such  an  absurdity.  Every- 
thing, even  a  star,  originates  somewhere 
—every  creature  in  the  world  has  a 
mother  force.  To  deny  motherhood  is 
to  deny  wimmin.  Patriarchal  religion  is 
built  on  this  denial  which  is,  curiously, 
its  only  original  though t-the  rest  of  the 
edifice  being  ripped-off  stone  by  stone 
from  the  Old  Faith. 

Once  patriarchal  Christianity  became 
the  dominant  western  religion,  witches 
sugar-coated  their  magic  with  token 
Christianity  and,  safely  disguised  (if  se- 
riously oppressed),  continued  to  wor- 
ship according  to  their  ancient  ways. 
Who  absorbs  whose  culture  is  a  crucial 
issue  on  the  cultural  battlefield. 

In  the  time  of  the  matriarchies,  the 
Craft  of  Wimmin  was  common  know- 
ledge. It  was  rich  in  knowledge  of  how 
to  live  on  this  planet,  of  how  to  love 
and  fight  and  stay  healthy,  and  espe- 
cially, of  how  to  learn  to  learn.  The 
remnants  of  the  wisdom  of  that  Golden 
Age  constitute  the  body  of  what  we 
call  'witchcraft'  today.  The  massive  re- 
mainder of  that  knowledge  is  buried 
within  ourselves,  in  our  deep  minds,  in 
our  genes.  In  order  to  recall  this  know- 
ledge, we  have  to  open  ourselves  to 
psychic  experiences  in  the  safety  of 
feminist  witches  covens.  Completing 
the    process  of  reclamation  will  take 


Witch  is  to  Womon  as  Womb  is  to  Birth/51 


tMLrc       -m, 


aw,    .F. 


*  %glm^JA 


?;  -%iy       :.^^' 


'  ill 


i   «* 


fy 


!*„       .. 


years  and  probably  several  more  waves 
of  feminism.  But  we  have  begun. 

Wimmin's  religion  will  not,  in  any 
way,  be  similar  to  patriarchal  churches. 
There  will  be  no  separation  of  clergy 


from  people.  There  will  be  no  separa- 
tion of  body  and  soul.  The  individual 
groves  of  witches  will  decide  their  own 
governing  processes  in  council.  We  will 
be  able  to  satisfy  our  needs  for  rituals 


52/Quest 


without  having  to  turn  to  male  insti- 
tutions. For  example,  we  have  already 
resurrected  a  womon-identifled  ritual 
called  'holy  tryst'  as  a  substitute  for 
marriage.  Recognizing  that  people  will 
always  need  to  ritualize  deep  feelings, 
we  'tryst'  wimmin  who  want  to  get 
married.  The  word  'tryst'  means  'trust' 
and  the  lovers  are  pronounced  'lovers 
in  trust.'  We  also  do  'naming  festivals' 
instead  of  c/irafenings,  and  this  ritual, 
like  the  tryst,  is  based  on  knowledge 
that  pre-dates  the  patriarchy. 

We  are  learning  a  different  attitude 
towards  death.  Witches  view  death  as  a 
journey  into  another  life.  We  wear 
white  at  death  (not  bkck),  symboliz- 
ing the  white  light  of  the  souL  The 
priestesses  of  Hecate  (death  aspect  of 
the  Goddess)  bury  the  bodies  of  be- 
loveds by  land  or  by  fire  without  caus- 
ing the  departing  soul  the  agony  of 
leaving  her  loved  ones  behind  in  a  state 
of  lonely  grief.  The  departed  soul  is 
assured  safety  and  unutterable  peace 
in  the  Goddess. 

New  trust  is  the  most  important 
contribution  wimmin's  spirituality  can 
make  to  the  wimmin's  movement.  We 
learned  we  can  trust  our  bodies  when 
we  learned  we  had  a  right  to  control 
them.  We  are  learning  we  can  trust  our 
souls  through  learning  that  our  right  to 
have  them  is  rooted  in  our  recognition 
of  the  Goddess,  of  the  female  principle 
within  the  universe. 

The  World  Of  The  Occult  And 
The  Feminist  Witch 

One  would  think  that  witches  are  a 


different  breed  altogether-the  old-time 
subversives  and  rebels.  Yet  it  is  inter- 
esting, although  sad,  that  many  witches 
are  threatened  by  this  new  brand  of 
the  craft-poiitical  ftminist  witchcraft. 
Traditional  witches,  like  their  citizen 
counterparts,  fall  victim  to  the  illusion 
that  they  can  exist  within  this  sexist, 
racist  society  and  escape  it.  They  think 
politics  should  be  different  from  rel- 
igion; they  don't  have  the  sense  of  her- 
story  and  the  far-sightedness  to  see 
that  politics  and  religion  are  inter- 
related to  the  point  of  being  inter- 
dependent. 

When  we  opened  our  store,  "The 
Feminist  Wicca,"  witches  showed  up 
just  to  heckle,  or  at  least  debate,  how 
we  could  possibly  envision  ourselves 
as  truly  practicing  witchcraft  since  we 
didn't  involve  any  males.  One  womon 
in  black  traditional  robes  and  an  'ank' 
as  large  as  a  fist,  announced  at  the 
Annual  Witches  and  Warlocks  Conven- 
tion in  Los  Angeles,  "I  don't  want  to 
have  anything  to  do  with  politics,  and 
especially  not  with  feminism." 

Naturally,  the  feminist  witch  is  not 
at  all  welcome  in  the  male-dominated 
multi-million  dollar  business  that  con- 
stitutes the  occult  world  of  the  20th 
century. 

"The  movement  is  using  the  God- 
dess," accused  one  high  priestess.  Our 
response  is  that  the  Great  Goddess  is 
using  the  movement  to  bring  back  Her 
worship  and  the  memory  of  Her  daugh- 
ters-the  witches  and  the  amazons.  This 
is  indicated  by  the  way  many  separate 
groves  relating  to  the  Goddess  are 
springing   up  without  any  formal  or- 


Witch  is  to  Womon  as  Womb  is  to  Birth/53 


Available  as  a  poster.  Write  in  care  of  the  Feminist  Wicca. 


54/Qwest 


ganizational  effort.  This  organic  spread 
of  the  Old  Faith  is  precisely  what  we 
pray  for  at  Sabbats  and  it  seems  the 
Lady  is  getting  into  organizing  because 
we're  all  coming  out  of  the  spiritual 
closet    to    find    our    spiritual    sisters. 

The  Susan  R  Anthony  Coven  No.  1 

The  Coven  started  in  1971  on  Dec- 
ember 21st,  Lucina's  night-time  of  the 
celebration  of  the  borning  light.  The 
six  like-minded  sisters  gathered  toget- 
her in  a  small  Hollywood  apartment 
never  dreamed  that  within  five  years 
the  largest  grove  on  the  West  Coast 
would    grow    out    of   their    meeting. 

The  structure  for  which  we  are 
striving  was  suggested  by  the  Amazon 
nations  (for  whom  it  worked  rather 
well).  A  trinity  of  wimmin  coordinate 
the  coven-they  volunteer,  or  are  elec- 
ted, or  are  selected,  or  some  combi- 
nation of  the  above.  The  Mother  of  the 
Coven  is  in  charge  of  the  political  dir- 
ection of  the  Coven  and  is  responsible 
for  upholding  high  feminist  ethics  and 
being  a  friend  to  all  in  the  Coven.  The 
Maiden  of  the  Coven  is  responsible  for 
the  protection  of  the  Coveners;  all 
spells  concerning  attack  and  self-de- 
fense are  discussed  with  her;  and  she 
holds  the  list  of  spells  to  be  worked  on 
during  ceremonies.  The  Nymph  of  the 
Coven  insures  that  the  Coven  plays- 
she  gathers  the  entertainment,  makes 
sure  the  cakes  and  wine  get  to  the  altar 
and  that  a  good  time  is  had  by  all.  In 
this  way,  all  the  power  and  responsi- 
bility does  not  rest  on  one  womon,  but 
is  shared. 


We  have  healers,  seers,  and  pro- 
phetic dreamers  among  us.  Some  of  us 
can  knock  out  electricity  within  five 
blocks,  others  can  shatter  glass,  others 
can  pick  up  messages  from  afar.  All 
these  talents  lay  repressed  and  dormant 
until  consciousness  was  raised  about 
wimmin  as  the  natural  psychics  of  the 
world.  We  don't  know  quite  where  all 
this  is  leading,  but  we  seem  to  be  doing 
something    (if  not   everything)    right. 

The  essence  of  the  Craft  is  the 
celebration  of  Womon,  and  sexuality 
is  considered  the  prime  expression  of 
the  life  force. 

We  are  in  the  process  of  organizing 
a  sect  of  Aphrodite.  We  envision  it  as 
being  a  closed  circle  of  13  wimmin  who 
would  attempt  to  follow  in  the  foot- 
steps of  the  ancient  wimmin  who  crea- 
ted the  Great  Fite.  The  energy  raised 
in  this  circle  could  be  used  to  request 
important  favors  from  the  Goddess- 
revolutionary  or  personal.  It  also  sim- 
ply could  be  considered  a  fine  time 
shared  with  the  life  force. 

Potentially,  circles  like  this  could 
help  to  feed  wimmin  whose  lives  are 
sexually  and/or  spiritually  starved— 
without  a  contingent  stigma  or  strain 
of  coupledom  or  sexual  commitment. 
Within  the  circle  we  will  transcend  and 
unite  with  each  other  and  the  Goddess. 
After  the  ritual,  wimmin  would  return 
to  the  world  re-energized.  Presumably, 
shared  pleasure  will  enrich  rather  than 
diminish  sisterhood  and  wimmin  will 
relate  to  each  other  better  after  this 
experience. 

Underlying  this  Great  Rite  is  the 
hope  of  alleviating  the  jealousies  and 


Witch  is  to  Womon  as  Womb  is  to  Birth/ 5  5 


horizontal  hostilities  that  have  already 
crippled  many  activists  and  the  belief 
that  sexuality  and  sensuality  are  in- 
stincts that  we  will  cut  our  revolu- 
tionary throats  on,  if  they  are  not 
satisfied. 

Survival 

Resurrecting  the  spirituality  of 
wimmin  means  recreating  jobs  we  used 
to  have,  as  well  as  creating  new  jobs. 
When  the  energy  crunch  hit  us  in  Los 
Angeles,  we  stopped  going  halfway 
across  the  city  for  our  herbs  and  in- 
censes and  opened  our  own  store 
where  we  hoped  to  serve  the  wimmin 
and  witches  of  our  part  of  town.  This 
store  (the  Feminist  Wicca)  has  dev- 
eloped into  a  modest  source  of  income 
that  allows  the  four  wimmin  in  the 
F.W.  Collective  to  develop  their  talents 
and  get  paid  for  it.  Ideally,  there  could 
be  Feminist  Wicca  stores  across  the 
country. 

There  are  many  potential  jobs  re- 
lated to  the  Craft.  We  need  more  herb- 
wimmin  to  heal  our  bodies  naturally. 
Just  looking  around,  we  know  wimmin 
who  can  cure  by  touch,  by  astral  mas- 
sage, by  foot  reflexology,  by  healing 
massage— and  just  looking  around,  we 
can  see  that  there  is  a  need  for  more 
of  these  wimmin.  Soul-healers,  like 
radical  feminist  therapists,  belong  in 
the  witchcraft  category  because  they 
help  mend  wimmin's  souls.  Priestessing 
itself  will  have  to  become  a  full-time, 
self-supporting  occupation,  as  it  was  in 
the  old  days.  Developing  covensteads 
(land  owned  by  witches)  could  be  yet 


another  source  of  some  economic  sta- 
bility-the  land  could  be  used  for  both 
recreation  and  sustenance-in  any  case, 
it  is  not  unlikely  that  wimmin  owning 
land  will  become  crucial  in  the  near 
future. 

By  developing  our  spirituality,  our 
mythology,  and  our  rituals,  we  are 
going  to  give  birth  to  new  kinds  of 
jobs,  needs,  inspirations,  arts,  and 
inventions.  We  gave  birth  to  today's 
society  long  ago  and  we  can  re-make 
tomorrow's  society  by  re-making  our- 
selves. Bold  witches  are  needed  to  ex- 
periment with  their  powers  and  share 
what  they  find.  Wimmin  seers,  uppity 
wimmin,  wimmin  with  a  sense  of  heri- 
tage and  political  analysis  are  needed 
to  change  the  image  of  witches  and 
re-energize  the  male-dominated  masses 
of  wimmin. 

We  were  advised  and  supported  by  our 
sister  witches  in  the  Feminist  Book  of 
Lights  and  Shadows  Collective. 


Z.  Budapest  is  a  Hungarian  born 
feminist  and  witch  who  in  January, 
1975,  helped  to  found  the  first  present 
day  feminist  church  to  the  Goddess 
and  for  women  only.  Z.  was  arrested 
in  Los  Angeles  on  Feb.  10  for  fortune- 
telling  and  found  guilty  of  divination. 
She  is  now  appealing  her  case  and  plans, 
if  need  be,  to  take  it  to  the  Supreme 
Court.  Donations  toward  her  legal  fight 
or  to  the  church  can  be  sent  to:  Woman 
Soul  Defense  Fund,  442  Lincoln  Blvd. 
Venice,  Ca.  90291. 


56/Quest 


by  Janice  Raymond 


graphics  by  Bethia  Stone 


Those  of  us  who  have  written  about 
androgyny-in  an  attempt  to  talk  about 
the  depths  of  the  feminist  vision  or  to 
get  at  what  it  is  that  lies  beyond  the 
superficial  lingo  of,  for  example,  "equal 
pay  for  equal  work,"  have  had  very 
serious  second  thoughts  on  the  matter. 
Not  that  the  vision  we  were  and  are 


trying  to  talk  about  is  any  less  real, 
but  that  the  use  of  a  word  like  andro- 
gyny to  describe  the  process  and  the 
end  in  view  adequately  describes  nei- 
ther. Etymologically,  historically,  and 
philosophically,  androgyny  presents 
many  problems  that  were  not  so  evi- 
dent at  first  glance. 


The  Illusion  of  Androgyny/57 


■«0««'*«,r 


HHk 


The  etymology  of  the  word,  com- 
ing from  the  Greek  aner  and  gyne 
(with  the  masculine  classically  coming 
first),  gives  the  impression  that  if  you 
put  the  archetypal  masculine  and  femi- 
nine together,  you  will  I  somehow  arrive 
at  an  adequate  whole  which  just  hap- 
pens to  be  formed  from  two  inade- 
quate halves.  As  Mary  Daly  has  phrased 
it,  androgyny  connotes  "scotch-taping 
John  Wayne  and  Bridgitte  Bardot  to- 
gether." Further  evidence  of  this 
pseudo-organicism  can  be  noted  when 
perusing  dictionary  definitions  of  an- 
drogyny. Some  dictionaries  talk  about 
the  meaning  of  androgyny  in  terms  of 
plant  hybrids  or  in  terms  of  human 
hybrids.  1  In  the  latter  case,  androgyny 
becomes  synonomous  with  physical 
hermaphroditism.  Nor  is  the  term  gyn- 
andry  adequate.  Although  the  female 
root  comes  first  here,  the  primary 
image    is   one    of  the    sexual   sphinx. 

In  appearance,  the  words  androgyne 
and  androgen  are  quite  similar.  In  fact, 
androgyny  is  sometimes  spelled  as 
androgeny.  Thus  to  speak  of  andro- 
gynizing  humanity  comes  dangerously 
close  to  literally  androgenizing  human- 
ity. An  androgenous  humanity  is 
no  mere  pun  in  light  of  some  of 
the    more   recent   works    on   sex   dif- 


58/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


., 


ferences  that  have  unfortunately  en- 
joyed wide  acceptance  among  femi- 
nists. I  refer  here  specifically  to  the 
writings  of  John  Money.  In  their  most 
recent  work,  Man  &  Woman,  Boy  & 
Girl,  John  Money  and  Anke  Ehrhardt 
talk  about  what  they  call  "fetal  an- 
drogenization,"  making  connections 
between  fetal  androgen  ization  and 
"tomboyism,"  the  latter  being  "a  se- 
quel to  a  masculinizing  effect  on  the 
fetal  brain. "2  Fe tally  androgenized  fe- 
males not  only  develop  physical  male 
characteristics  (perhaps  an  enlarged 
clitoris  or  excessive  body  hair)  but  also 
have  the  propensity  to  develop  psycho- 
social conditioned  masculine  behavior. 
The  most  likely  hypothesis  to  ex- 
plain the  various  features  of  tomboyism 
is  a  sequel  to  a  masculinizing  effect  on 
the  fetal  brain.  This  masculinization 
may  apply  specifically  to  pathways, 
most  probably  in  the  limbic  system  or 
paleocortex,  that  mediate  dominance 
assertion  (possibly  in  association  with 
assertion  of  exploratory  and  territorial 
rights)  and,  therefore,  manifests  itself 
in  competitive  energy  expenditure.^ 
Androgenization  is  seen  to  cause  not 
only  biological  androgynization  (her- 
maphroditism) but  also  psycho-social 
androgynization     (tomboyism,      etc.). 


The  Illusion  of  Androgyny/59 


Money  and  Ehrhardt  are  quick  to  point 
out  that  no  corresponding  estrogeniza- 
tion  is  responsible  for  a  normal  bio- 
logical female  differentiation,  much 
less  for  a  so-called  "feminized"  male, 
biologically  or  psycho-socially  speak- 
ing. ".  .  .the  antithesis  of  androgen  is 
not  estrogen,  but  nothing.  .  .feminine 
differentiation  requires  only  the  ab- 
sence of  androgen.  It  does  not  require 
the  presence  of  a  feminizing  sub- 
stance. "4  What  Money  and  Ehrhardt 
are  actually  re-iterating  here,  in  more 
sophisticated  pseudo-scientific  termi- 
nology, is  Aristotelian/Thomistic  biol- 
ogy. Once  more,  the  male  comes  to  be 
seen  as  the  active  power  of  generation 
and  the  female  as  the  passive  power,  or 
worse,  as  the  totally  non-effecting 
power  (read,  non-power).  And  once 
more  the  female  comes  to  be  seen  as  a 
"defective  male,"  this  time  not  due  to 
a  moisture  in  the  south  wind  at  the 
time  of  conception,  5  but  due  to  the 
absence  of  androgen.  Furthermore,  it 
is  the  presence  or  absence  of  androgen 
in  Money  and  Ehrhardt  that  becomes 
directive  for  both  physical  and  psycho- 
social androgyny.  Androgen  becomes 
normative  for  androgyny. 

Similar  androgenizing  processes  have 
functioned  on  a  mytho-metaphorical 
level  in  the  historical  and  theological/ 
philosophical  literature  that  has  dealt 
with  androgynous  themes.  For  example, 
much  of  the  Gnostic  literature  stresses 
androgyny  as  a  salvation  theme.  In  the 
Gospel  of  Thomas  especially,  only 
when  the  "two  become  one,"  "when 
you  make  the  male  and  the  female 
(not)   be  female,""  will  salvation  and 


the  Kingdom  of  God  be  attained.  In 
order  for  androgyny  to  be  attained  in 
the  woman,  she  must  first  make  herself 
male.  "For  every  woman  who  makes 
herself  male  will  enter  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven. "^  nq  such  comparable  pro- 
cess is  necessary  for  men  to  attain  an- 
drogynous actualization. 

Thus  the  male  has  a  direct  route  to 
androgynous  being;  the  female  must 
first  of  all  become  male.  This  hierarchi- 
cal androgenization  of  woman  is  not 
peculiar  to  the  Gnostic  literature  alone. 
It  also  forms  part  of  the  androgynous 
theme  in  Plato,  the  Kabbalah,  and  in 
the  Renaissance  mystics. 

The  split-level  hybrid  model  of 
androgyny  also  prevails  in  current 
literature  on  the  topic.  The  prevailing 
notion  of  androgyny  in  Carolyn  Heil- 
brun's  work,  Toward  a  Recognition  of 
Androgyny  is,  as  the  book  jacket 
acknowledges,  that  of  ".  .  .the  realiza- 
tion of  man  in  woman  and  woman  in 
man.  .  ."  Heilbrun  is  in  good  company 
here.  Unfortunately  even  the  brilliant 
Virginia  Woolf  had  a  similar  notion  of 
androgyny  in  A  Room  of  One's  Own. 
She  wrote: 

And  I  went  on  amateurishly  to  sketch 
a  plan  of  the  soul  so  that  in  each  of  us 
two  powers  preside,  one  male,  one 
female;  and  in  the  man's  brain,  the  man 
predominates  over  the  woman,  and  in 
the  woman's  brain,  the  woman  pre- 
dominates over  the  man.  The  normal 
and  comfortable  state  of  being  is 
when  the  two  live  in  harmony  together, 
spiritually  co-operating.  If  one  is  a  man, 
still  the  woman  part  of  the  brain  must 
have  effect;  and  a  woman  also  must 


60IQuest 


have  intercourse  with  the  man  in  her. 
Coleridge  perhaps  meant  this  when  he 
said  that  a  great  mind  is  androgynous.  .  . 
It  is  when  this  fusion  takes  place  that 
the  mind  is  fully  fertilized  and  uses  all 
its  facilities.^ 

Likewise,  Betty  Roszak  has  a  hybrid 
model  of  androgyny.  In  an  essay  en- 
titled "The  Human  Continuum"  which 
takes  great  pains  to  stress  that  if  we 
even  "think  of  ourselves  as  'a  woman' 
or  'a  man'  we  are  already  participating 
in  a  fantasy  of  language, "9  Roszak 
concludes  with  these  words:  "Perhaps 
with  the  overcoming  of  women's  op- 
pression, the  woman  in  man  will  be 
allowed  to  emerge."  10 

Obviously,  Heilbrun,  Woolf,  and 
Roszak  are  each  attempting  to  describe 
a  future  vision  that  will  push  us  beyond 
stereotyped  definitions  and  require- 
ments of  masculinity  and  femininity. 
Yet  it  also  ought  to  be  obvious  that  if 
this  is  the  desired  goal,  then  we  cannot 
use  the  language  of  oppression  nor  in- 
corporate oppressive  definitions  of  the 
self  into  a  non-oppressive  ideal  of  the 
same  self.  For  in  reality  the  language 
and  imagery  of  androgyny  is  the  lan- 
guage of  dominance  and  servitude  com- 
bined. One  would  not  put  master  and 
slave  language  or  imagery  together  to 
define  a  free  person.  Therefore,  any 
serious  effort  to  describe  an  androgy- 
nous ideal  must  take  issue  with  Heil- 
brun's  assertion  that  ".  .  .so  wedded 
are  we  to  the  conventional  definitions 
of  'masculine'  and  'feminine'  that  it  is 
impossible  to  write  about  androgyny 
without  using  these  terms  in  their 
accepted,  received  sense." H  Heilbrun 


fails  to  perceive  here  the  eminent  ad- 
optability of  this  kind  of  language. 

Androgyny  as  Co-optation 

Co-optation  forms  another  critical 
theme  in  the  discussion  of  androgyny. 
It  is  not  only  a  word  that  lends  itself 
to  co-optation  but  the  vision  it  at- 
tempts to  describe  is  equally  suscep- 
tible to  co-optation.  The  grossest  ex- 
ample of  this  kind  of  co-optation  ap- 
peared in  Ramparts,  December,  1973. 
Here  androgyny  was  identified  with 
what  was  called  "The  Third  Sex." 
This  "new  androgyny"  was  supposedly 
freed  by  the  technological  culture. 
This  freeing,  together  with  "the  deep 
exploration  of  our  psyches  by  acid  and 
meditation,"  gave  us  entrance  into 
exploring  "our  true  and  androgynous 
natures,  the  anima  and  animus,  both  of 
which  we  all  possess.  Men  are  coming 
to  realize  their  feminine  side  and  wom- 
en are  "excavating  their  masculine 
identities."! 2  As  models  for  the  "new 
androgyny,"  James  Nolan  gives  us  the 
"pansexual  rock  images"  of  David 
Bowie,  Janis  Joplin,  Mick  Jagger  and 
Bette  Midler.  "David  and  Mick  and 
Janis  and  Bette:  consider  the  possibili- 
ties." 

A  fuller  notion  of  the  "Third  Sex" 
emerges,  "fertilized"  by  Women's  and 
Gay  Liberation,  "both  of  which  began 
with  strains  of  either  man-hating  or 
woman-hating,"  according  to  the  au- 
thor, James  Nolan. 

It  seemed  for  a  while  that  Women's 
Liberation,  for  all  the  deep-seated  mis- 
anthropy it  generated,  was  becoming 


The  Illusion  of  Androgyny/61 


with  a  lot  of  pushy  verbalizing  and 
hard-edged  power  struggling,  a  carica- 
ture of  the  very  masculine  traits  which 
the  woman  despised.  Gay  Liberation 
ation,  with  its  indigenous  misogyny, 
had  taken  to  playing  house  in  the 
superficial  deco-parlor  on  narcissism 
and  taste,  a  realm  traditionally  ruled 
over  by  the  very  women  the  gay  men- 
tality found  so  ludicrous.  But  perhaps 
these  two  militant  liberation  move- 
ments were  just  awkward  and  adoles- 
cent phases  we  all  had  to  pass  through, 
pimply  and  self-conscious  and  blatant- 
ly extreme,  to  arrive  at  a  more  whole 
type  of  sexual  identity :  away  of  seeing 
how  the  other  half  (of  ourselves) 
lives.  13 

So  here  we  have  the  ultimate  co-opta- 
tion of  the  Women's  Movement  as  an 
"adolescent  stage,  which  we  have  al- 
ready passed  through.  Androgyny  be- 
comes the  great  leap  forward,  a  syno- 
nym for  an  easily  accessible  human 
liberation  that  turns  out  to  be  sexual 
liberation— a  state  of  being  that  men 
can  enter  as  easily  as  women  through 
the  "cheap  grace"  of  the  "wider" 
countercultural  revolution.  What  an- 
drogyny comes  to  mean  here,  in  fact, 
is  sexual  revolution,  phrased  in  the 
language  of  "The  Third  Sex."  Here 
women  are  handed  a  "mess  of  porridge 
for  our  birthright."  Sex  (fucking), 
not  power,  becomes  the  basic  founda- 
tion of  liberation. 

Given  the  difficulties  with  the  word, 
its  eminent  susceptibility  to  being  co- 
opted,  and  what  we  might  call  the  pre- 
maturity of  it  as  a  vision,  is  it  valid  to 
even  try  to  talk  about  whatever  it  is 


we  want  to  mean  when  we  use  the 
word  androgyny?  I  would  answer  in 
the  affirmative  here,  but  only  if  one  is 
fully  aware  of  the  afore-mentioned 
dangers  and  corruptions. 

A  Vision  of  "Integrity" 

It  is  difficult  to  know  what  else  to 
call  this  vision,  if  we  discard  the  unsat- 
isfactory term  androgyny.  However, 
perhaps  we  have  tried  to  name  it  pre- 
maturely. Therefore,  as  a  transition 
word,  and  lacking  a  better  term  at  the 
moment,  I  will  hereinafter  refer  to 
whatever  it  is  we  want  to  mean  when 
we  use  the  word  androgyny  by  the 
term  "integrity."  My  choice  of  the 
word  integrity  is  a  deliberately  cau- 
tious one  and  needs  some  explanation. 
First  of  all,  it  is  an  attempt  to  choose 
a  word  which  avoids  the  pitfalls  of 
pseudo-organic  connotation.  Originally, 
I  thought  of  using  "wholeness"  or  even 
"integration."  But  both  connote  put- 
ting something  together  to  achieve  a 
desired  transformation.  There  are,  how- 
ever, various  and  subtle  meanings  of 
the  word  "integrity"  which  render  it  a 
more  adequate  term  to  express  a  mean- 
ingful vision  of  what  many  of  us  pre- 
viously wanted  androgyny  to  convey. 

In  comparison  to  the  word  "inte- 
gration, which  is  defined  as  "the 
making  up  or  composition  of  a  whole 
by  adding  together  or  combining  the 
separate  parts  or  elements.  .  ."  and  in 
comparison  to  the  word  "integrate," 
which  is  defined  as  to  complete  or 
perfect  (what  is  imperfect)  by  the  addi- 
tion   of  the    necessary    parts"    (italics 


62/Quest 


The  Illusion  of  Androgyny/63 


mine),  integrity  is  defined  primarily  in 
the  following  way:  "The  condition  of 
having  no  part  or  element  taken  away 
or  wanting;  undivided  or  unbroken 
state.  .  .something  undivided;  an  inte- 
gral whole.  .  .  The  condition  of  not 
being  marred  or  violated;  unimpaired 
or  uncorrupted  condition;  original  per- 
fect state;  soundness."  Integration  gives 
a  certain  validity  to  the  parts  them- 
selves and  to  an  addition  process  of 
putting  these  parts  together.  In  con- 
trast, integrity  reverses  this  connota- 
tion and  validates  an  original  unity 
from  which  no  part  may  be  taken. 
Integrity  gives  us  a  warrant  for  laying 
claim  to  a  wholeness  that  is  rightfully 
ours  to  begin  with  and  from  which 
centuries  of  patriarchal  socialization 
to  sexual  roles  and  stereotyping  has 
detracted.  An  intuition  of  integrity  in 
this  sense  is  characteristic  of  the  tex- 
ture of  be-ing  (becoming)  and  prior  to 
cultural  definitions  of  masculinity  and 
femininity.  It  is  an  "original"  state  of 
be-ing  before  the  "fall"  of  patriarchy, 
an  original  state  that  does  not  reside  in 
a  static  historical  past  as  original  or 
primal  conditions  are  prone  to  do,  but 
which  resides  rather  in  the  intuitive 
wanderings  of  a  mytho-historical  past 
which  has  the  potentiality  of  genera- 
ting for  all  of  us  a  future  vision  of 
becoming,  beyond  a  gender-defined 
society. 

A  Process  Towards  the  Future 

Finally,  I  think  it  is  only  valid  to 
talk  about  a  vision  of  integrity  if  one 
talks  about  how  one  gets  there,  given 
our   present  point  in  history.    Here   I 


take  Cynthia  Secor's  point  very  serious- 
ly when  she  states:  ".  .  .my  objection 
to  the  term  androgyny  is  a  goal  without 
any  blueprint  for  getting  there;  a  kind 
of  moral  imperative  without  any  stra- 
tegic direction."  14  What  follows  is 
certainly  not  a  blueprint,  but  it  is  at 
least  an  intimation  of  a  process  which 
is  presently  on-going;  for  "the  future  is 
now." 

First  of  all,  we  cannot  talk  about 
integrity  without  talking  about  what 
Emily  Culpepper  has  termed  "gynergy." 
Gynergy  is  the  woman  power/spirit/ 
strength  that  is  building  up  in  "women 
identified  women."  There  is  no  short- 
cut to  integrity  without  what  I  would 
want  to  call  a  prior  intuition  of  gyner- 
gy. In  a  previous  article,  I  wrote  about 
an  intuition  of  androgyny.  15  I  see 
more  clearly  now  that  what  I  was 
more  adequately  describing  was  an 
intuition  of  gynergy.  Various  philo- 
sophers, most  notably  Jacques  Mari- 
tain,  have  written  about  the  intuition 
of  being,  and  what  I  am  now  calling  an 
intuition  of  gynergy  takes  its  starting 
point  in  this  ontological  process.  Gyn- 
ergy, at  its  depth,  is  a  question  of  the 
power  of  being. 

When  discussing  the  intuition  of 
being,  Maritain  emphasized  that  mod- 
ern existentialism  had  cut  off  the  more 
primary  concept  of  being  (ens,  or  that 
which  exists  or  whose  act  is  to  exist) 
from  the  concept  of  existence.  That 
is,  it  had  isolated  the  concept  of  being 
from  that  of  existence.  When  this  in- 
tuition occurs,  one  suddenly  realizes 
that  a  given  entity  exists  and  exercises 
its  highest  activity  of  being  in  its  own 


64/Quest 


way  which  is  total  and  totally  self- 
assertive. 

In  a  critical  sense,  Maritain's  con- 
ception of  the  intuition  of  being  is  too 
individualized  and  thus  loses  its  social 
impact  and  minimizes  the  issue  of 
power.  In  contrast  I  would  say  that  the 
intuition  of  gynergy  that  is  being  de- 
scribed here  takes  power  very  seriously 
and  has  a  definite  social  emphasis.  In 
origin,  it  proceeds  not  only  from  an 
individual  woman's  realization  of  her 
own  power  of  being  but  from  a  collec- 
tive consciousness,  i.e.,  a  feminist  col- 
lective consciousness  of  nonbeing  and 
of  being.  It  therefore  has  a  fundamen- 
tal social,  as  well  as  individual  direc- 
tion. Being  is  partly  known  from  non- 
being,  and  women  are  now  beginning 
to  realize  and  act  on  the  nonbeing  we 
have  been  conditioned  to.  At  its  most 
destructive  level  (which  paradoxically 
is  the  beginning  point  of  liberation), 
oppression  is  an  inundative  intuition 
of  nonbeing.  As  Tillich  has  stated, 
"The  question  of  being  is  produced  by 
the  shock  of  our  stunted  personhood 
and  lack  of  power. 

Women  have  been  first  to  recognize 
this  basic  stunting  and  sexual  alienation, 
because  we  have  felt  most  heavily  the 
weight  of  its  oppression.  Sexual  aliena- 
tion has  also  been  destructive  to  men 
but  there  are  profound  differences  in 
our  respective  degrees  and  manifesta- 
tions of  oppression.  Few,  if  any,  men 
have  had  the  shock  of  nonbeing  that 
women  have  experienced  in  coming  to 
realize  a  consciousness  of  sexual  op- 
pression. And,  until  men  perceive  the 
basic  nonbeing  that  an  oppressor  is  im- 


mersed in,  they  will  continue  to  enjoy 
the  benefits  of  sexual  oppression  and 
alienation.  If  and  when  this  realization 
for  men  ever  occurs,  it  will  "complete" 
the  intuition  of  gynergy,  not  in  the 
sense  of  "balancing"  gynergy  of  the 
"andergy"  (Goddess  knows  we  have 
enough  male  negative  energy  domina- 
ting the  planet),  but  in  the  sense  of 
men  becoming  wo  man-id  entitled.  Thus 
an  authentic  andergy  would  be  rooted 
in  gynergy  or  have  its  source  in  gynergy. 
If  and  when  this  identification  occurs, 
we  might  well  begin  to  talk  about  an 
intuition  of  integrity.  Obviously  this 
means  very  different  things  for  men 
than  for  women.  It  would  probably 
mean  relinquishing  male-privileged 
power,  prestige,  status,  and  goods.  It 
would  mean  a  lot  of  other  things  also, 
but  it  is  up  to  men  who  think  they 
have  a  glimpse  of  gynergy  to  figure  out 
what  this  can  mean  for  their  own  lives. 
One  thing  it  would  definitely  mean 
would  be  the  acceptance  of  some  form 
of  separatism.  Thus,  we  cannot  talk 
about  integrity  without  talking  about 
separation.  There  is  no  way  to  move 
toward  integrity  without  political  po- 
larization between  women  and  men,  a 
polarization  that  may  separate  us  in 
every  sphere  of  human  activity  from 
the  conference  room  to  the  bedroom. 
To  deny  this  would  be  to  say  you  can 
have  meaningful  integrity  and  trans- 
formation without  conflict  and  vindi- 
cation. As  stated  before,  integrity 
without  polarization  would  be  just 
another  form  of  "cheap  grace."  Integ- 
rity is  not  simply  a  matter  of  men  and 
women  coming  together   (no  pun  in- 


The  Illusion  of  Androgyny /6  5 


tended).  It  is  not  simply  a  matter  of 
powerless  women  and  powerful  men 
"dialoguing"  about  the  possibilities  of 
the  intuition  of  integrity.  This  kind  of 
answer  trivializes  the  whole  issue  of 
power  and  short-circuits  the  necessity 
for  gynergy  to  manifest  itself  among 
women.  It  is  this  notion  of  integrity  that 
enables  people  like  James  Nolan  to 
brand  feminism  as  an  "awkward  and 
adolescent  phase  we  all  had  to  pass 
through,  pimply  and  self-conscious  and 
blatantly  extreme,  to  arrive  at  a  more 
whole  type  of  sexual  identity."  It  is 
this  notion  of  integrity  which  sees 
pseudo-organisism  as  the  essence  of 
liberation,  and  polarized  struggle  as  its 
aberration.  It  is  this  notion  of  integrity 
which  directs  women  once  again  to 
others  instead  of  to  ourselves.  And  it 
is  this  notion  of  integrity  which  makes 
men  the  ultimate  beneficiaries  of  femi- 
nist struggle  without  really  having  to 
struggle  themselves.  Women  need  this 
integrity  discovered  separately.  We  have 
little  sense  of  ourselves  as  selves,  much 
less  as  a  people  who  have  named  who 
we  are  and  who  we  want  to  be.  Gyner- 
gy resulting  from  separatism  is  calling 
us  into  existence. 

In  the  final  analysis,  gynergy  is  a 
process  opening  us  to  an,  as  yet,  un- 
known future.  It  is  an  open  teleology. 
Goal-talk  seems  to  have  an  inability  to 
grasp  the  notion  of  infinity  and  at 
some  point  insists  upon  closing  the 
circle.  Integrity  is  an  unfolding  process 
of  becoming.  It  contains  within  itself 
an  insatiable  generativeness,  that  is,  a 
compulsion  to  reproduce  itself  in  ever- 
diverse    fashion.    Its   generativeness   is 


that  of  insufficiency  striving  conscious- 
ly for  richer  and  more  varied  being,  the 
fullness  of  which  is  always  the  quest. 
Ultimately,  integrity  is  perhaps  best 
described  as  a  quest  for  transcendence. 

Footnotes 

ISee  for  example,  the  listings  "Andro- 
gynous," and  "Androgyny"  in  The  Com- 
pact Edition  of  the  Oxford  English  Dic- 
tionary. 

2 John  Money  and  Anke  Ehrhardt,  Man  & 
Woman,  Boy  &  Girl,  (Baltimore:  The  Johns 
Hopkins  University  Press,  1972),  p.  103. 

^Idem. 

*Ibid,  pp.  60,  63-64. 

■JSumma  Theologiae,    I,  92,  I,  ad  I. 

6Logion   22:  pi.  85,  vs.  20-31. 

lLogion  114,  pi.  99,  vs.  18-26. 

^Virginia  Woolf,  A  Room  of  One's  Own 
(New  York:  Har court,  Brace  &  World,  Inc., 
1929),  p.  102. 

^Betty  Roszak,  "The  Human  Continuum'' 
in  Betty  Roszak  and  Theodore  Roszak, 
Masculine  I  Feminine  (New  York:  Harper  & 
Row,  1969),  p.  304. 

lOlbid.,  p.  306. 

^Carolyn  Heilburn,  Toward  a  Recog- 
nition of  Androgyny  ^New  York:  Alfred 
Knopf,  1973),  p.  xv. 

12James  Nolan,  "The  Third  Sex."  Ram- 
parts, December,  1973,  p.  24. 

HlbicL,  p.  25. 

14Cynthia  Secor,  Address  to  the  Modern 
Language  Association  Forum,  December, 
1973. 

!5cf.  Janice  Raymond,  "Beyond  Male 
Morality"  in  Women  and  Religion.  Revised 
Edition  ed.  by  Judith  Plaskow  and  Joan 
Arnold  Romero  (Missoula,  Montana:  The 
Scholars'  Press,   1974)   pp.   115-25. 

Janice  Raymond  will  soon  hold  a 
women's  studies  /Medical  Ethics  posi- 
tion in  the  Women's  Studies  Program 
of  the  five  college  consortium  in  Am- 
herst, Mass. 


66/Quest 


Matriarchy  and 
Power 


by 

Esther  Newton 

and 

Paula  Webster 


This  article  is  excerpted  from  "Ma- 
triarchy: As  Women  See  It"  by  Esther 
Newton  and  Paula  Webster,  published 
by  Aphra  Magazine  (Vol  IV,  No.  3),  a 
feminist  literary  publication.  It  is  avail- 
able in  its  entirety  from  Aphra  Maga- 
zine, Box  893,  Ansonia  Station,  New 
York,  New  York,  10023,  for  $1.50  per 
copy.  A  one  year  subscription  is  $4.50. 


Why  bring  up  the  matriarchy  contro- 
versy at  all?  Isn't  the  notion  of  a  ma- 
triarchal stage  in  social  history  dead 
and  buried  with  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury? Both  of  us  had  accepted  without 
question  that  males  had  always  been 
dominant,  that  even  in  matrilineal  sys- 
tems this  was  so. 

****** 

The  only  literature  within  anthro- 
pology which  questions  the  existence 
of  universal  male  domination,  and 
therefore  implicitly  assumes  the  possi- 
bility of  a  different  kind  of  society,  is 
the  nineteenth  century  work  of  Engels 
and  Bach  of  en  which  claimed  that  ma- 
triarchies had  preceded  the  patriarchies 
at  some  period  of  prehistory.  Although 
the  evidence  of  prehistory  does  not 
rule  out  matriarchal  societies,  it  cer- 
tainly does  not  demonstrate  that  they 
existed,  and  in  the  face  of  world-wide 
patriarchies  of  today,  there  is  no  strong 
reason  to  suppose  that  things  were  ever 
different.  Nor  has  the  claim  held  up 
that  matrilineal  societies  (in  which  kin 
groups,  property  holding,  and  inherit- 


Matriarchy  and  Power/67 


ance  are  organized  around  or  through) 
women   represent   vestiges  of  ancient 

matriarchal  societies. 

****** 

Feminists  have  already  begun  to  re- 
view Bachofen  and  Engels:  a  number  of 
papers  and  books  have  come  out  re- 
cently. Some  of  these  reassert  the  exist- 
ence of  matriarchy,  modify  the  original 
theories  or  build  on  them,  and  forward 
new  evidence.  From  this  literature  of 
claims  and  disclaims,  all  by  women, 
certain  key  issues  emerge.  The  most 
interesting  of  these  is  that  feminists 
who  were  claiming  the  existence  of  a 
golden  age  in  which  women  had  power 
and/or  were  not  oppressed  (we  say 
golden  age  because  not  all  of  them  ac- 
cept the  term  matriarchy)  did  not  vis- 
ualize it  as  the  mirror  opposite  of  pa- 
triarchy. We  had  been  thinking  of  pa- 
triarchy as  a  social  system  in  which 
men,  as  a  class  or  group,  were  domi- 
nant over  women  as  a  class  or  group. 
That  is,  what  we  have  today  in  Ameri- 
ca, and  what  we  see  in  all  present  day 
societies,  whether  or  not  they  are  pa- 
trilineal. In  other  words,  for  us,  patri- 
archy =  male  dominance.  We  expected 
that  matriarchy  =  female  dominance. 
But  even  where  the  author  unequivo- 
cally postulated  a  system  based  on 
female  dominance,  the  system  was  seen 
based  on  different  principles  from  the 
male  dominated  systems  we  know.  In 
other  words,  there  was  no  general 
agreement  on  what  the  word  matri- 
archy meant,  while  at  the  same  time  it 
was  often  used  to  mean  something 
quite  different  from  the  reverse  of 
patriarchy. 


For  us,  the  matriarchy  controversy 
raises  some  very  essential  issues  about 
our  present  condition  and  our  future 
in  a  way  that  cannot  be  easily  dis- 
missed because  it  is  visionary.  The  con- 
troversy goes  far  beyond  a  narrow  aca- 
demic haggle  over  the  origins  of  social 
institutions  into  the  very  pressing  prob- 
lems that  feminists  are  facing  today. 
Whatever  else  the  idea  of  matriarchy 
is,  it  is  most  compellingly  an  idea 
about  what  a  society  would  look  like 
in  which  women  would  truly  be  free. 
We  have  been  so  powerless  that  the 
effort  to  imagine  ourselves  with  power 
is  a  critical  exercise. 

Five  of  our  authors,  none  of  whom 
are  anthropologists,  assert  that  matri- 
archy once  existed  (de  Beauvoir,  Reed, 
Firestone,  Davis  and  Diner).  The  three 
anthropologists  deny  that  matriarchy 
ever  existed.  What  kind  of  society  are 
they  talking  about?  When  we  boiled 
down  the  various  definitions  we  found 
there  were  two  types,  a  dominance 
matriarchy  and  an  equality  matriarchy. 

Logically,  we  thought,  matriarchy 
should  mean  the  power  of  women,  as  a 
group,  over  men,  i.e.,  female  domi- 
nance. But  only  two  of  the  authors 
claim  that  women  were  dominant  in 
matriarchy  (Davis  and  Diner).  The 
other  three  who  use  the  term-Reed, 
Firestone,  and  de  Beauvoir-do  not  de- 
scribe a  society  in  which  women  had 
power  over  men,  but  rather  a  social 
order  in  which  women's  position  or 
status  was  "more  equal,"  where  wom- 
en were  "highly  esteemed."  In  many 


68/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  1,  summer,  1975 


cases  we  couldn't  even  tell  whether  the 
author  meant  "more  equal/influential/ 
esteemed  than  they  are  now"  or  "more 
equal/influential/esteemed  than  men." 
To  add  to  the  difficulty,  nearly  all 
authors  see  the  matriarchy  as  influence 
or  power  of  mothers,  while  patriarchy 
has  come  to  mean  power  of  men.  We 
think  the  definitional  vagueness  comes 
not  only  from  basic  theoretical  dis- 
agreements, but  also  from  anxiety  a- 
bout  saying  that  woman  might  have 
had  power  (much  less  that  they  had 
power  over  men). 

One  of  the  authors,  Leacock,  de- 
fines matriarchy  as  a  society  in  which 
women  would  hold'  power  over  men, 
and  denies  that  such  a  society  ever 
existed.  Nevertheless,  she  believes  that 
under  prehistoric  conditions  of  hunt- 
ing/gathering and  horticulture,  there 
existed  egalitarian  societies:  The  signi- 
ficant point  for  women's  status  is  that 
the  household  was  communal,  and  the 
division  of  labor  between  the  sexes  re- 
ciprocal; the  economy  did  not  involve 
the  dependence  of  the  wife  and  child- 


ren on  the  husband.  .  .since  in  primi- 
tive communal  society  decisions  were 
made  by  those  who  would  be  carrying 
them  out,  the  participation  of  women 
in  a  major  share  of  socially  necessary 
labor  did  not  reduce  them  to  virtual 
slavery,  as  is  the  case  in  class  society, 
but  accorded  them  decisionmaking 
powers  commensurate  with  their  con- 
tribution. 

Leacock  speculates  that  these  primi- 
tive communal  societies  were  very 
likely  matrilineal,  so  that  Engels'  ma- 
triarchy should  be  read  as  matrilineal. 
Leacock  never  says  that  women  held 
power  as  a  group,  or  that  they  had 
authority  and  legitimacy  even  equal  to 
men.  Presumably  in  the  communal  soci- 
ety they  had  no  need  for  them. 

Evelyn  Reed,  whose  thought  is 
based  on  Engels,  with  some  anthro- 
pological data  mixed  in,  vigorously 
defends  the  notion  that  matriarchies 
existed.  When  you  examine  her  argu- 
ment she  is  describing  almost  exactly 
the  same  primitive  communal  society 
(which  was  matrilineal)  as  Leacock.  So 


mr*At 


Spectra  Feminist  Media  Project 


Now  Available:  A  half-hour  video-taped  seminar  with  Bev  Fisher  of  Quest, 
Coletta  Reid  of  Diana  Press,  and  other  Washington,  D.C.  feminists  dis- 
cussing issues  raised  in  the  Fall,  1974  issue  of  Quest,  "Money,  Fame,  and 
Power" . 

This  discussion  of  feminist  economic  strategy  is  ideal  for  Women's  Studies 
classes,  feminist  discussion  groups,  and  libraries. 

Available  on  one-half  inch  tape;  $30  plus  15%  handling.  Send  orders  to: 

115  Eighth  Street,  S.E.,  Washington,  D.C.  20003 
(Please  include  payment  with  order  if  possible) 


Matriarchy  and  Power/69 


actually  the  same  claim  is  being  made, 
although  Leacock  denies  and  Reed  af- 
firms the  existence  of  primitive  ma- 
triarchy. 

Therefore,  of  our  eight  authors,  two 
affirm  matriarchy  defined  as  class  pow- 
er (Davis  and  Diner),  while  four  accept 
matriarchy  only  if  defined  as  a  stage  of 
equality  with  harmony  between  the 
sexes,  some  kind  of  classless  authority- 
reciprocity  (although  Leacock  explicit- 
ly rejects  the  word  matriarchy  because 
for  her  it  means  power  over  men).  Two 
of  the  anthropologist  authors  doubt 
the  existence  not  only  of  matriarchy 
but  of  primitive  egalitarianism  (the 
KNOW  group  and  Gough).  According 
to  the  first,  hereinafter  referred  to  by 
an  acronym  of  their  last  names, 
BMOPS:  In  no  society  at  any  point  in 
time,  or  in  any  place  in  the  world,  are 
women's  activities,  no  matter  how  eco- 
nomically productive,  considered  by 
the  society  to  be  as  important  as  the 
activities  in  which  men  engage.  Fur- 
ther, women  as  a  group  have  never 
been  in  the  position  to  make  political 
decisions  which  affect  the  wider  socie- 
ty. .  .individual  women  hold  power; 
women   as  a   class   do   not. 

* *  *  *  *  * 

Davis  and  Diner  are  the  two  authors 
who  accept  the  definition  of  matriarchy 
as  class  power  and  do  in  fact  defend  its 
past  existence.  Their  matriarchy  was 
not  an  egalitarian  society.  Women  as  a 
group  were  more  powerful  than  men 
and  dominated  them  in  both  the  pri- 
vate and  public  spheres. 
****** 

For  those  who   hold  the  vision  of 


the  golden  age  or  some  time  when  wom- 
en's position  was  better,  it  serves  as  a 
model  to  imagine  a  liberated  society, 
and  as  a  statement  about  how  prob- 
lems currently  facing  women  might  be 
dealt  with,  particularly  the  problem  of 
power  and  hierarchy.  For  those  who 
reject  the  matriarchy,  the  problem  is 
not  one  of  return,  but  of  changing  what 
has  always  been,  in  order  to  bring 
about  liberation  of  women  for  the 
first  time.  In  neither  group  is  the  vision 
of  the  new  society  really  as  specific  as 
a  blueprint,  and  more  problems  are 
raised  than  are  answered. 

Each  author  wants  to  see  an  end  to 
the  oppression  of  women  and  a  new 
society  in  which  technology  will  be 
used  for  human  ends.  Whether  one  will 
almost  automatically  bring  about  the 
other  or  whether  both  must  be  done  at 
the  same  time  is  a  subject  of  disagree- 
ment which  partially  results  from  a 
fundamental  unclarity  about  what  lib- 
eration for  women  would  mean.  There 
seem  to  us  to  be  two  logical  possibili- 
ties. The  central  tendency  among  our 
authors  is  to  hope  that  men  and  wom- 
en will  be  equal.  But  what  does  this 
mean?  Does  this  mean  that  sex  distinc- 
tions including  roles  will  be  eliminated, 
so  that  men  and  women  would  be  in 
some  sense  the  same?  This  solution  is 
proposed  by  Firestone,  as  the  source  of 
women's  oppression  has  always  been 
childbearing  and  child-rearing,  sex  dis- 
tinction could  be  eliminated  by  ending 
the  biologically  unequal  division  of 
labor  via  population  reduction  and 
test-tube  babies,  and  by  fully  shared 
and  socialized  child  care.  At  the  same 


70/Quest 


time,  she  argues,  as  an  integral  part  of 
the  change,  we  need  a  socialist  revolu- 
tion. Ultimately  all  forms  of  hierarchy 
and  power  are  based  on  the  sex  distinc- 
tion, and  should  be  done  away  with, 
including  finally,  culture  itself.  The 
end  goal  is  "cosmic  consciousness." 
How  are  women  to  make  sure  that  rev- 
olutionary change  proceeds  in  our 
interests?  Firestone  assumes  that  those 
in  power  after  the  socialist  revolution 
will  have  "good  intentions." 

On  the  other  hand,  if  equal  does 
not  mean  the  same,  does  it  mean  a 
balance  of  power?  This  problem  is  no- 
where worked  out  by  Leacock,  Reed, 
De  Beauvoir  or  Gough,  all  of  whom 
advocate  a  socialist  revolution  as  more 
or  less  sufficient  to  bring  about  equality 
between  men  and  women  if  it  includes 
the  socialization  of  child  care  and  an 
end  to  monogamous  marriage.  For 
Leacock  and  Reed,  this  answer  is  logi- 
cally consistent  with  what  they  see  as 
the  source  of  women's  oppression.  But 
who  is  to  guarantee  that  future  social- 
ist revolutions  will  do  away  with 
monogamous  marriage?  Women  are 
clearly  still  oppressed  in  socialist  coun- 
tries. And  what  if  these  changes,  even 
if  realized,  are  not  enough  to  free 
women?  None  of  the  authors  goes  fur- 
ther than  the  suggestion  of  some  kind 
of  women's  caucus  within  the  socialist 
revolution  to  push  for  women's  inter- 
ests. Gough  avoids  the  problem  of  how 
to  reverse  men's  ultimate  monopoly  of 
force,  which  she  sees  as  a  likely  source 
of  women's  oppression  from  hunting 
and  gathering  times. 

BMOPS    do    explicitly    recommend 


the  elimination  of  sex  oppression 
through  a  balance  of  power.  For  them, 
male  dominance  was  adaptive  under 
primitive  conditions,  but  is  now  lead- 
ing us  toward  destruction  and  must  be 
eliminated.  As  an  antidote  to  man's 
aggressive  tendencies,  they  propose  a 
"partly  female  dominated  polity"  and 
equal  control  over  technology.  Every- 
one shies  away  from  the  possible  im- 
plications of  a  balance-of-power  situa- 
tion. Isn't  a  balance  of  power  notori- 
ously unstable  and  conflict-ridden, 
rather  than  harmonious  and  co-opera- 
tive, as  these  authors  assume?  Why 
should  the  sex  antagonism  pointed  to 
by  De  Beauvoir,  Diner,  Davis,  and 
Firestone  disappear? 

A  basic  problem  is  the   failure   to 


Matriarchy  and  Power/71 


spell  out  the  relationship  of  power  to 
women's  freedom.  For  the  previous 
writers,  somehow  women's  oppression 
as  a  group  will  be  ended  without  their 
holding  power  as  a  group.  Why  should 
men  give  up  their  power  simply  be- 
cause male  dominance  is  no  longer 
adaptive?  How  can  we  count  on  men 
agreeing  that  their  dominance  is  no 
longer  in  the  interests  of  the  human 
race? 

On  the  other  hand,  Davis  and  (per- 
haps only  implicitly)  Diner  reject  the  e- 
quality  or  the  balance-of-power  models, 
and  propose  instead  a  female-domi- 
nated  society.  Since  women  were  ori- 
ginally overthrown  by  force,  you  would 
expect  Davis  to  call  for  a  new  Amazon 
army  to  redress  the  situation,  but  she 
avoids  this  by  claiming  that  patriarchy 
is  bringing  about  its  own  destruction. 
For  her,  female  dominance  will  bring 
about  equality  and  harmony  between 
the  sexes,  and  end  all  the  evils  she  sees 
as  caused  by  the  current  dominance  of 
men  and  "masculist"  principle:  vio- 
lence, chaos,  injustice,  overemphasis 
on  materialism  and  property  rights  as 

against  spirituality  and  human  rights. 

****** 

Once  again  the  fundamental  prob- 
lem revolves  around  power.  If  women 
are  to  be  supreme,  won't  men  necessar- 
ily be  subordinate?  If  women  are  to 
rule,  won't  men  be  the  subjects?  Why 
should  they  agree  to  this  state  of  af- 
fairs? How  could  this  society  be  better 
than  what  we  have  now?  (However,  if 
sex  oppression  cannot  be  eliminated, 
why  not  say  frankly  we  would  rather 
be  rulers  than  the  ruled?) 


Finally,  whether  one  believes  or 
disbelieves  in  the  existence  of  primi- 
tive matriarchy,  the  controversy  does 
push  women  (and  men)  into  the  future 
by  challenging  us  to  envision  a  society 
where  women  would  be  liberated, 
free  and  (perhaps  for  the  first  time) 
powerful. 


Re  fere 


nces 


Eleanor  Leacock,  Introduction  to  Engels, 
The  Origin  of  the  Family,  Private  Property 
and  the  State.  New  York:  International 
Publishers,  1972. 

Simone  de  Beauvoir,  The  Second  Sex. 
New  York:  Knopf,  1953;  Bantam,  1961. 

Minda  Borun,  Molly  McLaughlin,  Gina 
Oboler,  Norma  Perchonock,  Lorraine  Sex- 
ton, "Women's  Liberation:  An  Anthropo- 
logical View."  Pittsburgh:  KNOW,  Inc.,  197L 

Elizabeth  Gould  Davis,  The  First  Sex. 
New  York:   Putnam's,   1970. 

Helen  Diner,  Mothers  and  Amazons. 
New  York:  Julian  Press,  1965. 

Shulamith  Firestone,  The  Dialectic  of 
Sex.  New  York:  William  Morrow,  1970. 

Kathleen  Gough,  "The  Origin  of  the 
Family,"  Journal  of  Marriage  and  the  Fam- 
ily. 1971. 

Evelyn  Reed,  "Engels  and  Women's  Lib- 
eration," International  Socialist  Review,  Vol 
33,  No.  4.  April,  1972. 


Esther  Newton,  anthropologist,  au- 
thor of  Mother  Camp:  A  Cultural  Anal- 
ysis of  Female  Impersonators  in  the 
U.S.A.,  is  presently  in  Paris. 

Paula  Webster,  anthropologist  at 
Queens  College  C.  U.N.  Y.  (SEEK)  is  re- 
searching the  physical  abuse  of  women 
in  primitive  "egalitarian"  societies. 


72/Quest 


Concrete 
Playgrounds 
on  my 
Mind 


by  Cynthia  Washington 

graphics  by  Jacky  English 


What  is  a  fantasy  but  the  synthesis 
of  all  our  experiences  projected  into 
the  future,  free  of  the  constraints  and 
sanctions  of  our  day  to  day  existence. 
Fantasies  are  based  on  our  real  cogni- 
tive experience.  They  are  not  revela- 
tions, visions,  or  messages  from  out  of 
nowhere  and  without  basis  in  our  own 
lives.  Because  fantasies,  dreams,  visions 
don't  come  out  of  a  vacuum,  I  have 
divided  this  article  into  two  sections: 
background  and  vision. 

Background  is  important,  because 
the  development  of  women  as  a  whole 


is  fragmented  and  uneven.  Not  only 
are  assumptions  about  women  diverse, 
but  so  are  our  real  material  conditions. 
As  illustration,  let  me  describe  briefly 
my  own  experience. 

When  I  was  in  engineering  school,  I 
discovered  that  indeed,  those  people 
were  serious  about  their  racism,  and 
they  weren't  too  fond  of  women 
either.  I  didn't  believe  it;  I  had  read 
about  such  things,  but  it  seemed  too 
illogical,  and  happened  in  the  deep 
South  somewhere.  But  it  was  real,  and 
active.  In  the  entire  school,  there  were 


Concrete  Playgrounds  on  my  Mind/73 


two  blacks  and  two  women-I  was  one 
of  each.  It  meant  no  one  to  study 
with,  and  my  social  life  at  school  was 
zilch.  Later,  in  the  "good  ole"  move- 
ment days,  I  directed  my  own  project, 
drove  a  truck,  supervised  a  staff  which 
happened  to  be  men,  and  had  a  certain 
amount  of  autonomy.  At  the  time,  I 
thought  that  the  school  experience  had 
been  exceptional  and  it  seemed  that 
things  had  returned  to  normal.  There- 
fore, when  I  encountered  the  women's 
movement  or  it  me,  I  had  no  idea  what 
those  ladies  were  complaining  about. 

Fortunately,  or  unfortunately,  I  got 
married  and  had  one  son.  I  had  been 
self-supporting  for  about  three  years. 
When  I  married,  I  was  hit  by  all  the 
realities  that  most  women  face  every 
day.  The  thought  never  had  occurred 
to  me  that  someone  seriously  would 
think  that  my  role  in  life  was  that  of 
cook,  maid,  servant,  what  have  you. 
At  first,  I  thought  it  was  him,  but  I 
soon  found  out  that  his  notions  about 
my  role  were  universal.  After  about 
three  years  of  that,  when  I  finally 
figured  out  how  serious  these  folk 
were  about  the  role  of  women,  I  left. 

At  that  point,  I  began  struggling 
with  the  fact  of  womanhood.  Until 
then  it  had  not  been  a  particular  prob- 
lem, or  so  I  thought.  There  I  was,  free, 
black,  over  21,  with  son  in  tow.  Like 
fantasies,  struggles  don't  exist  in  a  void 
either,  so  it's  important  to  figure  out 
what  you're  struggling  against.  Were 
all  those  funky  things  happening  to  me 
because  I  was  black,  a  woman,  a  divor- 
cee, a  single  parent,  a  draftsman,  had  a 
bad  personality,  all  of  the  above,  none 


of  the   above.  The  details   of  what  I 
faced  are  not  important  here,  but  two 
leading   examples   are    both  being  re- 
fused credit  and  a  place  to  live. 

After  wading  around  in  that  morass, 
I  began  to  understand  that  while  some 
of  it  probably  had  to  do  with  me  per- 
sonally, most  of  it  didn't.  Nevertheless, 
I  must  say  the  impact  was  and  is  per- 
sonal. I  began  to  realize  that  these 
generalized  beliefs,  hatreds,  abuses, 
exclusions,  etc.,  are  expressed  actively 
through  rules,  institutional  policy,  and 
indeed  through  an  entire  system  of 
socio-economic  arrangements  that  af- 
fect and  often  control  one's  life. 

In  the  course  of  all  that,  you  get 
tired  and  really  don't  want  to  struggle 
about  anything  anymore.  You  reach 
the  point  where  it  is  more  important 
to  struggle  for  something  than  against 
something.  But  what?  At  that  point, 
women  were  struggling  to  be  liberated 
from  their  dependence  on  and  oppres- 
sion by  men.  I  didn't  have  a  man  and 
had  been  supporting  my  son  and  my- 
self for  some  time,  as  well  as  working 
and  going  to  school.  I  thought  they 
were  nuts.  I'd  been  there,  and  if  I 
needed  additional  independence,  it  was 
to  be  independently  wealthy.  But  in 
trying  to  answer  the  question,  "struggle 
for  what?",  I  realized  that  the  single 
most  hassling  problem  is  my  son. 

He's  not  a  problem  in  terms  of  our 
relationship,  but  the  logistics  of  what 
to  do  with  him  are.  Most  working 
mothers  have  this  problem;  single 
mothers  have  a  greater  problem.  Moth- 
ers who  don't  work,  with  or  without 
partner,  who  like  to  do  something  in 


74/Quest 


life  other  than  play  with,  and  care  for, 
their  children  also  have  this  problem. 
As  far  as  I  know,  child  rearing  and 
new  systems  for  child  care  (as  dis- 
tinguished from  24-hour  baby  sitting 
services  and  other  warehousing  arrange- 
ments), have  not  been  a  priority  of  the 
women's  movement.  But  for  women 
who  want  to  be  mothers  and  people 
too,  it  is  crucial  to  develop  visions  of 
socio-economic  structures  which  don't 
force  us  to  choose  between  mother- 
hood and  personhood. 


Motherhood  and  Personhood 

To  date,  women  are  the  only  ones 
who  can  bear  children  (although  I 
understand  that  some  mad  scientist  is 
working  to  change  this  situation).  Be- 
cause only  women  bear  children,  and 
motherhood  has  such  a  permanent  im- 
pact on  the  lives  of  women,  dividing 
us  into  two  distinct  groups,  my  pri- 
mary fantasy  is  to  develop  alternative 
social  and  economic  arrangements  for 
rearing  children.  These  arrangements 
hopefully  would  lessen  the  distinction 
between  mothers  and  non-mothers, 
thus  creating  a  basis  for  a  greater 
unity  between  the  two  groups,  and  a 
situation  where  mothers,  relieved  of 
the  awesome  primary  relationship  with 
their  children,  could  assume  other  re- 
sponsible roles  within  society. 

We  need  to  redefine  "mother". 
The  term  no  longer  means  simply  that 
you  have  given  birth  to  others,  but 
that  you  are  responsible  for  the  child 
and  everything  that  happens  to  her,  as 
well  as  anything  that  she  causes  to  hap- 
pen to  something  or  to  someone  else. 


Concrete  Playgrounds  on  my  Mind/75 


This  functional  definition  is  spelled 
out  in  the  law  and  reinforced  by  social 
sanction.  It  means  that  you  take  the 
weight  for  everything.  Even  if  the  kid 
is  at  school,  which  is  also  required  by 
law,  if  anything  goes  wrong,  it's  still 
your  problem,  your  responsibility,  ob- 
viously an  impossible  task.  As  Lucia 
Valeska  states  in  "If  All  Else  Fails, 
I'm  Still  a  Mother",  {Quest,  Vol.  I,  no. 
3)  the  failure  is  built  in,  systemic, 
avoidable  only  by  fluke,  or  substantial 
monetary  privilege.  If  you  won  sole 
custody  you  have  my  sympathy,  which 
of  course  is  not  enough. 

Mothers  have  not  always  been  de- 
fined this  way.  There  are  historical  and 
anthropological  accounts  of  communal 
societies  where  the  land  and  the  so- 
cially necessary  work,  such  as  food 
gathering  and  preparation,  child  rear- 
ing, etc.  were  shared  by  the  group.  In 
places  where  communalism  still  exists, 
there  were,  and  are,  various  divisions 
of  labor  and  roles,  but  the  outstanding 
feature  is  that  individual  mothers  did 
not  have  the  exclusive  responsibility 
for  their  offspring.  The  children  were 
members  of,  and  therefore  the  respon- 
sibility of,  the  entire  group.  The 
theories  of  why  there  was  a  transition 
from  communal  ownership  to  private 
ownership  or  how  private  property 
developed  are  many  and  varied.  But 
the  thing  we  do  know  is  that  a  transi- 
tion occurred  and  one  result  has  been 
the  relative  isolation  of  women  with 
young  children.  The  immediate  pic- 
ture that  comes  to  mind  is  that  of  a 
middle  income  housewife  somewhere 
in  suburbia,   but  we  must  remember 


that  welfare  mothers  also  are  at  home 
with  young  children. 

Motherhood  is  a  functionally  de- 
fined role,  and  the  only  way  we  can 
change  it  is  to  change  the  function. 
Suppose  in  our  future  society  we  de- 
clared that  all  adults  had  equal  re- 
sponsibility for  children?  Suppose  that 
mothers  were  no  different  from  others, 
therefore  they  would  be  expected  to 
participate  fully  in  socially  necessary 
work,  production,  cultural  develop- 
ment, education,  and  so  on?  This 
would  establish  a  political  right  for 
mothers  as  well  as  a  group  responsibil 
ity  for  children.  Such  a  re-definition 
would  necessitate  changes  throughout 
the  entire  system. 

Motherhood  and  the  Economy 

Basic  to  my  fantasy  is  the  need  to 
develop  an  economic  system  that  pro- 
vides women  with  optimal  income, 
through  meaningful  employment.  Sup- 
pose our  economy  provided  women 
with  sufficient  and  independent  means 
to  be  able  to  create  communities  where 
they  could  live  as  people  and  mothers. 
These  would  be  classless  communities 
in  the  economic  sense,  where  each 
member  owned  the  entire  community 
equally  with  other  members-the  land, 
the  buildings,  businesses,  factories, 
everything.  There  would  not  be  a  group 
who  owned  sources  of  wealth  and 
those  things  necessary  to  produce 
goods  and  services,  because  resources 
would  be  owned  equally  by  all.  Sup- 
pose further,  that  within  this  commun- 
ity,   wages    and    income    distribution 


76/Quest 


were  set  up  to  greatly  reduce  class  dis- 
tinctions based  on  income.  Ownership 
and  income  level  as  a  means  of  separ- 
ating "us"  from  them  would  thereby 
be  eliminated.  This  would  not  immed- 
iately do  away  with  the  social  dif- 
ferences which  people  would  bring 
into  such  a  community,  but  it  would 
do  away  with  the  economic  basis  of 
class.  The  other  criteria  used  to  dis- 
tinguish classes  or  groups,  such  as 
family,  educational  level  and  back- 
ground, as  well  as  racism  and  sexism, 
(if  there  are  to  be  men  in  this  com- 
munity) are  much  more  difficult  to 
deal  with.  Some  aspects  of  these  prob- 
lems might  be  diminished  by  the  use  of 
assembly  government  as  the  governing 
mechanism  of  such  a  community. 

The  assembly  would  be  comprised 
of  all  the  members  of  the  community, 
each  having  a  single  vote.  The  rules 
governing  the  community  and  its  devel- 
opment would  be  decided  in  the  as- 
sembly,  as  well  as  all  decisions  con- 


cerning revenues  and  expenditures. 
The  administrative  functions  could  be 
carried  out  by  persons  selected  by  lot 
to  serve  for  a  short  period  of  time.  The 
fact  that  everyone  has  equal  voice 
through  their  one  vote,  would  mean 
political  equality  for  all  members.  By 
selecting  officers  at  random,  the  power 
that  tends  to  accrue  to  organizations 
built  to  win  elections,  and  in  offices 
held  too  long  by  one  person,  would 
be  evenly  dispersed  among  the  group. 
Power  would  reside  within  each  indi- 
vidual, rather  than  in  political  offices 
or  organizations. 

Let  us  suppose  further,  that  in  such 
a  community  the  ground  rules  were 
designed  to  create  the  greatest  possible 
individual  liberty,  but  held  each  mem- 
ber responsible  for  the  socially  neces- 
sary work,  including  the  care  and 
rearing  of  children.  We  could  then 
choose  life  style:  extended  family, 
commune,  with  or  without  men  (in- 
dividually or  en  group),  hermit,  single, 
what  have  you,  but  mostly  without  the 
singular  responsibility  for  children. 

Back  in  the  here  and  now,  such 
communities  are  possible,  particularly 
if  started  on  a  small  scale.  Developing 
an  alternative  economic  system  within 
the  U.S.  is  difficult  to  imagine.  After 
all,  it  is  the  largest,  most  "developed" 
country.  However,  these  communities 
could  be  begun  both  as  ends  in  them- 
selves, as  well  as  transitional  tools 
toward  overall  changes  in  the  whole 
society.  What  I  do  not  have  in  mind  is 
a  group  of  people  with  money  going 
off  to  play  survival  in  the  hinterlands 
of  North  America. 


Concrete  Playgrounds  on  my  Mind/77 


A  community  could  begin  as  a 
single  apartment  building  in  the  heart 
of  the  metropolis.  The  co-op  is  not  to 
be  confused  with  its  modern  perver- 
sion, the  condominium,  which  is  own- 
ed and  managed  by  the  developer  until 
the  mortgage  is  paid  off.  The  impor- 
tant thing  about  a  cooperative  apart- 
ment is  that  it  reduces  costs  to  resi- 
dents, and  gives  them  control  of  the 
space  where  they  live.  The  same  could 
be  true  on  a  larger  scale~an  entire  city 
block  or  neighborhood  for  instance. 
Obviously  there  are  necessary  relation- 
ships with  the  city  and  other  neighbor- 
hoods, but  it  is  the  beginning  of  real 
control.  Further,  if  the  area  contained 
commercial  property,  that  property, 
through  rental  at  prevailing  rates, 
would  generate  funds  which  could  be 
used  either  to  further  reduce  the  hous- 
ing costs  of  the  group,  or  to  reinvest  in 
the  development  of  the  community 
and  the  services  it  provides. 

Despite  the  quantity  of  money 
needed  for  such  a  project,  there  are 
ways  to  raise  it.  Ideally,  there  would 
be  a  women's  or  people's  bank,  or  a 
revolving  fund  which  would  loan  mon- 
ey for  such  a  venture  at  low  or  no 
interest.  However,  even  without  a  bank, 
it  seems  possible  to  raise  enough  mon- 
ey through  a  "friendly  bond  issue", 
that  is,  selling  bonds  to  sympathetic 
friends  who  could  afford  such  a  thing. 
This  would  not  make  them  owners;  it 
is  simply  an  I.O.U.  There  also  is  federal 
and  local  legislation  making  funds 
available  for  renovation  and  acquisi- 
tion of  existing  dwellings,  and  for  the 
development    of    "new    towns",    and 


new  housing  developments.  A  last  re- 
sort is  the  standard  financial  institu- 
tions: banks,  and  savings  &  loans.  In 
the  case  of  mortgage  borrowing  from 
a  standard  institution,  if  an  apartment 
building  were  purchased  as  the  first 
step  toward  community,  simply  re- 
moving all,  or  a  portion  of  the  profit 
made  by  the  landlord,  would  reduce 
costs  for  tenants. 

This  excess  then  could  become  be- 
ginning capital  for  an  internal  economy 
in  the  community.  To  go  a  step  fur- 
ther, suppose  that  the  citizens  of  this 
community  also  owned  a  factory  which 
then  produced  some  of  the  needed 
goods  consumed  both  within  and  out- 
side the  community.  By  producing 
needed  goods  and  services,  the  com- 
munity would  not  be  totally  dependent 
on  others  for  its  survival.  It  could  then 
work  to  build  an  economy  which 
would  not  only  sustain  that  com- 
munity, but  also  generate  income  to 
make  funds  available  to  others  to  start 
similar  ventures  or  other  projects,  as 
they  are  determined  by  the  assembly. 

Owning  our  own  turf  is  about  the 
only  defense  we  have  against  the  state 
and  society.  Owning  the  place  where 
you  work  means  that  you  are  self- 
employed,  as  a  group.  Thus,  there 
would  be  political  citizenship  at  the 
assembly  and  at  the  work-place.  Once 
we  have  control  over  our  dwellings, 
public  spaces  and  work  places,  it  would 
then  be  possible  to  work  out  ways  to 
reintegrate  children  into  the  social  and 
cultural  life  of  the  community.  Child- 
ren who  are  involved  in  the  socially 
productive  and  necessary  work  of  the 


7S/Quest 


community  can  learn  to  take  on  re- 
sponsibility for  various  aspects  of  com- 
munity life  and  work.  There  is  almost 
no  area  where  children  cannot  perform 
meaningful  tasks,  whether  at  the  com- 
munity waste  disposal  plant,  the  com- 
munity art  gallery,  or  in  its  financial 
institutions.  Some  may  say  that  these 
tasks,  or  at  least  some  of  them,  are 
idiot  work,  meaningless,  not  using  the 
full  creative  potential  of  children.  But, 
when  tasks  are  performed  in  the  con- 
text of  a  community  such  as  the  one 
described  above,  they  are  no  longer 
alienating,  but  directly  affect  our  per- 
sonal survival  as  well  as  that  of  the 
community,  and  through  the  commun- 
ity hopefully  our  struggle  agaisnt  op- 
pression, racism,  sexism  and  all  other 
injustices.  The  work  also  could  be  ar- 
ranged so  that  no  one  was  stuck  for- 
ever with  the  same  boring  tasks,  or 
perhaps  the  most  mundane  tasks  could 
be  done  collectively.  In  this  way,  we 
would  be  learning  necessary  skills  and 
also  creating  more  free  time  for  all  to 
pursue  various  forms  of  self-develop- 
ment. The  extent  to  which  we  are  not 
actively  involved  in  producing  and 
doing  the  things  which  sustain  us  all- 
producing  food  or  cooking,  repairing 
our  houses  and  tools,  as  well  as  writing 
the  great  new  theoretical  piece  or  be- 
coming a  great  artist— is  the  extent  to 
which  these  tasks  get  passed  along  to 
someone  else.  We  must  be  certain  that 
we  don't  simply  gain  power  for  our- 
selves and  then  pass  our  oppression  on 
to  others. 

Ownership  also  means  that  the  frag- 
mentation of  our  lives,  a  result  of  the 


physical  layout  of  our  communities, 
can  be  changed.  For  example,  markets, 
parks,  schools,  etc.  could  be  located 
within  walking  distance,  so  that  no  one 
would  have  to  commute  to  shop,  work, 
and  do  other  errands  unless  they 
wanted  to.  Also,  the  community  could 
be  made  physically  safe  for  children, 
as  well  as  esthetically  attractive.  The 
development  of  such  a  community  im- 
plies a  public  social  life  rather  than  a 
private  one.  Children  could  be  active 
because  there  would  be  many  to  super- 
vise them,  and  the  area  would  be  phy- 
sically conducive  to  child  participa- 
tion without  parents  being  two  steps 
away. 

Do  I  really  expect  this  to  work?  Do 
I  really  expect  people  to  take  an  active 
role  in  rearing  other  people's  children? 
Sure  I  do.  It  seems  more  possible  with 
other  hassles  taken  care  of  within  the 
community.  For  instance,  someone 
who  commutes  two  hours  a  day  to 
work,  discovers  that  the  landlord  has 
raised  the  rent,  is  totally  responsible 
for  her  own  show,  will  be  less  likely 
to  want  to  add  to  all  this,  as  compared 
with  someone  who  works  walking  dis- 
tance away,  owns  the  place  where  she 
lives,  and  shares  meal-making,  laundry, 
etc.  Also,  because  children  would  be 
accepted  anywhere  within  the  com- 
munity, it  wouldn't  be  a  matter  of 
being  stuck  at  home  with  someone 
else's  kid.  Children  are  unacceptable  in 
the  current  context  because  they  have 
no  productive  role,  and  almost  all  pub- 
lic space  is  structured  for,  and  occu- 
pied by,  adults:  How  many  places  have 
you    been    lately    where    there    were 


Concrete  Playgrounds  on  my  Mind/79 


water  fountains  or  toilets  that  the 
average  2-3  year  old  potty  trained  child 
could  use?  Or  handicapped  people  for 
that  matter. 

Taking  an  active  role  in  rearing 
other  people's  children  is  neither  as 
awesome  or  as  difficult  as  it  sounds. 
All  of  us  have  some  skill,  some  insight, 
some  knowledge,  values  and  resources 
which  would  enrich  the  life  of  a  child. 
Think  of  how  broad  and  culturally 
rich  a  child's  life  would  be  if  she 
could  develop  independent  relation- 
ships with  adults  in  addition  to  mother 
or  parents  by  doing  things  and  learn- 
ing things  with  other  adults,  one  to 
one,  or  at  least  in  casual,  rather  than 
structured  ways.  For  example:  swim- 
ming with  Sally,  bookkeeping  and  man- 
agement with  Bev,  how  to  fix  the  hi-fi 
set  with  Mary,  visiting  an  art  gallery 


or  playing  with  Ruth,  etc.  It  really 
isn't  that  difficult,  particularly  if  we 
concede  that  children  are  people  too, 
that  they  come  in  all  sizes  and  various 
ages,  and  they  converse  about  many 
things  other  than  Johnnie  who-ever's 
flying  robot,  if  given  the  opportunity. 

Once  we  get  it  firmly  fixed  in  our 
minds  that  children  are  structured  out 
because  they  have  no  productive  role 
to  perform,  that  rearing  children  is  no 
longer  considered  a  productive  role  for 
women  or  anyone  else,  we  can  move 
forward  by  developing  productive  roles 
for  women  (mothers  included)  as  well 
as  for  children.  Visions  begin  to  be 
realities  by  developing  social  alterna- 
tives for  the  mundane  things  in  life, 
changing  the  function  of  mothers  and 
developing  a  system  of  rearing  child- 


ren. 


Cynthia  Washington,  previously  di- 
rector of  the  Atlanta  Center  for  Black 
Art,  is  a  fellow  at  the  Institute  for 
Policy  Studies,  Washington,  D.C. 


SOlQuest 


Notes  for  prospective  contributors 

We  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling  material 
for  each  issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off  the 
presses,  a  small  development  committee  prepares  a  list  of  ques- 
tions and  ideas  which  we  hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  This 
list  is  available  to  anyone  who  is  considering  submitting  ideas  for 
the  issue,  outlines  for  potential  articles,  manuscripts,  poetry,  gra- 
phics, etc.  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out  writers  and 
artists  known  to  have  definitive  political  perspectives  on  issues 
related  to  the  theme. 

All  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members.  If  it  is  not 
appropriate  for  Quest  purposes  the  manuscript  or  graphic  will  be 
returned  to  the  author.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered,  it  is 
then  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible  for 
working  with  the  author  through  whatever  processes  of  rewriting 
and  editing  required.  This  process  includes  soliciting  comments  and 
suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and  Advisory  Committee 
members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review 
before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8V2  by  11  paper,  using 
a  black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy). 
Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10  type- 
written pages)  for  reviews,  responses  and  short  articles,  to, 
at  most,  7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where 
appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  collected  and 
typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manu- 
scripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  are  requested.  For  information 
concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspondence 
to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


future  issues 
THEORIES  of  REVOLUTION 

vol.  II  no.   2 

How  do  we  get  what  we  want?— will  we  need  a  revolution  to  achieve 
new  political  and  economic  systems,  new  cultural  and  spiritual  forms, 
and  if  so,  what  kind  of  revolution.  Areas  for  articles  include:  definitions 
of  revolution;  what  ingredients  are  required  for  revolution  in  different 
societies;  what  is  the  role  of  leaders  and  political  parties  in  change;  what 
are  the  steps  necessary  and  obstacles  to  women  taking  power  to  change 
society.  Copy  Deadline:  June  1,  1975 

ORGANIZATIONS  and  STRATEGIES 

vol.  II  no.  3 

Organizations  and  Strategies  picks  up  where  Theories  of  Revolution 
left  off— on  the  relationships  between  our  priorities,  needs  and  ideology 
and  our  actions.  Areas  for  articles  include:  how  to  measure  success  and 
effectiveness  of  an  organization;  how  to  build  coalitions;  what  is  the  role 
of  political  parties,  national  gorups,  community  organizing  and  other 
forms  of  networks,  how  will  feminist  programming  deal  with  race  and 
economic  conditions?  Copy  Deadline:  September  1,  1975 

LEADERSHIP 

vol.  II    no.  4 

Leadership  is  vital  to  achieving  social  change  but  we  need  to  examine 
the  role  and  function  of  leaders  in  a  feminist  movement.  Areas  for 
articles  include:  concepts,  types  and  problems  of  leadership;  how  to 
achieve  collectivity  and  accountability  without  destroying  initiative  and 
imagination;  problems  of  fame  and  public  recognition;  the  process  of 
training,  sharing  and  developing  skills  that  create  more  and  stronger 
leaders.  Copy  Deadline:  December  1,  1975 

KALEIDOSCOPE 

vol.  Ill  no.  I 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  two  years  of  publication  and 
for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics 
and  ideas  that  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous 
articles.  Copy  Deadline:  March  1,  1975 


