ISSN  0098-955  X 


QUEST 

a  feminist  quarterly 


WORK,  WORK.  WORK 


Quest  Communique 

Letters 

In  the  last  issue,  we  initiated  a  Letters  section  to  share  feedback 
from  our  readers  about  their  likes,  dislikes,  agreements,  and  dis- 
agreements. We  hope  you  will  continue  to  send  us  your  comments. 
All  letters  commenting  on  Quest  will  be  considered  for  publication, 
either  with  attribution  or  anonymously  unless  you  indicate  that  you 
do  not  want  your  letter  published. 

Readers'  Survey  Results 

We  are  sorry  that  we  were  unable  to  finish  compiling  the  Readers' 
Surveys  in  time  for  this  issue.  The  response  was  so  much  greater 
than  we  anticipated  that  it  is  taking  many  more  woman  hours  than 
we  anticipated.  In  the  next  several  issues,  we  are  publishing  some  of 
your  comments  from  the  surveys.  We  want  to  thank  all  of  you  for 
taking  the  time  to  share  your  ideas. 

Sold  Out 

In  this  issue  we  are  announcing  the  availability  of  a  limited  number 
of  complete  sets  of  Volume  I  and  II  in  binders.  This  offer  is  directed 
to  libraries,  institutions,  and  collectors  who  desire  sets  as  permanent 
source  material  for  their  users. 

If  you've  "loaned  out"  your  Quests  or  you're  a  recent  subscriber, 
we  also  are  making  a  special  effort  to  encourage  you  to  order  those 
back  issues  which  you  are  missing.  (However,  Vol.  I  No.  1 — "Pro- 
cesses of  Change,"  and  Vol.  II  No.  2 — "Theories  of  Revolution",  are 
available  only  as  parts  of  complete  sets  in  binders.)  To  simplify  your 
ordering  and  our  handling  of  your  orders,  all  back  issues  are  now 
priced  at — $3.35.  This  reflects  a  small  increase  for  the  most  recent 
issues  due  to  increased  postage  rates  and  a  higher  one  for  older 
issues  due  to  their  increased  value  as  they  become  fewer  in  number. 

Graphics 

In  "Work,  Work,  Work"  we  have  experimented  with  our  approach 
to  graphics.  We  usually  solicit  graphics  or  photographs  from  artists 
to  illustrate  specific  articles.  In  this  issue,  the  art  was  done  with 
regard  to  the  overall  theme  of  "work",  and  not  intended  as  individual 
article  illustration.  While  we  have  of  course  made  choices  as  to  the 
order  and  placement  of  the  photographs,  it  is  our  hope  that  the  art 
will  be  seen  as  a  single  connected  body  of  work  woven  throughout 
the  issue. 


QUEST 

a  femuoiist  quarterly 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  3 
Winter,  1976-77 


Contents 


STAYING  ALIVE 

Nancy  Hartsock 

SEXUAL  HARASSMENT: 

Working  Women's  Dilemma 

Dierdre  Silverman 

LETTERS 

WHO  WANTS  a  PIECE  of  the  PIE? 

Marilyn  Frye 

WE  WORK,  THEY  PROFIT 
DOING  FACTORY  TIME 

An  Interview  with  Kyla 

THE  RAISE 

}anet  Rechtman 

CRITIQUE  and  COMMENTARY 

Zillah  Eisenstein 

The  FEMINIST  WORKPLACE 

An  Interview  with  Nancy  McDonald 

Building  Feminist  Organizations 

Alexa  Freeman  and  Jackie  MacMillan 


2 
15 

25 
28 

36 
50 

59 

62 

65 

73 


©Copyright  1977  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights  re- 
served. Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  prohibited. 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in  January, 
April,  July  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  1909  Que 
St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Second  class  postage 
paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  is  a  tax-ex- 
empt, non-profit  organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003. 
Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 
$10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  surface, 
$14.50/year  overseas  air;  $15.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.75  and 
.35  postage  and  handling  for  single  issues;  $3.35/all  back  issues. 
Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request.  Book- 
stores contact  Women  in  Distribution,  Box  8858,  Washington, 
D.C.  20003  for  ordering  information. 


Staff 


ISSN  0098-955  X 


Editorial  Coordinator 

Gerri  Traina 
Managing  Editor 

Beverly  Fisher 
Design  Editor 

Alexa  Freeman 
Promotion  Editor 

Dorothy  Allison 
Editors 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Jane  Dolkart 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Mary-Helen  Mautner 

Sidney  Oliver 


Associates 


Denise  Davis 
Jackie  MacMillan 


Support 
Workers 


Marge  DuMond 
Judith  Jones 
Prudence  McKinney 
Margaret  Streitenberger 


Theme 
Development 


Peg  Averill 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Carolyn  Hoch 
Joanna  Knowles 
Karen  Kollias 
Jackie  MacMillan 
Nancy  Weirgesma 


Cover  Design  by 
Ginger  Legato 


Quest  Communique 

Letters 

In  the  last  issue,  we  initiated  a  Letters  section  to  share  feedback 
from  our  readers  about  their  likes,  dislikes,  agreements,  and  dis- 
agreements. We  hope  you  will  continue  to  send  us  your  comments. 
All  letters  commenting  on  Quest  will  be  considered  for  publication, 
either  with  attribution  or  anonymously  unless  you  indicate  that  you 
do  not  want  your  letter  published. 

Readers'  Survey  Results 

We  are  sorry  that  we  were  unable  to  finish  compiling  the  Readers' 
Surveys  in  time  for  this  issue.  The  response  was  so  much  greater 
than  we  anticipated  that  it  is  taking  many  more  woman  hours  than 
we  anticipated.  In  the  next  several  issues,  we  are  publishing  some  of 
your  comments  from  the  surveys.  We  want  to  thank  all  of  you  for 
taking  the  time  to  share  your  ideas. 

Sold  Out 

In  this  issue  we  are  announcing  the  availability  of  a  limited  number 
of  complete  sets  of  Volume  I  and  II  in  binders.  This  offer  is  directed 
to  libraries,  institutions,  and  collectors  who  desire  sets  as  permanent 
source  material  for  their  users. 

If  you've  "loaned  out"  your  Quests  or  you're  a  recent  subscriber, 
we  also  are  making  a  special  effort  to  encourage  you  to  order  those 
back  issues  which  you  are  missing.  (However,  Vol.  I  No.  1 — "Pro- 
cesses of  Change,"  and  Vol.  II  No.  2 — "Theories  of  Revolution",  are 
available  only  as  parts  of  complete  sets  in  binders.)  To  simplify  your 
ordering  and  our  handling  of  your  orders,  all  back  issues  are  now 
priced  at — $3.35.  This  reflects  a  small  increase  for  the  most  recent 
issues  due  to  increased  postage  rates  and  a  higher  one  for  older 
issues  due  to  their  increased  value  as  they  become  fewer  in  number. 

Graphics 

In  "Work,  Work,  Work"  we  have  experimented  with  our  approach 
to  graphics.  We  usually  solicit  graphics  or  photographs  from  artists 
to  illustrate  specific  articles.  In  this  issue,  the  art  was  done  with 
regard  to  the  overall  theme  of  "work",  and  not  intended  as  individual 
article  illustration.  While  we  have  of  course  made  choices  as  to  the 
order  and  placement  of  the  photographs,  it  is  our  hope  that  the  art 
will  be  seen  as  a  single  connected  body  of  work  woven  throughout 
the  issue. 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  po- 
litical analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  itself, 
but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the  women's  movement  possi- 
bly including  such  concrete  forms  as  regional  or  national  conferences,  a 
national  organization,  or  a  political  party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  wo- 
men who  have  been  in  the  movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached 
a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been 
through  various  ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feel- 
ing that  our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  strug- 
gle brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power  for 
women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence  against  wo- 
men? Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the 
answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the 
world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


Note:  Change  of  Address 

If  you  have  not  received  a  previous  issue  of  Quest,  it  may  be  because 
you've  moved  and  never  sent  us  a  change  of  address.  The  post  office  does 
not  forward  Quest  because  it  is  handled  as  third  class  mail;  even  if  you 
check  the  P.O.  box  to  forward  your  mail  and  say  you  will  pay  for  it,  you 
will  not  get  Quest.  The  post  office  does  not  return  the  undelivered  copies 
of  Quest.  We,  therefore,  cannot  be  responsible  for  these  lost  issues.  As 
neither  of  us  can  afford  the  loss,  please  notify  us  of  a  change  of  address 
immediately.  If  possible,  provide  us  with  the  number  which  appears 
above  your  name  on  your  address  label. 


photographs  by  Ginger  Legato 


Staying^Alive 


By  NANCY  HARTSOCK 

Introduction 

"Gray  is  the  color  of  work  without  purpose  or  end,  and  the  cancer  of  hopelessness 
creeping  through  the  gut." 
Marge  Piercy,  To  Be  Of  Use  (Garden  City:  Doubleday,   1973),  p.   77. 

You're  there  just  to  filter  people  and  filter  telephone  calls.  .  .  .  Your' re  treated 
like  a  piece  of  equipment,  like  the  telephone.  You  come  in  at  nine,  you  open  the  door, 
you  look  at  the  piece  of  machinery,  you  plug  in  the  headpiece.  That's  how  my  day  be- 
gins. You  tremble  when  you  hear  the  first  ring.  After  that,  it's  sort  of  downhill.  .  .  . 

1  don't  have  much  contact  with  people.  You  can't  see  them.  You  don't  know  if 
they're  laughing,  if  they're  being  satirical  or  being  kind.  So  your  conversations  be- 
come very  abrupt.  1  notice  that  in  talking  to  people.  My  conversations  would  be  very 
short  and  clipped,  in  short  sentences,  the  way  1  talk  to  people  all  day  on  the  telephone. 
.  .  .  When  I'm  talking  to  someone  at  work,  the  telephone  rings  and  the  conversation  is 
interrupted.  So  1  never  bother  finishing  sentences  or  finishing  thoughts.  1  always 
have  this  feeling  of  interruption.  .  .  .There  isn't  a  ten  minute  break  in  the  whole  day 
that's  quiet.  .  .  .  You  can't  think,  you  can't  even  finish  a  letter.  So  you  do  quickie 
things,  like  read  a  chapter  in  a  short  story.  It  has  to  be  short  term  stuff.  ...  1  al- 
ways dream  I'm  alone  and  things  are  quiet.  1  call  it  the  land  of  no-phone,  where 
there  isn't  any  machine  telling  me  where  1  have  to  be  every  minute.  The  machine 
dictates.  This  crummy  little  machine  with  buttons  on  it — you've  got  to  be  there  to 
hear  it,  but  it  pulls  you.  You  know  you're  not  doing  anything,  not  doing  a  hell  of  a 
lot  for  anyone.  Your  job  doesn't  mean  anything.  Because  you're  just  a  little  ma- 
chine. A  monkey  could  do  what  1  do.  It's  really  unfair  to  ask  someone  to  do  that. 

1  don't  know  what  I'd  like  to  do.  That's  what  hurts  the  most.  That's  why  J  can't 
quit  the  job.  1  really  don't  know  what  talents  1  may  have.  And  I  don't  know  where  to 
go  to  find  out.  I've  been  fostered  so.  long  at  school  and  1  didn't  have  time  to  think 
about  it." 

Studs  Terkel,  Working  (New  York:  Pantheon,  1972),  pp.  29-31. 


ZlQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


Whether  we  work  for  wages  or 
not,  most  of  us  have  come  to  accept 
that  we  work  because  we  must.  We 
know  that  the  time  we  spend  on 
things  important  to  us  must  some- 
how be  found  outside  the  time  we 
work  to  stay  alive.  We  have  forgot- 
ten that  work  is  in  fact  fundamen- 
tal to  our  development  as  human 
beings,  that  it  is  a  source  of  our 
sense  of  accomplishment,  and  an 
important  aspect  of  our  sense  of 
self. 

Work  is  an  especially  important 
question  for  feminists  since  in  our 
capitalist  and  patriarchal  society  the 
work  women  do  goes  unrecog- 
nized, whether  it  is  done  for  wages 
or  not.  Housework  is  not  defined  as 
work  at  all,  but  rather  as  a  "natur- 
al" activity,  or  an  expression  of 
love.   Only   in   the   last  few  years 


have  women  as  a  group  demanded 
that  housework  be  recognized  as 
important  work.  Women  who  work 
for  wages  simply  have  two  jobs — 
the  one,  though  unimportant  and 
temporary,  recognized  as  work,  and 
the  other,  completely  unrecog- 
nized. 

The  liberation  of  women — and  all 
human  beings — depends  on  under- 
standing that  work  is  essential  to 
our  development  as  individuals  and 
on  creating  new  places  in  our  lives 
for  our  work.  We  must  develop  a 
new  conception  of  work  itself.  To 
begin  this  process,  we  must  clarify 
what  is  wrong  with  the  capitalist 
and  patriarchal  organization  of 
work,  and  define  the  requirements 
of  human  work.  We  must  critically 
evaluate  the  ways  we  are  structur- 
ing work  in  feminist  organizations, 


photograph  by  Charlotte  Bunch 


Staying  Alive/3 


where  we  can  experiment,  and  in- 
vent ways  to  use  our  work  for  our 
development  as  human  beings. 

Estranged  Labor 

The  receptionist  has  described 
the  way  most  of  us  feel  about  our 
work — that  is  not  important,  and 
that  the  pace  is  often  set  by  ma- 
chines or  by  people  who  are  not  in- 
volved in  the  work  itself.  Work  is 
something  we  must  do,  however 
painful.  In  our  society,  work  is,  al- 
most by  definition,  something  we 
cannot  enjoy.  Time  at  work  is  time 
we  do  not  have  for  ourselves — time 
when  creativity  is  cut  off,  time 
when  our  activity  is  structured  by 
rules  set  down  by  others.  The  in- 
creasing use  of  unskilled  labor  (or 
more  precisely,  the  skills  everyone 
is  taught  in  public  schools),  and  the 
increasing  application  of  scientific 
management  techniques  in  manu- 
facturing, the  office,  and  even  the 
home  (as  home  economics)  all  con- 
tribute to  the  feeling  that  many 
jobs  could  be  done  by  machines,  and 
that  people  should  not  have  to  do 
them.  In  these  respects,  housework 
does  not  differ  fundamentally  from 
women's  wage  work.  Housewives 
too  experience  the  isolation  des- 
cribed by  the  receptionist,  while  the 
phrase,  ''just  a  housewife,"  ex- 
presses the  cultural  devaluation  of 
housework. 

The  work  most  of  us  do  has  been 
described  by  Marx  as  estranged  la- 
bor— time  and  activity  that  is  taken 
from  us  and  used  against  us.  Work 
which  should  be  used  for  our 
growth  as  well-rounded  human 
beings  is  used  instead  to  diminish 


us,  to  make  us  feel  like  machines. 
Estranged  labor  distorts  our  lives 
in  a  number  of  ways,  most  of 
them  illustrated  by  the  reception- 
ist's description  of  her  work.*  She 
expresses  what  Marx  described  as 
our  separation  from  our  own  acti- 
vity at  work  when  she  says,  "the 
machine  dictates.  This  crummy 
little  machine  with  buttons  on  it," 
so  that  "you  can't  think."1  We  are 
not  in  control  of  our  actions  dur- 
ing the  time  we  work;  our  time  be- 
longs to  those  who  have  the  mon- 
ey to  buy  our  time.  Women's  time 
in  particular  is  not  our  own  but  is 
almost  always  controlled  by  men. 
Our  time  is  not  our  own  even 
away  from  work.  The  rhythms  of 
estranged  labor  infect  our  leisure 
time  as  well;  our  work  exhausts  us 
and  we  need  time  to  recover  from 
it.  As  a  result  we  spend  much  of 
our  leisure  time  in  passive  activi- 
ties— watching  television,  listen- 
ing to  the  radio,  or  sleeping. 

In  addition,  Marx  pointed  out 
that  our  work  separates  us  from 
others,  preventing  real  communi- 
cation with  our  fellow  workers. 
Often  our  work  separates  us 
physically  from  others.  Some 
manufacturers  deliberately  put 
working  stations  too  far  apart  for 
conversation  among  employees. 
But  just  as  often,  we  are  kept  from 
real  contact  with  others  not  by  act- 
ual physical  barriers  but  by  roles, 
status  differences,  and  hierarchies. 

*  All  this  is  more  true  for  working-  and  lower-class 
women  than  for  middle-class  professional  women.  Wo- 
men who  are  lawyers,  for  example,  have  much  more 
control  over  their  work,  but  the  patterns  which  are  so 
clear  for  most  women  (whether  we  work  for  wages  or 
not)  also  structure  and  limit  the  ability  of  any  woman 
to  control  her  own  work. 


4lQuest 


The  receptionist  points  out  that  al- 
though she  is  surrounded  by  people, 
she  has  little  contact  with  them. 
Competition  on  the  job  also  separ- 
ates us  from  others.  We  are  forced 
into  situations  in  which  our  own 
promotion  or  raise  means  that 
someone  else  cannot  advance,  situa- 
tions where  we  can  only  benefit  by 
another's  loss. 

Patriarchy  too,  in  giving  men 
more  power  over  women,  separates 
us  from  real  contact  with  other  hu- 
man beings.  And  here  too,  the  pat- 
terns of  our  lives  at  work  invade 
our  leisure  as  well.  The  receptionist 
says,  "I  never  answer  the  phone  at 
home.  It  carries  over.  The  way  I  talk 
to  people  has  changed.  Even  when 
my  mother  calls,  I  don't  talk  to  her 
very  long.  I  want  to  see  people  to  talk 
to  them.  But  now,  when  I  see  them, 
I  talk  to  them  like  I  was  talking  on 


the  telephone. ...I  don't  know  what's 
happened."2 

Finally,  estranged  labor  prevents 
us  from  developing  as  well-rounded 
people  and  keeps  us  from  participa- 
ting in  the  life  of  the  community  as 
a  whole.  Marx  argued  that  rather 
than  participating  in  community 
work  for  joint  purposes,  our  survi- 
val as  individuals  becomes  primary 
for  us,  and  prevents  us  from  recog- 
nizing our  common  interests.3  Our 
own  activity,  especially  our  actions 
in  our  work,  separates  us  from 
other  people  and  from  the  people 
we  ourselves  could  become.  We 
work  only  because  we  must  earn 
enough  money  to  satisfy  our  physi- 
cal needs.  Yet  by  working  only  to 
survive,  we  are  participating  in  our 
own  destruction  as  real,  social  indi- 
viduals. Worst  of  all,  even  though 
we  recognize  the  dehumanization 


photograph  by  Charlotte  Bunch 


Staying  Alive/5 


our  work  forces  on  us,  we  are  pow- 
erless as  individuals  to  do  anything 
about  it.  Patriarchy  and  capitalism 
work  together  to  define  "women's 
work"  as  suited  only  to  creatures  of 
limited  talent  and  ambition:  the  sex- 
segregation  of  the  labor  market  en- 
sures that  women's  work  will  be  es- 


pecially dehumanizing.  The  recep- 
tionist speaks  for  most  of  us  when 
she  says  she  doesn't  know  what  she 
wants  to  do.  We  all  have  talents  we 
are  not  developing  but  we  don't 
really  know  what  they  are.  As  she 
says,  we  haven't  really  had  the 
chance  to  find  out. 

Work:  The  Central  Human  Activity 

Because  of  the  perverted  shape  of 
work  in  a  patriarchal,  capitalist  so- 
ciety, we  have  forgotten  that  work 


is  a  central  human  activity,  the  acti- 
vity through  which  the  self-crea- 
tion of  human  beings  is  accom- 
plished.4 Work  is  a  definition  of 
what  it  is  to  be  human — a  striving 
first  to  meet  physical  needs  and  lat- 
er to  realize  all  our  human  potenti- 
alities. Marx  argues  that  our  practi- 
cal activity,  or  work  in  the  largest 
sense,  is  so  fundamental  that  social 
reality  itself  is  made  up  of  human 
activity  (work).5 

Our  work  produces  both  our  ma- 
terial existence  and  our  conscious- 
ness. Both  consciousness  and  ma- 
terial life  grow  out  of  our  efforts  to 
satisfy  physical  needs,  a  process 
which  leads  to  the  production  of 
new  needs.  These  efforts,  however, 
are  more  than  the  simple  produc- 
tion of  physical  existence.  They 
make  up  a  "definite  mode  of  life." 
"As  individuals  express  their  life,  so 
they  are.  What  they  are,  therefore, 
coincides  with  their  production, 
both  with  what  they  produce  and 
with  how  they  produce.  The  nature 
of  individuals  thus  depends  on  the 
material  conditions  determining 
their  production."6  Here  individual- 
ity must  be  understood  as  a  social 
phenomenon,  that  human  exist- 
ence in  all  its  forms  must  be  seen  as 
the  product  of  human  activity — 
that  is,  activity  and  consciousness 
"both  in  their  content  and  in  their 
mode  of  existence,  are  social:  social  activi- 
ty and  social  mind.7 

Finally,  Marx  argued  that  the 
realization  of  all  human  potential  is 
only  possible  as  and  when  human 
beings  as  a  group  develop  their 
powers,  and  that  these  powers  can 
be  realized  only  through  the  coop- 
erative   action    of   all    people   over 


6lQuest 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


time.8  Thus,  although  it  is  human 
work  which  structures  the  social 
world,  the  structure  is  imposed  not 
by  individuals,  but  by  generations, 
each  building  on  the  work  of  those 
who  came  before.  Fully  developed 
individuals,  then,  are  products  of 
human  work  over  the  course  of  his- 
tory.9 

However,  as  we  saw,  capitalism 
perverted  human  work,  has  distort- 
ed the  self-creation  of  real  individu- 
als.The  fact  that  a  few  use  the  time 
of  a  majority  for  their  own  profit  or 
their  own  pleasure  makes  work  in- 
to a  means  to  life  rather  than  life  it- 
self. The  work  we  do  has  become 
estranged  labor;  and  as  a  result,  our 
humanity  itself  is  diminished.  Our 
work  has  become  a  barrier  to  our 
self-creation,  to  the  expansion  and 
realization  of  our  potential  as  hu- 
man beings.  Work  in  a  capitalist  and 


patriarchal  society  means  that  in 
our  work  and  in  our  leisure  we  do 
not  affirm  but  deny  ourselves;  we 
are  not  content  but  unhappy;  we  do 
not  develop  our  own  capacities,  but 
destroy  our  bodies  and  ruin  our 
minds.10 

By  contrast,  creative  work  could 
be  understood  as  play,  and  as  an  ex- 
pression of  ourselves.  "In  creative 
work  as  well  as  genuine  play,  ex- 
haustion is  not  deadening. ...When 
one  selects  the  object  of  work,  de- 
termines its  method,  and  creates  its 
configuration,  the  consciousness  of 
time  tends  to  disappear.  While 
clock-watching  is  a  characteristic 
disease  of  those  burdened  with  ali- 
enated labor,  [when  we  work  crea- 
tively], we  lose  ourselves,  and  cease 
to  measure  our  activities  in  so 
many  units  of  minutes  and  hours 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


Staying  Alive/7 


Alternatives  to  Estranged  Labor 

The  perversion  of  our  work, 
then,  is  the  perversion  of  our  lives 
as  a  whole.  Thus  our  liberation  re- 
quires that  we  recapture  our  work. 
Ultimately  we  can  do  this  only  by 
reordering  society  as  a  whole  and 
directing  it  away  from  domination, 
competition,  and  the  isolation  of 
women  from  each  other.  What 
would  work  be  like  in  such  a  socie- 
ty? What  models  can  we  look  to  for 
guidance  about  ways  to  reorganize 
work? 

We  know  that  a  feminist  restruc- 
turing of  work  must  avoid  the  mo- 
notonous jobs  with  little  possibility 
of  becoming  more  creative,  and  the 
fragmentation  of  people  through 
the  organization  of  work  into  re- 
petitive and  unskilled  tasks.  Al- 
though we  have  some  ideas  about 
what  such  a  reorganization  of  work 
would  look  like,  the  real  redefini- 
tion of  work  can  occur  only  in  prac- 
tice. While  our  alternative  institu- 
tions cannot  fully  succeed  so  long 
as  we  live  in  a  society  based  on  pri- 
vate profit  rather  than  public  good 
— a  society  in  which  work  and  hu- 
man development  are  polar  oppo- 
sites — feminist  organizations  pro- 
vide a  framework  within  which  to 
experiment.  The  organizations  we 
build  are  an  integral  part  of  the  pro- 
cess of  creating  political  change 
and,  in  the  long  run,  can  perhaps 
serve  as  proving  grounds  for  new 
institutions. 

Some  examples  of  alternatives  to 
estranged  labor  occur  in  science  fic- 
tion. There  are  worlds,  for  exam- 
ple, in  which  high  status  relieves 
one  from  the  necessity  to  consume 
and  provides  a  chance  to  work.  To 


move  up  in  that  world  means  to 
move  from  a  life  of  high  consump- 
tion to  a  life  of  low  consumption 
and  work.  In  The  Female  Man,  Joanna 
Russ  describes  a  world  where  no 
one  works  more  than  three  hours 
at  a  time  on  any  one  job  except  in 
emergencies,  and  the  work-week  is 
only  16  hours.  Yet,  she  says,While- 
wayans  work  all  the  time.  Marge 
Piercy,  in  Woman  on  the  Edge  of  Time, 
shows  us  a  future  in  which  all  the 
work  is  done  by  machines,  and  wo- 
men no  longer  bear  children.  The 
high  level  of  technology  makes  it 
possible  for  people  to  work  at 
things  which  satisfy  them,  and 
spend  only  a  small  part  of  their  time 
on  supervising  and  overseeing  the 
production.12 

There  are,  however,  contempor- 
rary  alternatives.  The  Chinese  re- 
structuring of  work  does  not  de- 
pend on  changes  in  technology,  but 
rather  operates  on  two  assump- 
tions: first,  creativity  is  an  aspect  of 
all  kinds  of  labor,  and  ordinary  wo- 
men and  men  on  ordinary  jobs  can 
make  innovations  and  contribu- 
tions to  society  which  deserve  hon- 
or and  reward;  second,  all  work 
that  helps  build  a  new  society 
should  be  treated  with  the  new  sig- 
nificance previously  accorded  only 
to  mental  labor.  The  Chinese,  too, 
have  been  concerned  with  avoiding 
the  star  mentality,  and  have  argued 
instead  that  those  who  are  capable 
of  helping  others  should  make  that 
rather  than  their  own  advance- 
ment, a  priority.  Thus,  in  China,  to 
lead  means  to  be  at  the  center  of  a 
group  rather  than  in  front  of  oth- 
ers.13 

These  examples  of  alternatives  to 
estranged  labor  draw  our  attention 


81  Quest 


to  the  organization  of  the  labor 
process  itself.  Feminists,  in  devel- 
oping new  organizational  forms, 
have  been  concerned  with  two  re- 
lated factors  which  structure  the 
estranged  labor  process  in  our  soci- 
ety— the  use  of  power  as  domina- 
tion, both  in  the  workplace  and 
elsewhere,  and  the  separation  of 
mental  from  manual  work.  By  un- 
derstanding the  ways  these  two  as- 
pects of  estranged  labor  mold  the 
labor  process  as  a  whole,  we  can 
correct  some  of  the  mistakes  we 
have  made  as  a  movement  and 
avoid  making  others  in  the  future. 

Power  and  Political  Change 

In  an  article  on  power,  I  argued 
that  social  theorists  have  generally 
conceptualized  power  as  "the  ability 
to  compel  obediance,  or  as  control 
and  domination. "14  Power  must  be 
power  over  someone — something 
possessed,  a  property  of  an  actor 
such  that  he**  can  alter  the  will  or 
actions  of  others  in  a  way  which 
produces  results  in  conformity  with 
his  own  will.15  Social  theorists  have 
argued  that  power,  like  money,  is 
something  possessed  by  an  actor 
which  has  value  in  itself  as  well  as 
being  useful  for  obtaining  other 
valued  things. 

That  power  can  be  compared 
with  money  in  capitalist  society 
supports  Marx's  claim  that  the  im- 
portance of  the  market  leads  to  the 
transformation  of  all  human  activi- 
ty into  patterns  modeled  on  mone- 
tary transactions.16  In  this  society, 


"*"He"  and  "men"  here  refer  specifically  to  men  and 
not  women. 


where  human  interdependence  is 
fundamentally  structured  by  mar- 
kets and  the  exchange  of  money, 
power  as  domination  of  others  (or 
the  use  of  power  to  "purchase"  cer- 
tain behavior  which  diminishes 
rather  than  develops  us),  is  what 
most  of  us  confront  in  our  work. 

There  are  other  definitions  of 
power.  Berenice  Carroll  points  out 
that  in  Webster's  International  Diction- 
ary (1933),  power  is  first  defined  as 
"ability,  whether  physical,  mental, 
or  moral,  to  act;  the  faculty  of  doing 
or  performing  something,"  and  is 
synonymous  with  "strength,  vigor, 
energy,  force,  and  ability."  The 
words  "control"  and  "domination" 
do  not  appear  as  synonyms.17  In 
this  definition  of  power,  energy  and 
accomplishment  are  understood  to 
be  satisfying  in  themselves.  This 
understanding  of  power  is  much 
closer  to  what  the  Women's  Move- 
ment has  sought,  and  this  aspect  of 
power  is  denied  to  all  but  a  few  wo- 
men: the  experience  described  by 
the  receptionist  can  scarcely  be 
characterized  as  effective  interac- 
tion with  the  environment. 

Feminists  have  rightly  rejected 
the  use  of  power  as  domination, 
and  as  a  property  analogous  to 
money,  but  in  practice  our  lack  of 
clarity  about  the  differences  be- 
tween the  two  concepts  of  power 
has  led  to  difficulties  about  leader- 
ship, strength  and  achievement.  In 
general,  feminists  have  not  recog- 
nized that  power  understood  as  en- 
ergy, strength,  and  effectiveness 
need  not  be  the  same  as  power 
which  requires  domination  of  oth- 
ers. 

We  must,  however,  recognize 
and   confront   the  world  of  tradi- 


Staying  Alive/9 


tional  politics  in  which  money  and 
power  function  in  similar  ways.  For 
those  of  us  who  work  in  "straight" 
jobs  (whether  paid  or  not)  and  work 
part-time  in  feminist  organizations, 
the  confrontation  occurs  daily. 
Those  of  us  who  work  full-time  for 
feminist  organizations  confront 
power  as  domination  most  often 
when  our  organizations  try  to 
make  changes  in  the  world.  Creat- 
ing political  change  requires  that 
we  set  up  organizations  based  on 
power  defined  as  energy  and 
strength,  groups  which  are  struc- 
tured, not  tied  to  the  personality  of 
a  single  individual  and  whose  struc- 
tures do  not  permit  the  use  of  pow- 
er to  dominate  others  in  the  group. 
At  the  same  time,  our  organiza- 
tions must  be  effective  in  a  society 
in  which  power  is  a  means  of  mak- 
ing others  do  what  they  do  not 
wish  to  do. 


Mental  and  Manual  Labor 

One  of  the  characteristics  of  ad- 
vanced capitalist  society  is  the  sep- 
aration of  the  conception  of  work 
from  its  execution.18  This  division 
between  mental  and  manual  labor 
— which  also  shapes  the  process  of 
estranged  labor — is  an  expression 
of  the  power  relations  between  the 
rulers  and  the  ruled,  and  is  closely 
related  to  the  concept  of  power  as 
domination.  Having  power  and 
dominating  others  is  commonly  as- 
sociated with  conceptual  or  mental 
work;  subordination,  with  execu- 
tion, or  with  manual  (routine) 
work.  Women  form  a  dispropor- 
tionate number  of  those  who  do 
routine  work  and  rarely  are  insi- 
ders in  capitalist  rituals  and  sym- 
bols of  "know-how." 

As  the  Chinese  have  recognized, 
subordination  and  lack  of  creativity 


WlQuest 


©1977    photograph  by  Elaine  Wessel/CWLU  China  Group 


are  not  features  of  routine  work  it- 
self but  rather  are  aspects  of  the  so- 
cialist relations  within  which  the 
work  takes  place.  A  feminist  re- 
structuring of  work  requires  creat- 
ing a  situation  in  which  thinking 
and  doing,  planning  and  routine 
work,  are  parts  of  the  work  each  of 
us  does;  it  requires  creating  a  work 
situation  in  which  we  can  both  de- 
velop ourselves  and  transform  the 
external  world.  Our  work  itself 
would  provide  us  with  satisfaction 
and  with  the  knowledge  that  we 
were  learning  and  growing.  It 
would  be  an  expression  of  our  own 
individuality  and  power  in  the 
world. 

The  Development  of  a 
Feminist  Workplace 

Specific  questions  about  how  to 
restructure  the  labor  process  can  be 
grouped  under  the  two  general 
headings  of  problems  of  power  and 
problems  about  the  division  be- 
tween mental  and  manual  labor. 
Attention  to  these  two  factors  can 
provide  several  specific  guidelines. 
First,  overcoming  the  domination 
of  a  few  over  the  majority  of  work- 
ers in  an  organization  requires  that 
we  have  control  over  our  own  time 
and  activity.  Second,  we  need  to  de- 
velop possibilities  for  cooperative 
rather  than  competitive  and  iso- 
lated work;  we  need  to  develop 
ways  for  people  to  work  together 
on  problems  rather  than  for  one 
(perhaps  more  experienced)  person 
to  give  orders  to  another. 

We  need  to  recognize  the  import- 
tance  of  enabling  people  to  become 
fully  developed  rather  than  one- 
sided. We  need  to  make  sure  that 


women  can  learn  new  skills  well 
enough  to  innovate  and  improve  on 
what  we  have  been  taught.  We 
need  to  make  space  for  changes  in 
interests  and  skills  over  time.  We 
need  to  include  elements  of  both 
mental  and  manual  work,  both 
planning  and  routine  execution,  in 
every  job  we  create.  Finally,  we 
must  recognize  the  importance  of 
responsibility  as  a  source  of  power 
(energy)  for  individual  members  of 
feminist  organizations.  To  have  re- 
sponsibility for  a  project  means  to 
have  the  respect  of  others  in  the 
group,  and  usually  means  as  well 
that  we  must  develop  our  capacities 
to  fulfill  that  responsibility.  The 
lines  of  responsibility  must  be  clear, 
and  unless  the  organization  is  large, 
they  will  often  end  with  a  single  in- 
dividual. Having  responsibility  for 
some  parts  of  the  work  done  by  a 
group  allows  us  not  only  to  see  our 
own  accomplishments,  but  also  to 
expand  ourselves  by  sharing  in  the 
accomplishments  of  others.19  We 
are  not  superwomen,  able  to  do  ev- 
erything. Only  by  sharing  in  the 
different  accomplishments  of  oth- 
ers can  we  participate  in  the  activi- 
ties of  all  women. 

Collectives  and  Cooperatives  Work 

Given  these  general  guidelines, 
how  should  we  evaluate  one  of  the 
most  common  forms  of  the  organi- 
zation of  work— the  collective? 
Here  I  am  concerned  about  one 
type  of  collective — a  group  which 
insists  that  the  work  done  by  each 
member  should  be  fundamentally 
the  same.  This  kind  of  organization 
is  widespread  in  the  women's  move- 
ment,    although     not     all     groups 


Staying  Alive/11 


which  call  themselves  collectives 
function  in  this  way.  For  example, 
the  Olivia  Records  collective  main- 
tains all  lines  of  individual  responsi- 
bility for  different  areas  of  work.20 

Just  as  the  Women's  Movement 
erred  in  its  almost  universal  con- 
demnation of  leaders — and  its  mis- 
taken identification  of  women  who 
achieved  with  those  that  wanted  to 
dominate — we  have,  through  work- 
ing in  collectives,  many  times  simply 
reacted  against  the  separation  of 
conception  from  execution.  Collec- 
tive work  is  our  answer  to  the  isola- 
tion, competitiveness,  and  the  mo- 
notony of  the  routine  work  forced 
on  us  in  capitalist  work  places.  But 
collectives  can  at  the  same  time  re- 
produce some  of  the  worst  features 
of  estranged  labor — the  separation 
of  the  worker  from  her  own  activi- 
ty,the  loss  of  control  over  her  work, 
and  the  separation  from  real  coop- 
erative work — that  is,  work  with 
rather  than  simply  beside  others. 
It  can  cut  us  off  from  real  growth  as 
individuals.  This  happens  when  col- 
lectives reproduce  power  as  domi- 
nation of  others  and  at  the  same 
time  reintroduce  the  division  be- 
tween conception  and  execution. 

Informal  rather  than  formal 
domination  of  some  members  of 
the  collective  by  others  often  re- 
sults from  the  attempt  to  avoid  hi- 
erarchal  domination  by  avoiding 
formal  structure  altogether.  What 
is  in  theory  the  control  of  the  entire 
group  over  its  work  becomes  in  fact 
the  domination  of  some  members 
of  the  group  by  others.  Some  mem- 
bers of  the  group  lose  control  over 
their  work  to  those  who  are  more 
aggressive,    although   perhaps   not 


more  skilled.  Also,  informal  deci- 
sion-making, which  assumes  that 
every  collective  member  has  the 
same  amount  to  contribute  in  every 
area,  can  result  in  reducing  oppor- 
tunities for  cooperative  work,  work 
which  recognizes,  combines  and 
uses  the  differing  skills  and  inter- 
ests of  members  of  the  group  to 
create  something  none  could  do 
alone. 

In  the  attempt  to  make  sure  that 
every  task  is  done  by  every  member 
of  the  group,  those  who  were  less 
involved  in  setting  up  particular 
tasks  are  deprived  of  a  sense  of  ac- 
complishment— a  sense  that  their 
activity  as  an  individual  and  unique 
expression  of  who  they  are,  a  con- 
tribution to  the  group  from  which 
the  group  as  a  whole  can  benefit. 
By  rotating  all  members  through 
the  various  tasks  of  the  group,  and 
by  insisting  that  every  member  of  a 
collective  do  every  activity  that  the 
group  as  a  whole  is  engaged  in,  the 
collective,  in  practice,  treats  its 
members  as  interchangeable  and 
equivalent  parts.  It  reproduces  the 
assembly  line  of  the  modern  fac- 
tory, but  instead  of  running  the 
work  past  the  people,  people  are 
run  past  the  work. 

We  are  not  all  equally  capable  of 
planning  and  doing  every  task  of 
the  groups  in  which  we  are  in- 
volved, although  we  may  have 
some  special  skills  in  a  particular 
area.  For  example,  while  I  am  incap- 
able of  doing  lay-out  or  paste-up 
for  Quest,  I  am  a  competent  editor. 
If  much  of  the  work  done  by  one 
member  of  the  collective  has  been 
designed  and  planned  by  someone 
else,  the  accomplishment  and  crea- 


lllQuest 


tivity  involved  in  designing  a  sys- 
tem for  doing  routine  work  is  not 
possible.  Instead,  the  tasks  are  al- 
ready planned  and  one  learns  new 
operations,  planned  by  someone 
else.  The  separation  between  con- 
ception and  execution  has  not  been 
overcome. 

One  reply  to  this  criticism  is  that 
learning  skills  is  important,  and 
that  collectives  provide  a  place  to 
learn  new  skills.  While  we  can  agree 
that  women  very  much  need  to 
learn  new  skills,  it  takes  time  to 
reach  the  point  where  we  can  be 
creative  with  a  new  skill.  We  need 
to  learn  skills  rather  than  simply  try 
out  new  things.  One  of  the  best 
ways  to  learn  a  skill  completely  is  to 
be  entrusted  with  full  responsibility 
for  one  or  more  aspects  of  the  oper- 
ation. 

In  sum,  my  criticism  of  this  form 
of  collective  work  is  that  it  is  simply 
a  reaction  against  being  forced  by 
the  capitalist,  patriarchal  organiza- 
tion of  work  to  do  a  single  task  over 
and  over  again.  Requiring  each  of 
us  to  do  everything  is  not  a  creative 
response  and  cannot  provide  a  real 
alternative  to  estranged  labor.  A 
creative  response  allowing  us  to 
move  toward  unalienated  labor  re- 
quires that  we  examine  the  root 
causes  rather  than  the  surface  ap- 
pearances of  estranged  labor  in  our 
society.  We  should  recognize,  for 
example,  that  learning  skills  by 
working  for  long  periods  of  time  on 
one  aspect  of  the  activities  of  a 
group  does  not  necessarily  produce 
the  estranged  labor  of  capitalist  so- 
ciety. If  we  recognize  that  the  prob- 
lem is  not  simply  doing  one  kind  of 
work  for  a  long  period  of  time  but 


rather  results  from  the  social  rela- 
tions which  surround  the  work 
process — power  as  domination  of 
others,  and  the  separation  of  con- 
ception from  execution  in  our  work 
— we  can  respond  to  the  real  prob- 
lems of  work  in  feminist  organiza- 
tions. Thus,  learning  skills  means 
not  only  learning  the  physical  oper- 
ations involved  in  a  particular  kind 
of  work,  but  learning  how  to  or- 
ganize and  set  up  that  work  in  the 
best  way — from  the  perspectives 
both  of  efficiency  and  of  self-devel- 
opment. 

Conclusions:  The  Fragility  of 
Alternatives 

Even  if  we  correctly  identify  the 
factors  which  structure  the  labor 
process  in  our  society,  the  alterna- 
tives we  construct  can  only  be  very 
tenuous.  Work  in  feminist  organi- 
zations will  exist  in  the  tension  be- 
tween reformism  and  conformity 
on  the  one  hand  and  simple  reac- 
tion to  work  in  our  society  on  the 
other.  Our  strategies  for  change 
and  the  internal  organization  of 
work  must  grow  out  of  the  tension 
between  using  our  organizations  as 
instruments  for  both  taking  and 
transforming  power  in  a  society 
structured  by  power  understood 
only  as  domination,  and  using  our 
organizations  to  build  models  for  a 
society  based  on  power  understood 
as  energy  and  initiative.  Work  in 
feminist  organizations  must  be  a 
way  of  expressing  and  sharing  with 
others  who  we  are  and  what  we  can 
do,  a  means  of  developing  our- 
selves, as  well  as  a  place  to  contri- 
bute to  the  struggle  for  liberation. 


Staying  Alive/13 


There  are  real  pressures  to  repro- 
duce the  patterns  of  estranged  la- 
bor in  the  interests  of  efficiency 
and  taking  power.  At  the  same 
time,  there  are  pressures  to  oppose 
estranged  labor  by  insisting  that 
each  of  us  do  every  job.  We  can  de- 
velop correct  strategies  only  by 
critically  examining  the  practical 
work  we  have  done  as  we  attempt 
to  maintain  organizations  in  which 
power  is  recognized  as  energy  and 
in  which  we  work  to  overcome  the 
divisions  between  mental  and  man- 
ual labor. 

Alexa  Freeman  is  responsible  for  many 
of  the  ideas  in  the  section  on  collectives. 
Other  Quest  staff  members,  along  with 
Richard  Flathaman,  Carolyn  Hock,  and 
Stephen  Rose,  also  made  important  sugges- 
tions for  clarifying  my  ideas. 


Footnotes 

*Studs  Terkel,  Working,  (New  York:  Pan- 
theon, 1972),  p.  30 

nbid. 

3Karl  Marx,  Economic  and  Philosophic  Manu- 
scripts of  1844,  ed.  Dirk  Struik,  (New  York: 
International  Publishers,  1964),  pp.  112-113. 
The  account  of  alienation  is  taken  from  pp. 
106-119. 

4Herbert  Marcuse,  Studies  in  Critical  Philoso- 
phy, tr.  Joris  De  Bres  (Boston:  Beacon  Press, 
1973),  p.  14;  Karl  Marx,  1844  Manuscripts,  pp. 
113,  188. 

sKarl  Marx,  Capital,  1  (New  York:  Interna- 
tional Publishers,  1967),  pp.  183-184. 

6Karl  Marx  and  Frederick  Engels,  The  Ger- 
man Ideology,  ed.  C.J.  Arthur,  (New  York:  In- 
ternational Publishers,  1970),  pp.  42,  59. 

7Karl  Marx,   1844  Manuscripts,  p.  137.' 

»lbid.,  p.  17. 

9Marx,     Grundrisse,     tr.     Martin     Nicolaus, 
(Middlesex,  England:  Penguin,  1973),  p.  162. 
10Marx,   1844  Manuscripts,  p.  110. 
"Stanley    Aronowitz,    False    Promises    (New 
York:  McGraw-Hill,  1973),  p.  62. 


^Respectively,  Frederick  Pohl,  "The  Midas 
Plague,"  in  The  Science  Fiction  Hall  of  Fame,  ed. 
Ben  Bova  (New  York:  Avon,  1973);  Joanna 
Russ,  The  Female  Man  (New  York:  Bantam, 
1975),  pp.  53-56;  and  Marge  Piercy,  Woman 
on  the  Edge  of  Time.  (New  York:  Alfred  Knopf, 
1976). 

13See  Marilyn  Young,  "Introduction,"  Signs, 
11:1  (Autumn,  1976),  p.  2,  and  Mary  Sheri- 
dan, "Young  Women  Leaders,"  Signs,  11:1 
(Autumn,  1976),  p.  66. 

14"Political  Change:  Two  Perspectives  on 
Power,"  Quest,  1:1  (Summer,  1974),  pp.  10- 
25. 

15See  Bertrand  Russell,  Power,  A  New  Social 
Analysis  (N.P.,  1936),  p.  35,  cited  by  Anthony 
de  Crespigny  and  Alan  Wertheimer,  Contem- 
porary Political  Theory  (New  York:  Atherton 
Press,  1970),  p.  22;  Harold  Lasswell  and  Ab- 
brahan  Kaplan,  Power  and  Society  (New  Haven: 
Yale  University  Press,  1950),  p.  76;  Talcott 
Parsons,  "On  The  Concept  of  Political  Pow- 
er," in  Political  Power,  eds.  Roderick  Bell,  Da- 
vid V.  Edwards,  and  R.  Harrison  Wagner 
(New  York:  Free  Press,  1969),  p.  256. 
16Karl  Marx,  The  Grundrisse,  ed.  David  McLel- 
lan  (New  York:  Harper  and  Row,  1971),  p. 
65. 

17Berenice  Carroll,  "Peace  Research:  The 
Cult  of  Power,"  paper  presented  to  the 
American  Sociological  Association,  Denver, 
Colorado  (Sept.,  1971),  pp.  6-7. 
18Harry  Braverman,  Labor  and  Monopoly  Capital 
(New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press),  espe- 
cially pp.  70-121. 

19As  Marx  put  it,  "I  would  have  been  for  you 
the  mediator  between  you  and  the  species 
and  thus  been  acknowledged  and  felt  by  you 
as  a  completion  of  your  own  essence  and  a 
necessary  part  of  yourself  and  have  thus  re- 
alized that  I  am  confirmed  both  in  your 
thought  and  in  your  love.  In  my  expression 
of  my  life  I  would  have  fashioned  your  ex- 
pression of  your  life,  and  thus  in  my  own 
activity  have  realized  my  own  essence,  my 
human,  communal  essence."  (in  David  Mc- 
Lellan,  The  Thought  of  Karl  Marx,  (New  York: 
Viking,  1969),  p.  32. 

20Ginny  Berson/'Olivia:  We  Don't  Just  Pro- 
cess Records,"  Sister  VII:2,  (December-Janu- 
ary, 1976),  pp.  8-9. 

Nancy  Hartsock  is  an  assistant  professor 
of  political  science  at  the  Johns  Hopkins 
University,  Baltimore,  Maryland. 


\4lQuest 


Sexual  Harassment: 
Working 
Women's 
Dilemma 


By  DIERDRE  SILVERMAN 

In  May  of  1975  Working  Women 
United,  an  organization  in  Ithaca, 
New  York,  held  a  Speak-Out  on 
Sexual  Harassment.  We  defined 
sexual  harassment  as  the  treatment 
of  women  workers  as  sexual  ob- 
jects. This  problem  permeates  all 
aspects  of  women's  work. 

Sexual  harassment  begins  with 
hiring  procedures,  in  which  women 
applicants  are  judged  not  only  for 
their  work  skills  but  also  for  their 
physical  attractiveness  (and,  in 
some  instances,  sexual  receptivity). 
It  continues  when  job  retention, 
raises  or  promotions  depend  on  tol- 
erating, or  submitting  to,  unwant- 
ed sexual  advances  from  co-work- 
ers, customers  or  supervisors.  The 
form  of  these  advances  varies  from 
clearly  suggestive  looks  and/or  re- 
marks, to  mild  physical  encounters 
(pinching,  kissing,  etc.)  to  outright 
sexual  assault.  In  all  instances,  the 
message  is  clear:  A  woman's  exist- 
ence as  a  sexual  being  is  more  im- 
portant than  her  work. 


The  speak-out  attracted  a  great 
deal  of  support  in  the  Ithaca  area, 
with  the  realization  that  this  was  a 
collective,  and  not  an  individual 
problem.  Sexual  harassment  has  re- 
ceived considerable  coverage  in  the 
establishment  media  as  a  result  of 
the  speak-out.  An  article  in  the  New 
York  Times  was  picked  up  by  papers 
around  the  country,  and  Redbook 
made  sexual  harassment  the  sub- 
ject of  its  January,  1976  reader  sur- 
vey. 

In  examining  coverage  of  the  is- 
sue in  the  liberal  media,  two  trends 
emerge  clearly.  The  first  is  that  me- 
dia focus  is  on  upper-middle-class, 
mostly  professional  and  business- 
women, although  it  is  clear  that 
sexual  harassment  effects  women 
workers  at  all  occupational  levels.1 
Second  is  the  lack  of  analysis;  an 
unwillingness  or  inability  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  sexual  harass- 
ment in  our  (capitalist,  patriarchal) 
society,  and  to  see  why  it  has  only 
recently  emerged  as  a  feminist  is- 
sue. Such  analysis  is  the  task  of 
feminist  theory,  and  a  beginning  is 
attempted  below. 

The  Prostitute  as  Paradigm 

It  is  my  contention  that  the  para- 
digm for  interactions  between  men 
and  women  in  our  society  is  that  of 
the  prostitute  and  her  customer.  In 
this  exchange,  the  man  provides 
money  (in  various  forms:  cash, 
commodities,  lifetime  economic 
support,  employment)  and  the  wo- 


Sexual  Harassment:  Working  Women's  Dilemma/15 


man  provides  sexual  services  (liter- 
al or  symbolic).2 

In  the  same  way  that  convention- 
al prostitution  is  an  economic  an- 
swer for  the  hooker,  other  prosti- 
tution exchanges  provide  economic 
solutions  for  most  women.  Wo- 
men's economic  position  demon- 
strates the  need  for  such  solutions. 
Overall  women's  income  is  57%  of 


economic  security  women  do  estab- 
lish depends  on  men.  For  it  is  men, 
as  husbands,  employers,  supervi- 
sors and  customers,  who  provide 
women  with  the  opportunity  to 
work  and  advance  as  paid  workers, 
or  to  live  and  work  in  economic  se- 
curity as  housewives. 

This  trade  of  money  for  sex  is 
fairly  clear  in  some  forms  of  inter- 


.jf*~~~^^ 


*  -  i 


&        ,     T* 


that  of  men.3  This  percentage  has 
declined  steadily  since  1955. 4  In  ad- 
dition the  unemployment  rate  for 
women  is  consistently  higher  than 
that  for  men,5  even  though  many 
women  retreat  to  housewife  status 
and  are  less  likely  to  be  counted  a- 
mong  the  unemployed. 

The  picture  is  even  worse  for  wo- 
men who  try  to  make  it  on  their 
own.  In  1969,  47%  of  families  living 
in  poverty  were  headed  by  women. 
Only  38%  of  female-headed  fami- 
lies had  incomes  over  $5,000. 6  The 


action.  Our  patterns  of  dating, 
courtship  and  marriage  are  exam- 
ples of  this.  On  dates,  men  pay,  and 
women  are  expected  to  repay  with 
sexual  favors.7  In  marriage,  men 
are  legally  required  to  provide  eco- 
nomic support,  while  women  are 
required  to  provide  sexual  services. 
Currently,  only  in  Michigan  is  rape 
within  marriage  recognized  as  a 
crime.8  The  wife  is  legally  seen  as 
the  husband's  sexual  property.  He 
does  not  break  the  law  by  demand- 
ing or  taking  what  is  his.  (The  wife 


16iQuesl,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


who  refuses  her  husband's  sexual 
approaches  may  be  seen,  in  legal 
terms,  as  violating  her  marriage 
contract.) 

Even  those  women  who  are  the 
most  traditional  in  values  and  be- 
havior recognize  this  relationship. 
For  women  who  follow  the  Total 
Woman  and  Fascinating  Woman- 
hood guidelines,  the  payoff  is  not 
only  in  greater  marital  (and  thereby 
economic)  security,  but  in  presents. 
Students  come  to  Total  Woman 
classes  with  glowing  reports  of  the 
refrigerators,  mink  coats  or  other 
rewards  their  husbands  have  given 
them  in  return  for  their  sexually 
submissive  games.9 

Teaching  girls  how  to  hustle  is 
one  of  the  functions  of  the  nuclear 
family.  James  Bryan,  in  a  1965  stud- 
y,  "Apprenticeships  in  Prostitu- 
tion," describes  the  work  of  the 
pimp  and  the  older  prostitute  in 
teaching  the  novice  girl  how  to  per- 
form.10 This  apprenticeship  system 
differs  only  in  label  from  the  more 
conventional  socialization  within 
the  family,  in  which  the  daughter 
learns,  by  watching  her  parents'  in- 
teractions, how  to  hustle  men.  In 
Working,  Studs  Terkel's  hooker  re- 
spondent describes  the  ease  with 
which  she  turned  her  first  trick:  "I 
wonder  why  I  was  so  willing. ..It 
wasn't  traumatic  because  my  train- 
ing had  been  in  how  to  be  a  hustler 
anyway.  I  learned  it  from  the  socie- 
ty around  me,  just  as  a  woman. 
We're  taught  how  to  hustle,  to  at- 
tract, to  hold  a  man  and  give  sexual 
favors  in  return. ...It's  a  market 
place  transaction."11 

In  our  society,  women  have  little 
choice     about     hustling,     whether 


they  do  it  as  professionals  or  as  am- 
ateurs, for  one  lifetime  trick  or  for 
a  series  of  customers. 

Women  at  Work 

Women  can  try  to  opt  out  of  the 
hustling  role  by  working  outside 
the  home.  In  spite  of  low  wages  and 
poor  promotion  possibilities,  out- 
side employment  offers  women  a 
chance  at  independence.  However, 
sexual  stratification  in  our  society 
assures  that  most  working  women 
will  be  trading  one  form  of  inde- 
pendence on  men  for  another.  Sex- 
ual harassment  at  work  is  one  man- 
ifestation of  this  dependence. 

In  a  recent  survey  conducted  by 
Working  Women  United,  70%  of 
the  respondents  had  experienced  at 
least  one  instance  of  sexual  harass- 
ment on  the  job.  Ninety-one  per- 
cent of  the  respondents  saw  such 
harassment  as  a  "serious  problem 
for  working  women."  Those  who 
had  personally  experienced  sexual 
harassment  were  asked  how  many 
times  it  had  happened.  The  median 
figure  was  three  instances,  with 
over  half  the  respondents  reporting 
"a  lot/'  "often,"  or  "more  than  ten 
times."  The  respondents'  median 
age  was  26,  and  they  had  been 
working  on  the  average,  only  seven 
years. 

Respondents  were  asked  to  des- 
cribe the  most  recent  instance  of 
sexual  harassment  they  had  experi- 
enced. The  statistics  presented  re- 
fer to  the  description  each  woman 
gave  of  that  one  instance.  In  more 
than  half  of  the  incidents  described 
the  man  or  men  doing  the  harassing 
were  in  work  positions  superior  to 


Sexual  Harassment/17 


the  respondent.  Another  18%  were 
customers  or  clients.  Thus,  about 
two  thirds  of  the  men  were  in  a  po- 
sition to  exert  some  economic  pres- 
sure on  the  respondent.  In  addition, 
41%  of  the  respondents  described 
harassment  involving  more  than 
one  man. 

Sexual  harassment  happens  to 
women  of  all  ages  and  all  occupa- 
tional groups.  One  respondent 
mentioned  an  incident  that  occur- 
red when  she  was  10  and  working 
as  a  child  model;  another's  experi- 
ence occurred  at  age  55.  In  this  sur- 
vey, clerical  employees  and  wait- 
resses were  most  frequently  har- 
assed; our  respondents' occupations 
covered  a  wide  range.  Working- 
class  women,  especially  those  in 
service  occupations,  were  more 
likely  to  receive  physical  as  well  as 
verbal  advances,  while  for  middle- 
class  and/or  professional  women, 
harassment  was  more  often  verbal. 
Middle-class  women  were  some- 
what more  likely  to  ignore  the  situ- 
ation, or  attempt  to  change  jobs,  in 
order  to  avoid  confrontation.  In 
spite  of  these  class  differences,  both 
in  the  ways  women  are  approached 
and  in  the  ways  they  respond,  sexu- 
al harassment  is  a  problem  that  cuts 


across  class  lines  and  affects  all  wo- 
men in  their  capacity  as  workers. 

In  popular  literature,  sexual  har- 
assment is  treated  as  a  joke  of  little 
consequence.  The  actress  who 
"succeeds"  by  means  of  the  casting 
couch,  the  "Fly  Me"  airline  stew- 
ardess and  other  stereotypes  per- 
meate American/male  humor.  Are 
women  laughing  along? 

Respondents  were  asked  to  des- 
cribe how  they  felt  after  being  har- 
assed. Table  1  shows  their  re- 
sponses. 

Many  respondents  indicated  mul- 
tiple reactions,  so  the  percentage 
total  is  more  than  100%.  When  ask- 
ed, "Did  this  experience  have  any 
emotional  or  physical  effect  on 
you?",  78%  answered  yes.  Consider 
the  following  comments: 

"As  I  remember  all  the  sexual  a- 
buse  and  negative  work  experi- 
ences I  am  left  feeling  sick  and  help- 
less and  upset  instead  of  angry." 

"Reinforced  feelings  of  no  con- 
trol— sense  of  doom." 

"I  have  difficulty  dropping  the 
emotion  barrier  I  work  behind 
when  I  come  home  from  work.  My 
husband  turns  into  just  another 
man." 

"Kept  me  in  a  constant  state  of 


Table  1. 

Percent  of 

Respondents  Mentioning 

Each  Reaction 

Angry 

78% 

Upset 

48% 

Frightened 

• 

23% 

Guilty 

22% 

Flattered 

10% 

Indifferent 

7% 

Other  (alienated, 

alone, 

helpless) 

27% 

18lQuest 


emotional  agitation  and  frustration 
...I  drank  a  lot." 

"Soured  the  essential  delight  in 
the  work/' 

"Stomach  ache,  migraines,  cried 
every  night,  no  appetite." 

Many  women  commented  on 
how  the  harassment,  or  their  reac- 
tions to  it,  interfered  with  their  job 
performance.  The  economic  conse- 
quences of  impaired  performance 
are  difficult  to  measure. 

What  actions  do  women  take  in 
response  to  sexual  harassment?  Re- 
spondents' descriptions  of  their 
most  recent  experience  are  sum- 
marized in  Table  2. 

Ignoring  the  harassment  is  an  in- 
effective response.  For  76%  of  the 
respondents  who  tried  this  tactic 
the  behavior  continued,  and  some- 
times got  worse.  In  fact,  almost 
one-third  of  these  women  were  pe- 
nalized on  the  job  for  not  respond- 
ing positively  to  the  harassment. 
When  asked  why  they  didn't  "com- 
plain through  channels,"  women's 
responses  indicated  their  weak- 
nesses in  the  work  situation.  Forty- 
two  percent  felt  that  nothing  would 
be  done;  33%  feared  some  negative 
consequences  for  themselves,  vary- 
ing from  blame  and  ridicule  to  con- 


crete penalties  at  work.  For  about 
20%  of  the  respondents,  either 
there  were  no  channels,  or  the  har- 
assing man  was  a  part  of  them. 

When  respondents  did  officially 
complain,  no  action  was  taken  in 
one  third  of  the  cases.  One  third  of 
the  respondents  who  complained 
were  themselves  penalized  at  work. 
In  a  small  number  of  cases,  action 
was  taken  against  the  man.  The 
most  severe  of  these  was  transfer 
to  another  work  place  or  ejection  of 
a  customer. 

Sexual  harassment  is  a  common 
problem  for  women  workers.  It  has 
serious  emotional  repercussions 
and  interferes  with  women's  work 
performance.  More  importantly,  as 
individuals,  women  have  no  effec- 
tive way  to  deal  with  the  problem. 
Whatever  their  response,  women 
pay. 

In  our  attempt  to  understand 
why  sexual  harassment  is  so  wide- 
spread and  why  women  are  so  un- 
able, emotionally  and  practically,  to 
handle  it,  the  model  of  prostitution 
provides  some  answers. 

Women  who  earn  money  may  be 
seen  as  less  dependent  on  men  then 
women  who  are  not  paid  for  their 
work.  By  extending  to  the  work- 


Table  2.     Percent  of  Respondents 

Taking  Each  Action 

Complain  to  the  man  harassing  you 

25% 

Ignore  it 

23% 

Pretend  not  to  notice 

13% 

Complain  through  channels 

12% 

Quit  the  job 

9% 

Ask  for  transfer 

2% 

Other  (most  verbal  responses,  to  the  man  or  co-workers) 

16% 

Sexual  Harassment/19 


place  the  general  pattern  of  male 
sexual  initiative,  and  by  reinforcing 
this  with  the  man's  superior  power 
to  enact  job  penalties,  women's  at- 
tempt at  independence  is  thwarted. 
The  implicit  prostitution-exchange 
in  work  situations  is  that  men  pro- 
vide the  jobs  through  hiring  and 
promotion,  set  salary  levels  and 
work  conditions,  and  can  terminate 
employment  by  firing.  Women  are 
employed  when,  and  because,  men 
choose  to  employ  them.  In  return 
for  these  economic  favors,  women 


pulation,  and  advise  women  to  use 
this  technique  for  their  own  advan- 
tage. 

When  women  are  unwilling  to 
play  the  game,  the  presumed  un- 
derstanding is  violated  and  the  situ- 
ation becomes  emotionally  loaded. 
A  woman  who  refuses  sexual  ad- 
vances at  work  is  breaking  her  end 
of  the  bargain  by  attempting  to  es- 
tablish her  independent  existence 
as  a  worker.  It  is  this  act  which  pro- 
vokes anger  and  reprisals  from 
men.  And  the  meaning  of  this  act 


provide  sexual  services,  as  well  as 
work  skills.  These  sexual  services 
range  from  providing  an  attractive 
female  presence,  to  actual  sexual 
encounters.  We  all  know  that  this 
arrangement  exists,  although  we 
may  not  choose  to  acknowledge  it 
as  a  conscious  or  consistent  pat- 
tern. Magazines  such  as  Cosmopolitan 
counsel  a  strategy  of  passive  mani- 


has  created  guilt,  ambivalence  and 
uncertainty  in  the  refusing  women; 
they  know  they  are  breaking  an  a- 
greement  that  they  have  been 
raised  to  honor. 

When  asked  why  they  did  not 
lodge  formal  complaints,  respon- 
dents replied: 

"I  thought  it  was  my  problem/' 
"The    importance    I    have    been 


20lQuest 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


trained  to  place  on  what  other 
people  think  of  me  —  trying  to 
please  other  people  rather  than 
finding  my  own  rewards,  fulfill- 
ment, etc/' 

"Hojo's  pride  themselves  on  their 
friendly,  pretty  girls — in  a  sense, 
they  promote  my  sexual  harass- 
ment/' 

"I  did  not  want  to  get  him  (the 
harasser)  in  trouble. " 

"No  one  would  believe  me." 

"I  felt  I  couldn't  make  a  scene  by 
telling  anyone  in  authority  over 
him.  I  felt  powerless  and,  oddly, 
honor-bound  not  to  publicly  em- 
barrass him." 

"I  would  be  seen  as  cruel  and  un- 
professional." 

These  women  express  an  inabili- 
ty to  deal  with  the  possible  reper- 
cussions of  their  complaint.  This  in- 
ability is  the  result,  not  just  of  fe- 
male socialization,  but  also  of  an  ac- 
curate assessment  of  the  power  dis- 
tribution at  work.  It  is  a  result,  not 
of  individual  weakness,  but  of  wo- 
men's disadvantaged  position. 

When  women  enter  fields  that 
are  traditionally  male,  or  occupy 
positions  of  authority  over  male 
workers,  sexual  harassment  be- 
comes a  tool  to  thwart  their  efforts 
at  economic  independence.  Fre- 
quent reminders  that,  no  matter 
what  work  a  woman  is  doing,  she  is 
still  a  woman  and  therefore  a  sex 
object,  are  designed  to  dampen  her 
identification  with  her  work,  and 
limit  her  success  at  it.  Respondents 
reported  harassment  when  they 
were  employed  as  carpenters,  film- 
makers, auto  mechanics,  college 
teachers,  social  workers,  probation 
officers,  or  accountants  as  well  as  in 


other  male-dominated  fields.  Often 
accompanying  these  incidents  is  a 
shared  jocularity  among  men  wit- 
nessing them,  perhaps  in  affirma- 
tion of  their  triumph  over  the"  up- 
pity woman." 

Sexual  Harassment  and  Feminism 

Because  sexual  harassment  is  so 
widespread,  and  because  its  conse- 
quences for  women  are  substantial, 
it  is  necessary  for  feminists  to  de- 
velop theoretical  analysis  and  prac- 
tical strategies  for  dealing  with  this 
issue.  We  must  try  to  understand 
women's  reactions  to  sexual  har- 
assment, as  well  as  how  the  issue 
can  be  used  to  help  develop  feminist 
consciousness. 

When  the  sexual  harassment  is- 
sue surfaced  in  Ithaca  last  year,  wo- 
men's reactions  were  dramatically 
divided.  Many  expressed  strong 
support  along  with  relief  that  what 
had  been  seen  as  a  personal  prob- 
lem was  in  fact  a  public  issue.  There 
was  also,  even  from  feminists,  a 
certain  amount  of  resistance.  This 
was  expressed  in  comments  like: 

"Any  woman  who  has  it  together 
can  handle  something  like  that." 

"That  sort  of  thing  only  happens 
to  women  who  are  asking  for  it." 
(Often  accompanied  by,  "It's  never 
happened  to  me,  because  I  know 
how  to  present  myself.") 

"Just  because  one  weird  guy  does 
something  that  doesn't  mean  it's  a 
real  problem." 

(These  comments  are  all  direct 
quotes  from  women  I  spoke  with. 
Any  resemblance  to  discussions  of 
rape  five  years  ago  is  not  at  all  a  co- 
incidence.) 


Sexual  Harassment/21 


Why  were  some  women  denying 
the  relevance  of  sexual  harassment 
to  women's  oppression?  It  was 
clear  that  women  with  class  and/or 
educational  privilege  were  most 
likely  to  feel  this  way.  These  wo- 
men, who  are  the  most  successful 
and  highly  skilled,  may  be  the  most 
threatened  by  the  idea  that  even 
they  will  still  be  judged  as  sexual 
objects.  The  fact  that  sexual  har- 
assment of  these  women  is  more 
often  purely  verbal  and  more  sub- 
tle than  that  directed  at  working- 
class  women  may  lead  to  their  will- 
ingness to  deny  its  relevency. 

It  is  also  important  to  recognize 
that  middle-class  women  have  far 
greater  job  mobility  than  working- 
class  women.  If  a  problem  such  as 
sexual  harassment  arises,  the  privi- 
leged woman  may  just  find  another 
job,  perhaps  denying  that  there 
ever  was  such  a  problem.  (I  did  that 
myself,  at  least  once.)  These  wo- 
men are  also  more  likely  to  be  able 
to  leave  the  job  market  entirely. 
Therefore,  for  many  reasons,  sexu- 
al harassment  is  not  as  harsh  an  is- 
sue for  them. 

The  more  male-identified  a  wo- 
man is,  the  less  likely  she  is  to  re- 
spond to  sexual  harassment  as  a 
serious  problem.  The  fact  that  ex- 
periences with  sexual  harassment 
are  so  common  for  women  suggests 
that  the  act  of  harassing  is  quite 
normal  for  men.  When  women  be- 
gin to  think  of  their  fathers,  hus- 
bands, lovers,  etc.  as  the  people  do- 
ing the  harassing,  resistance  stiff- 
ens. Defenses  that  place  the  blame 
on  women  are  developed. 

To  combat  this  resistance,  it  is 
necessary    to    break    through 


people's  tendency  to  view  them- 
selves and  those  around  them  per- 
sonally, outside  of  structural,  poli- 
tical context.  This  type  of  cons- 
ciousness-raising, which  has  been 
so  basic  to  feminism,  can  mobilize 
a  great  amount  of  energy  around 
the  sexual  harassment  issue.  It 
should  focus  on  the  use  of  sexual 
standards  and  sexual  demands  on 
women  workers  by  male  superiors 
as  an  instrument  to  divide  women 
and  to  maintain  male  superiority. 
When  standards  of  physical  attrac- 
tiveness are  used  as  hiring  and  pro- 
motion criteria,  women  are  set 
against  one  another  in  competitive 
and  self-destructive  ways.  None  of 
us  is  ever  young  enough,  or  beauti- 
ful enough,  to  work  without  inse- 
curity about  being  replaced  by 
someone  more  attractive.  The  en- 
ergy women  devote  to  maintaining 
or  enhancing  their  physical  appear- 
ance may  very  well  cause  their  act- 
ual work  performance  to  suffer. 

At  the  Working  Women  United 
speak-out,  women  spoke  about  the 
"other  side"  of  sexual  harassment: 
being  rejected  as  a  worker  because 
one  is  "unattractive."  They  felt  re- 
sentment of  the  men  in  power  who 
made  those  judgments,  but  they  al- 
so felt  resentment  of  the  women 
who  were  hired  because  of  the  way 
they  look.  This  jealousy  and  compe- 
tition keeps  women  fighting  among 
themselves,  and  not  questioning 
the  standards  men  are  using  or 
their  right  to  use  them. 

Feminists  should  also  regard  sex- 
ual harassment  as  a  workplace  or- 
ganizing issue.  We  should  push  for 
its  recognition  as  a  serious  griev- 
ance, an  intolerable  working  condi- 


lllQuesi 


tion.  We  should  make  it  clear  that 
sexual  exploitation  of  workers  is 
not  a  joke. 

Recognition  and  discussion  of  the 
issue  in  workplaces  is  important,  so 
that  women  do  not  feel  guilt  or  fear 
when  they  complain  about  sexual 
harassment.  And  it  is  important  to 
provide  organized  support  for  indi- 
vidual cases,  to  follow  up  com- 
plaints and  to  insure  the  develop- 
ment of  workplace  policies  that 
make  sexual  harassment  unaccept- 
able. 

Beyond  the  workplace,  public  ed- 
ucation campaigns  are  necessary.  If 
public  harassment  is  continually 
presented  as  a  joke,  or  an  accept- 
able part  of  women's  lives,  or  some- 
thing for  which  women  are  to 
blame,  individual  women  will  re- 
main silent.  Those  who  do  object  to 
sexual  harassment  will  not  receive 
necessary  social  support.  Feminists 
should  use  available  media  to  pub- 
licize and  explain  the  issue,  to  let 
women  know  that  they  are  not 
alone  and  that  they  are  not  at  fault. 

It  is  important  that  such  publicity 
does  not  focus  on  blaming  or  attack- 
ing individuals.  The  frequency  of 
sexual  harassment  suggests  that 
virtually  all  men  are  actual  or  poten- 
tial harassers.  What  is  necessary,  in- 
stead, is  an  approach  that  analyzes 
the  power  situation  at  work,  ex- 
poses and  destroys  the  stereotypes 
about  women  workers,  and  sug- 
gests collective  efforts  at  changing 
the  work  situation. 

Sexual  harassment  is  an  extreme- 
ly powerful  issue;  it  clarifies  men's 
definition  of  women,  as  well  as  the 
power  relationship  between  the 
sexes.    Because   it   deals   with   wo- 


men's economic  existence,  it  is  an  is- 
sue that  can  tie  together  our  exper- 
ience as  workers  and  as  women. 

Sexual  harassment  has  been  pres- 
ent as  a  problem,  but  invisible  as  an 
issue.  This  is  because  men  and  wo- 
men have  accepted  the  idea  that 
men  are  entitled  to  take  the  sexual 
initiative,  especially  when  they  are 
"paying."  Women  have  not  mobi- 
lized around  the  sexual  harassment 
issue  because  it  has  been  seen  as  an 
individual  difficulty,  and  its  conse- 
quences, even  to  individuals,  have 
not  been  acknowledged.  By  making 
the  consequences  clear,  and  by  link- 
ing this  issue  to  the  basic  power  re- 
lationships between  the  sexes,  femi- 
nist analysis  and  action  around  the 
issue  can  develop. 

The  issue  of  sexual  harassment  was  de- 
veloped by  the  Working  Women  United  In- 
stitute and  by  Lin  Farley,  Susan  Meyer, 
Karen  Sauvigne  and  Carmita  Wood. 
These  women  and  others  helped  found  the 
institute,  put  on  the  first  Speak-Out  on 
Sexual  Harassment,  gathered  the  data  dis- 
cussed in  this  article,  and  first  brought  the 
issue  to  public  attention.  Lorraine  Hodgson 
did  the  computer  analysis  of  the  data,  and 
was  a  great  help  in  interpreting  the  results. 

The  Working  Women  United  Institute 
will  be  doing  further  research  in  the  area  of 
sexual  harassment  as  well  as  education  and 
litigation  necessary  to  bring  the  problem  to 
public  consciousness.  The  WWUI  hopes  to 
serve  as  a  national  resource/ action  center  to 
provide  support  for  women  interested  in  or- 
ganizing in  the  workplace.  The  institute 
will  be  fully  operational  by  the  fall  of 
1977.  Project  ideas  are  welcome  and  money 
is  needed.  For  more  information,  contact: 

Working  Women  United  Institute 

P.O.  Box  732 

Ithaca,  New  York  14850 


Sexual  Harassment/23 


Footnotes 


1.  Data  used  in  this  paper  come  from  two 
surveys  conducted  by  the  Working  Women 
United  Institute.  The  questionnaire  was 
completed  by  50  food-service  workers  at 
SUNY  Binghamton,  and  by  100  women  who 
attended  the  Speak-Out  on  Sexual  Harass- 
ment. 

2.  This  is  hardly  a  new  idea.  See  writings 
by  Emma  Goldman,  Charlotte  Perkins  Gil- 
man,  and  Simone  de  Beauvoir,  as  well  as 
many  more  recent  feminist  theorists.  In  a 
capitalist  society,  where  relations  between 
people  occur  in  the  context  of  commodity 
exchanges,  the  prostitution  exchange  is  only 
a  specific  example.  It  is  based  on  the  assump- 
tion that  women  in  our  society  most  often 
have  sexuality  (including  reproduction)  as 
their  most  "marketable"  commodity. 

3.  Blau,  Francine,  "Women  in  the  Labor 
Force:  An  Overview,"  in  Freeman,  Jo,  Wo- 
men: A  Feminist  Perspective  (Palo  Alto:  Mayfield, 
1975),  p.  222. 

4.  Hill,  Monica,  The  Woman  Worker,  (Radical 
Women)  p.  4. 

5.  Shortridge,  Kathleen,  "Working  Poor 
Women,"  in  Freeman,  op.  cit.,  p.  248. 

6.  Stein,  Robert,  "The  Economic  Status  of 
Families  Headed  by  Women,"  Monthly  Labor 
Review,  93  (December,  1970).  p. 7. 

7.  Obviously,  these  customs  are  related  to 
our  conceptions  of  male  and  female  sexual- 
ity. It  is  naive  to  think,  however,  that 
changing  ideas  about  women's  sexual  needs 
and  capacities  will  be  sufficient  to  alter  these 
behavior  patterns,  without  an  accompanying 
change  concerning  women's  economic  de- 
pendence on  men. 

8.  Changes  in  rape  laws  are  being  consid- 
ered in  Florida,  California,  and  the  District 
of  Columbia.  Rape  in  marriage  is  also  a  crime 
in  South  Australia. 

9.  Maynard,  Joyce,  "The  Liberation  of  To- 
tal Women,"  New  York  Times  Magazine,  Sep- 
tember 28,  1975,  pp.  45-46. 

10.  Bryan,  James,  "Apprenticeships  in  Pros- 
titution," Social  Problems,  (Winter  1965). 

11.  "Robert  Victor"  in  Terkel,  Studs,,  Work- 
ing, (New  York:  Pantheon  Books  1972),  p. 
58. 

Dierdre  Silverman  teaches  sociology  and 
feminist  studies  at  Ithaca  College.  She  was 
a  founding  member  of  Working  Women 
United. 


U.S.  Postal  Service  Statement  of  Ownership,  Management, 
and  Circulation. 

Title  of  publication:  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
Date  of  filing:  October  1,  1976 
Frequency  of  issue:  quarterly 

Location  of  known  office  of  publication:  1901  Que  St.  N.W., 
Washington,  D.C.  20009 

Headquarters  or  general  business  offices  of  the  publishers: 
same  as  above 

Publisher:  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  P.O.  Box  8843, 
Washington,  DC.  20003 

Editor:  Charlotte  Bunch,  1901  Que  St.  N.W.,  Washington, 
D.C.  20009 

Managing  Editor:  Beverly  J.  Fisher,  1901  Que  St.  N.W., 
Washington,  D.C.  20009 

Owner:  Quest:  a  feminist  querterly,  Inc.,  P.O.  Box  8843, 
Washington,  D.C.  20003;  no  stockholders.  Non-profit  tax 
exempt  educational  organization  under  section  501(c)(3). 
Known  bondholders,  mortgages,  security  holders:  none 
The  purpose,  function,  and  non-profit  status  of  this  organi- 
zation and  the  exempt  status  for  Federal  income  tax  pur- 
poses have  changed  during  preceding  12  months:  Final  de- 
termination that  (we)  are  not  a  private  foundation  within 
the  meaning  of  section  509  (a)  of  the  Internal  Revenue 
Code  because  (we)  are  an  organization  of  the  type  described 
in  section  509(a)(2). 


Extent  and  Nature                 Average  no. 

Actual  no. 

of  Circulation                       copies  each  is- 

copies of  single 

sue 

during  pre- 

issue  published 

ced 

ing  12  mos. 

nearest  to 
filing  date 

Total  no.  of  copies  printed 

5,128 

6,240 

Paid  Circulation 

1.  Sales    through   dealers 

and  carriers,  street  vendors 

and  counter  sales 

1,648 

1,886 

2.  Mail  subscriptions 

1,784 

1,705 

Total  paid  circulation 

3,437 

3,591 

Free  distribution  by  mail 

carrier  or  other  means-  sam- 

ples,    complimentary,     and 

other  free  copies 

305 

478 

Total  Distribution 

3,717 

4,069 

Copies  not  distributed 

1.  Office  use,  left  over, 

unaccounted,  spoiled  after 

printing 

1,364 

2,171 

2.  Returns  from  news 

agents 

47 

0 

Total 

5,128 

6,240 

I  certify  that  the  statements  made  by  me  above  are  correct 
and  complete. 

Beverly  J.  Fisher 
Managing  Editor 


24lQuest 


etters 


Dear  Quest  Magazine, 
I  am  writing  from  a 
feminist  group  which 
organized  a  confer- 
ence last  May  in  Bol- 
ton, Ontario.  The  Con- 
ference became  one  of 
the  most  exciting  fem- 
inist events  that  had 
occured  here  in  a  long 
time.  There  is  definite- 
ly a  spirit  of  renewal 
in  the  air,  and  a  gener- 
al concern  to  struggle 
through  the  often 
heavy  differences  that 
have  emerged  among 
us  in  the  last  several 
years.  In  this  spirit  we 
are  organizing  a  fol- 
low-up weekend, 
"Daughter  of  Bolton/' 
to  be  held  in  Toronto 
the  first  weekend  in 
December.  Our  dis- 
cussions are  going  to 
fall  under  the  broad 
topic  of  "the  institu- 
tion  of  heterosexuali- 

ty." 

I  am  writing  to  you 
specifically  because 
we  have  been  xeroxing 
articles  from  Quest: 
for     Bolton     we     used 


Nancy  Hartsock's  Fun- 
damental Feminism 
Process  and  Perspec- 
tive, and  Charlotte 
Bunch's,  Not  For  Les- 
bians...Only;  and  for 
"Daughter  of  Bolton" 
we  are  going  to  use 
Charlotte's  article  in 
the  latest  issue.  By  use 
I  mean  include  in  a 
pre-conference  mail- 
out.  We  therefore  de- 
cided that  we  should 
send  you  something  in 
consideration  for  the 
use  of  your  material, 
and  I  am  enclosing  a 
cheque  for  $150.00.  I 
hope  that  seems  rea- 
sonable to  you. 

Several  women  have 
promised  to  write  pa- 
pers for  the  December 
conference.  If  any- 
thing really  good  is 
done,  we'll  see  about 
sending  it  on.  In  the 
meantime,  congratu- 
lations on  a  good  mag- 
azine. You  have  a  lot  of 
readers  here. 

In  sisterhood, 
Debra  Curties 
Toronto,  Ontario 


Sisters: 

The  day  after  I  re- 
turned your  question- 
naire, my  new  Quest 
arrived,  and  I  have  an 
added  comment.  I 
have  always  felt  that  a 
lot  of  the  articles  in 
Quest  were  incredibly 
hard  reading  (and  if  I, 
an  academic,  find 
them  tough  going,  I 
imagine  that  the  aver- 
age woman  is  inclined 
to  skip  them  by).  This 
had  really  troubled 
me,  and  I  have  wor- 
ried that  this  barrier 
of  communication 
might  prevent  the 
spread  of  theory/ideo- 
logy etc.  So  I  was  real- 
ly heartened  to  read 
both  the  article  on  fem- 
inist presses  and  Alph- 
abet Soup — both  used 
new  sorts  of  formats 
and  made  potentially 
heavy  articles  very 
easy  reading.  I  think 
that  you  should  try  to 
make  a  priority  of 
finding  new  reason- 
able ways  to  commu- 
nicate    feminist    theo- 


Letters/25 


ry — until  we  develop 
such  means  we  will  ex- 
clude most  women 
from  a  crucial  part  of 
feminism,  and  that  ex- 
clusion could  destroy 
us  in  the  end. 
Thanks, 

Name  Withheld 
Toronto,  Ontario 

The  following  are  a  few 
excerpts  from  the  Readers' 
Survey.  We  have  chosen  a 
sample  of  comments  and  crit- 
icism to  illustrate  the  great 
diversity  of  replies  we've  re- 
ceived: 

"Of  the  feminist  pub- 
lications which  I  have 
seen,  Quest  seems  to 
have  a  unique  place  in 
that  it  is  not  a  newspa- 
per, nor  is  it  the  organ 
of  an  organization,  nor 
is  it  a  scholarly  journal. 
Rather,  it  has  been  a 
forum  for  thoughtful 
articles,  generally  well- 
written  and  of  a  schol- 
arly yet  unpedantic 
character.  This  lively 
character  should  be  sus- 
tained in  the  future. 

One  comment  which 
I  do  have  concerns  the 
environment  in  which 
it  is  written  and  that  in 
which  it  is  read.  Large 
metropolitan  areas  are 
generally  good  enclaves 
of    feminist    activity. 


Smaller  urban  areas  as 
well  as  country  places 
are  not,  the  exception 
being  feminist  enclaves 
in  the  country  which 
are  rather  rare.  While 
issues  of  survival, 
growth  and  change  are 
important  to  all  femi- 
nist activities,  they  are 
probably  more  acute 
and  naggingly  persis- 
tent in  the  smaller 
areas.  If  there  are  dif- 
ferences, and  I  think 
there  are,  though  I  can 
be  proved  wrong,  might 
not  an  article  or  two  on 
these  differences  be  in 
order?" 

"I  have  often  felt  like 
writing  something  for 
you  but  the  topics  that 
often  move  me  are  eith- 
er not  your  agenda  or  I 
just  don't  trust  that  my 
opinions  and  outlook 
are  feminist  enough.  I 
was  disturbed  by  June 
Arnold's  article  on  fem- 
inist presses.  When  I 
read  it,  I  felt  a  romantic 
rush  —  Yes,  Yes  —  to 
work  on  a  women's 
small  press,  etc...  But  I 
work  on  one  and  there 
is  no  money  in  it,  no 
matter  how  hard  I 
work.  Right  now  I'm 
trying  to  finish  a  re- 
search project. ..I'm 
broke  and  need  money. 


I'd  like  to  know  what 
women's  press  could 
give  me  an  advance,  get 
me  some  library  privi- 
leges (I  have  none),  and 
publish  my  results.  I 
think  June  Arnold's  ar- 
ticle is  too  rose-colored. 
It  also  makes  me,  as  a 
small  press  publisher, 
feel  that  my  feminist 
politics  aren't  perfect 
enough.  .  .  ." 

"How  about  inter- 
viewing leaders  of  poli- 
tical women's  organiza- 
tions and  learn  their  re- 
actions to  committed 
feminists  who  don't  join 
their  groups,  and  juxta- 
pose these  comments 
with  interviews  with 
committed  feminists 
who  explain  why  they 
chose  not  to  join  such 
groups.  I'm  against  you 
adding  more  fiction  be- 
cause there's  so  few 
good  examples  pub- 
lished. I  enjoy  Quest  be- 
cause it  is  non-fiction — 
directly  communicat- 
ing I  don't  have  to  read 
how  the  tentacles  of 
lust/guilt/insanity/you- 
name-it  are  slapping  at 
the  tortured  soul  of 
some  poor  woman  who 
finds  it  therapeutic  to 
lay  the  story  of  her  sad 
life  on  me.  I  know  we've 
had/have  it  rough,  and 


26lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


I  prefer  to  make  pro- 
gress in  relieving  this 
condition,  not  wallow- 
ing in  it. 

One  last  comment. 
Quest  is  a  pleasure  to 
read  because  it's  pro- 
fessionally produced 
and  thoughtfully  ed- 
ited. It's  nice  to  know  a 
group  of  women  think 
enough  of  themselves 
to  publish  something 
that  doesn't  have  the 
quality  and  appearance 
of  toilet  paper." 

"Quest  has  served  me 
with  an  example  of  ex- 
cellence and  limitless 
possibility. ...Your  work 
is  a  source  of  guidance 
for  THE  BLUE  LAN- 
TERN and  your  struc- 
ture a  building  block 
for  our  own  structure 

"It  is  always  reassur- 
ing to  hear  people  with 
a  national  perspective 
say  that  we  are  still  vi- 
brant and  strong.  With 
local  perspective,  only, 
to  go  on,  the  failures 
and  decline  in  momen- 
tum can  be  so  depress- 
ing. 

Lesbianism,  marx- 
ism, and  other  isms  are 
all  discussed  in  other 
publications — I  think 
the  strong  point  in 
Quest  is  the  blending." 


A  Limited  Offer  of  Feminist  Classics 

The  demand  for  back  issues  of  Quest  has  grown 
steadily,  but  the  supply  is  shrinking.  Before  they  are 
gone,  we  want  to  make  a  special  offer  to  our  readers. 
We  are  now  preparing  complete  sets  of  volumes  I 
and  II  from  the  remaining  back  issues  of  Quest.  Each 
volume  will  be  mounted  in  convenient,  attractive, 
durable  binders  for  efficient  research,  easy  reference 
and  safe  keeping.  The  few  hundred  sets  remaining 
will  be  offered  to  libraries,  Women's  Studies  depart- 
ments and  collectors,  but  first,  we  are  offering  them 
to  you. 

VOLUME  I:  The  first  four  issues  of  Quest  included  Pro- 
cesses of  Change;  Money,  Fame  &  Power;  Selfhood  of  Wo- 
men; and  Women  and  Spirituality.  A  few  of  the  titles — "The 
Reform  Tool  Kit"  by  Charlotte  Bunch.  ..."Put  Your  Money  Where 
Your  Movement  Is"  by  Beverly  Fisher.  .."Class  Realities" by  Kar- 
en Kollias.  .."New  Visions  of  Spiritual  Power"  by  Dorothy  Riddle 
. .  .The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion"  by  Mary  Daly 
. .  ."The  Good  Fairy"  by  Rita  Mae  Brown. .  ."Women's  Health  Poli- 
tics" by  Frances  Hornstein. .  ."The  Beguines:  A  Medieval  Women's 
Community"  by  Gracia  Clark. .  ."Dimensions  of  Spirituality"  by 
Judy  Davis  and  Juanita  Weaver. 

VOLUME  II:  The  second  year  of  Quest  included  Future  Vi- 
sions; Theories  of  Revolution;  Organizations  and  Strat- 
egies; and  Leadership.  A  few  of  the  titles— "Freestanding:  Jac- 
qua's  Story"  by  Sally  Gearhart.  .."Witch  is  to  Womon  as  Womb  is 
to  Birth"  by  Z.  Budapest. .  "The  Future  of  Female  Separatism"  by 
Lucia  Valeska... "Nof  For  Lesbians  Only"  by  Charlotte  Bunch... 
"Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism"  by  Joan  Landes. . . 
"Designs  for  Income  Sharing"  by  Caroline  Sparks,  Bar- Ami  Bar- 
On  and  Cherlyn  B.  Paul. .  ."Reflections  on  Science  Fiction"  by  Jo- 
anna Russ. .  ."The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader"  by  Ber- 
tha Harris. 

UNTIL  THEY  ARE  GONE  these  sets  will  be  sold  at 
$25.00  each  or  both  volumes  for  $45.00.  Reserve  your  set 
now.  Fill  in  the  coupon  below  and  return  it,  with  your 
check,  today. 

Name 

Address 

Zip 

Circle  your  order  and  include  check  made  payable  to  Quest. 

Please  send   Vol.    I   Please  send   Vol.   II   Please  send  Vol.   I  &  II 
$25.00  $25.00  $45.00 


Letters/27 


WhoWants  a  Piece  g) 


By  MARILYN  FRYE 


For  feminists,  the  permanent 
moral  problem  of  how  to  live  be- 
comes the  problem  of  how  to  live  in* 
accord  with  feminist  values;  we 
have  to  subsist  by  means  which  are 
harmonious  with  these  values,  and 
we  have  to  live  well  enough  to  have 
resources  for  change  and  for  en- 
during processes  and  events  precip- 
itated by  our  own  movement.  In 
short,  we  need  more  than  subsis- 
tence, we  are  committed  to  getting 
it  in  wholesome  ways,  and  we  must 
manage  all  of  this  now,  within  a 
hostile  sexist  society.  Looking 
about  at  people's  lives  generally,  it 
seems  that  requiring  more  than 
subsistence  is  a  considerable  lux- 
ury, and  so  it  can  seem  that  a  femi- 
nist ethic  which  presupposes  that 
luxury,  is  necessarily  elitist.  There 
is  truth  in  this,  but  it  is  not  the  last 
word.  For  one  thing,  revolution 
may  in  fact  be  something  of  a  luxury 
— its  moment  is  not  to  be  found  a- 
mong  the  absolutely  destitute.  And 
furthermore,  if  having  resources 
beyond  the  requirements  of  materi- 
al subsistence  is  deemed  a  luxury, 
then  a  great  many  of  us  were  born 
to  that  luxury  as  surely  as  we  were 
born  to  our  oppression  as  women, 
and  we  had  better  understand  what 
it  means  and  what  we  should  do 
with  it. 

For  some  of  us  these  dilemmas 
arise  concretely  in  the  matters  of 
work  and  privilege.  One  apparently 
rich  resource  which  many  feminists 


have,  have  access  to,  or  aspire  to,  is 
a  situation  in  an  establishment  in- 
stitution or  profession.  Attractions 
include  salaries,  fringe  benefits,  of- 
fices and  supplies,  postage,  secre- 
tarial services  and  assistants,  trans- 
portation services,  contacts  with 
other  persons  similarly  situated, 
and  respectability.  But  there  are 
feminists  who  have  been  wary  of 
this,  and  have  been  inclined  to  re- 
ject such  situations  or  aspirations, 
as  part  of  their  rejection  of  class 
privilege. 

Elimination  of  class  privilege,  a- 
long  with  race  privilege,  is  certainly 
a  feminist  goal;  if  we  ignore  it  we 
will  find  ourselves  outmaneuvered 
by  a  strategy  of  sex-integration  in 
middle  bureaucracy,  which  would 
strengthen  white  middle-class 
dominance  and  divert  the  force  of 
radical  feminism.  Part  of  our  de- 
fense against  this  is  steady  aware- 
ness of  class  and  race.  Class  privi- 
lege is  offensive;  but  privilege  is  itself 
an  odd  sort  of  self-regenerative 
thing  which,  once  youVe  got  it, 
cannot  be  simply  shucked  off  like  a 
too-warm  jacket. 

Privilege  in  general  is  maintained 
by  its  exercise.  It  must  remain  sub- 
stantially unquestioned  by  the  non- 
privileged  and  this  is  achieved 
through  the  constant,  easy,  more- 
or-less  unconscious  exercise  of  it. 
The  constancy  and  the  ease  make  it 
seem  natural,  and  then  render  it  al- 
most imperceptible,  like  the  weight 
of  one's  clothes  on  one's  body.  As  a 
consequence  of  this,  one  cannot 
merely  do  something  which  it  happens 


28lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


heWe? 


to  be  a  privilege  to  be  able  to  do. 
The  "mere"  exercise  of  the  privilege 
positively  contributes  to  the  contin- 
uance of  privilege.  Using  it 
strengthens  it.  This  obviously 
applies  to  taking  a  position  in  an 
establishment  institution:  tak- 
ing such  a  job  not  only  uses  pri- 
vilege but  builds  privilege.  And 
even  this  is  not  the  worst  of  it. 
For,  to  reject  the  position  is  also 
to  exercise  privilege.  As  a  mat- 
ter of  fact,  it  seems  more  of  a 
privilege  to  be  able  to  turn  down  a 
$15,000  a  year  administrative  job 
than  to  be  in  a  position  to  get  it  in 
the  first  place.  If  the  question  even 
arises  for  a  particular  woman,  then 
she  has  privilege;  and  she  cannot  re- 
frain from  having  it,  whichever  de- 
cision she  then  makes.  In  deciding 
not  to  do  some  lucrative  thing  one 
is  privileged  to  do,  one  is  falling 
back  on  other  privileges.  The  person 
who  does  not  take  the  $15,000  job 
can  handle  the  resulting  poverty 
relatively  well  because  the  same 
skills,  training,  connections  and 
style  which  fit  her  for  the  job,  en- 
able her  to  be  a  reasonably  crafty 
consumer  and  manipulator  of  bur- 
eucratic  process,  and  give  her  a  net- 
work of  well-connected  acquain- 
tances; and  she  starts  out  her  pov- 
erty in  good  health  and  forearmed 
with  feminist  analysis.  For  most 
people,  poverty  is  intolerably  de- 
structive; for  most  people,  choosing 
it  would  be  choosing  a  form  of  sui- 
cide. Having  relative  poverty  as  a 
genuine  and  interesting  option  is  it- 
self a  privilege. 


I  see  no  way  to  suddenly  stop 
having  privilege,  or  to  stop  exer- 
cising it.  I  certainly  am  not  saying 
that  privilege  is  ineradicable  abso- 
lutely— but  one  cannot  suddenly, 
by  a  simple  act  of  will,  detach  one- 
self from  it  (which  is  perhaps  one  of 
the  many  reasons  why  "personal" 
solutions  are  inadequate).  And  in 
the  end,  if  poverty  and  detachment 
from  establishment  institutions 
would  eventually  reduce  one  to 
having  no  privilege  it  is  still  far 
from  obvious  that  feminists  should 
do  it.  To  renounce  middle-class  priv- 
ilege is  not  to  extricate  oneself  from 
the  system  but  to  relocate  oneself 
within  it.  Joining  the  lower  classes 
and  recruiting  members  to  them 
may  tend  more  to  the  support  of 
the  system  than  to  its  downfall,  for 
it  may  simply  be  providing  more 
victims  for  the  more  thorough  ex- 
ploitation and  oppression  which 
take  place  at  the  lower  levels  of  the 
hierarchy:  those  more  thoroughly 
oppressed  provide  more  fuel  for  the 
machinery.* 

Impoverishment  and  deprivation 
reduce  power,  vision  and  endurance. 
The  idea  that  Justice  and  Dignity 
require  Suffering  belongs  to  an 
ethic  of  self-denial,  a  slave  morality. 
All  resource  is  tainted  (men  have 
not  yet  been  dispossessed).  We  rec- 
ognize this  and  we  aim  to  change  it. 
Meanwhile  it  is  not  politically  in- 


*This  essay  has  a  long  history  during  which  it  has 
incorporated  contributions  by  C.  Rene  Davis  and  by 
Carolyn  Shafer  who  is,  among  other  things,  my  regu- 
lar-thinking partner.  It  got  valuable  criticism,  also 
from  ]ane  English,  Alison  }aggar,  Sandra  Harding 
and  Adelp  Laslie. 

Here,  in  particular,  this  essay  draws  on  conversa- 
tions with  Carolyn  Shafer. 


Who  Wants  a  Piece  of  the  Pie?/29 


correct  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  re- 
sources available  to  us. 

If  the  foregoing  arguments  are 
sound,  then  holding  a  well-paying 
job  is  not  necessarily  in  violation  of 
feminist  principles.  Since  virtually 
all  well-paying  jobs  are  establish- 
ment jobs,  the  next  rack  of  prob- 
lems is  generated  by  tokenism.  In  vir- 
tually all  middle-income,  middle- 
bureaucracy,  middle-civil-service 
jobs,  a  woman  will  be  a  token  wo- 
man, since  virtually  none  of  these 
are  classified  as  "women's  work/' 
Her  existence  there  as  a  token  wo- 
man works  for  the  good  of  the  in- 
stitution and  the  ill  of  women  gen- 
erally. The  presence  of  the  token  is 
used  to  convince  both  her  employ- 
ers and  the  rest  of  the  world  that 
the  institution  is  not  sexist  and 
need  not  bother  seriously  with  af- 
firmative action,  or  correcting  sala- 
ry inequities  or  sexist  division  of 
work,  et  cetera,  while  it  cheerfully 
continues  to  hire  and  promote  men 
and    serve    male    interests.    These 


goods  done  the  institutions  are 
complemented  by  various  harms 
done  the  token  woman  (one  never 
gets  something  for  nothing).  The 
token  woman  is  generally  quite  iso- 
lated; she  will  not  have  the  rela- 
tions with  her  colleagues  that  the 
men  have,  and  thus  the  whole 
work-situation  is  not  as  rich  in 
stimulation,  assistance,  and  com- 
radeship as  it  is  for  most  men  in 
similar  positions.  This  is  likely  to  af- 
fect the  quality  of  her  work,  or  the 
amount  of  energy  it  takes  to  main- 
tain the  quality  of  her  work.  And 
this  isolation  also  aggravates  the 
constant  problem  of  coping  with 
the  difficult  questions  of  integrity 
and  compromise  that  arise  for  her. 
She  has  to  decide  whether  and  in 
what  degree  she  must  be  a  closet 
feminist,  how  manly  to  act  in  order 
to  be  taken  seriously,  how  much, 
when,  where  and  with  whom  to 
fight  over  sexist  language,  sexist 
jokes,  sexist  gallantry,  sexist  as- 
sumptions,   sexism    in   hiring   and 


30 1  Quest 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


promotion  and  such  consummate 
evils  as  sexist  dress  requirements. 
If  a  woman  fails  to  take  matters  of 
integrity  and  compromise  serious- 
ly, or  makes  the  wrong  decisions, 
she  is  likely  to  slip  into  being  one  of 
the  boys — a  female  man.  If  she 
takes  them  seriously  and  makes  the 
right  decisions,  she  invites  the  fate 
of  being  a  token  feminist,  and  the 
whole  situation  becomes  more 
complicated.  My  situation  as  a  pro- 
fessor at  a  university  exemplifies 
this  nicely. t 

Sometimes  I  catch  a  glimpse  of 
myself  in  a  classroom,  in  a  universi- 
ty building,  clothed  and  fed  and  in- 
sured by  the  university,  before  an 
audience  brought  there  by  the  uni- 
versity; and  I  am  very  seriously 
spelling  out  and  explaining  for 
them  as  persuasively  as  I  can  a  radi- 
cal feminist  perception  of  the 
world,  and  coaching  them  in  the 
arts  of  right  reason  and  clear  vision 
so  they  will  be  able  to  discover  for 
themselves  what  is  going  on  in  this 
sexist  culture.  And  the  better  I  am 
at  teaching  these  things,  the  more 
truth  I  find  and  communicate,  the 
more  good  I  do  the  institution.  The 
fact  that  it  allows  someone  to  stand 
in  it  and  say  those  things  gives  it 
credit  in  the  eyes  of  the  students 
and  the  wider  public.  That  I  am 
there  saying  truths  and  teaching 
women  makes  the  whole  thing 
more  tolerable  for  the  women.  The 
better  I  am,  the  better  they  feel 
about  being  in  the  university,  the 
more  they  are  inclined  to  believe 
that  professors  know  what  they  are 
talking  about,  the  more  they  feel 

^The  subsequent  paragraph  draws  on  conversa- 
tions with  Rene  Davis. 


the  university  really  is  a  place 
where  knowledge  will  bring  them 
freedom.  And  the  stronger  is  the 
institution.  But  among  the  truths  is 
the  truth  that  the  institution  is 
male-dominated  and  directed  to 
serve  the  ends  of  a  male-dominated 
society,  economy  and  culture.  As 
such,  its  existence,  not  to  mention 
its  strength  and  vigor,  is  inimical  to 
the  welfare  of  women,  and  probab- 
ly to  the  survival  of  the  species^.If 
the  women  in  the  class  come  to 
agree  with  me  in  belief  and  percep- 
tion, they  must  see  me  then  as  an 
absurd  figure.  For  I  am  just  that.  I 
can  try  to  see  myself  as  someone 
working  as  an  undercover  agent, 
fomenting  restlessness  and  stirring 
up  radical  sentiment  and  anger, 
working  as  a  traitor  from  within,  as 
an  agent  of  the  new  order....  But 
that  gratifying  fantasy  is  absurdly 
counterbalanced  by  the  fact  that  I 
am  doing  all  this  fomenting  quite 
openly,  in  the  pay  of  the  institution, 
with  the  blessing  of  the  patriarchy, 
in  the  context  of  a  grading  system, 
and  with  the  students  learning 
through  all  of  this  that  the  univer- 
sity is  a  good  place,  a  place  where 
freedom  reigns.  The  university  is  in 
the  business  of  authority;  by  be- 
stowing its  authority  on  selected  to- 
ken representatives  of  non-stan- 
dard views,  it  enhances  its  own  au- 
thority, which  is  used  and  designed 
to  be  used  in  the  maintenance  and 
justification  of  male  hegemony  over 
knowledge. 

Tokenism  is  painful,  and  either 
resolution  of  the  problems  of  integ- 
rity and  compromise — joining  the 
boys  or  becoming  a  token  feminist 
— immerses  the  woman  in  the  ab- 
surdity. For  the  token  feminist,  the 


Piece  of  Pie/31 


thing  must  eventually  come  down 
to  the  question  of  when,  over  what 
issues,  and  with  what  provocation, 
to  fight  the  battle  which  will  lose 
her  her  job;  or  when  to  reject  the 
absurdity  and  resign.  It  is  inevitable 
that  it  comes  to  this  question.  If  she 
is  a  feminist  her  tolerance  for  sexist 
abuse  must  have  a  limit;  if  she  is 
unable  or  unwilling  to  risk  her  job, 
she  has  no  limit;  if  she  can  risk  it 
she  eventually  will. 

The  conclusion  here  is,  of  course, 
that  a  feminist  should  not  be  too 
dependent  upon  her  establishment 
job.  And  this  is  not  peculiar  to  es- 
tablishment jobs;  anyone  living  and 
acting  in  a  manner  calculated  to 
bring  about  changes  in  her  situa- 
tion must  keep  her  options  open. 
Economic  flexibility  is  needed  by 
anyone  who  is  sticking  to  some 
principles.  But  there  are  factors 
contributing  to  dependence  which 
are  of  particular  significance  to  a 
feminist  working  an  establishment 
job — especially  in  the  kind  of  emo- 
tive or  psychological  relationship 
one  has  to  the  institution  in  which 
one  works. 

I  began  to  see  these  questions  of 
relationship  through  discussion 
with  another  woman  professor 
about  the  role  and  life  of  a  feminist 
in  such  a  position.  There  was  much 
agreement,  until  we  got  to  the 
question  of  reforming  the  universi- 
ty. She  claimed  the  university's 
ideals  were  fine  and  could  be  made 
to  live  up  to  them;  that  one  should 
work  for  reform  in  the  institution, 
and  this  would  help  reform  society. 
I  claimed  that  these  "ideals"  were 
not  really  the  university's  ideals  at 
all  but  a  public  relations  hype,  and  it 


was  never  meant  to  live  up  to  them 
and  never  would.  What  emerged 
was  a  crucial  and  profound  differ- 
ence and  affect,  not  of  opinion.  She 
was  loyal  to  the  university  and  its 
professed  ideology,  she  had  faith  in 
the  institution;  I  had  neither  faith 
nor  loyalty.  As  she  talked,  it  became 
clear  that  her  loyalty  was  rather 
like  filial  love  over  patriotism.  I 
have  seen  such  loyalty  also  among 
those  who  have  worked  for  a  long 
time  for  one  of  the  large  paternalis- 
tic corporations. 

The  pathology  of  institutional 
loyalty  seems  to  come  from  at  least 
three  sources.  First,  the  institution 
keeps  the  person  on  the  payroll,  in- 
creasing salary  and  benefits  a  little 
faster  than  the  cost  of  living  goes 
up.  Second,  there  is  the  matter  of 
exclusivity,  of  fraternal  bonding, 
especially  in  loyalty  to  a  profession. 
This  has  a  nice  additional  twist 
when  the  subject,  a  sister,  is  being 
taken  in  as  a  brother.  A  third  source 
of  loyalty  lies  in  the  fact  that  one 
gains  status  and  identity  from  one's 
position  in  an  established  institu- 
tion, profession,  or  the  like.  One  is  a 
professor;  one  is  a  physician;  one  is 
the  director  of  the  women's  studies 
program.  The  bestower  of  such 
meaning  and  identity  is  the  besto- 
wer of  self-respect,  of  personhood 
(or  it  seems  to  the  love-struck  em- 
ployee). One  is  grateful,  and  in- 
debted, almost  as  to  one's  heavenly 
creator. 

An  institution,  profession,  corpo- 
ration or  such,  to  which  one  feels 
loyal,  which  one  loves,  has  a  great 
deal  more  than  mere  economic 
power  over  one.  The  threat  of  be- 
ing fired,  in  one  form  or  another,  is 


32lQuest 


laced  with  overtones  of  the  threat 
of  rejection  by  a  loved  one,  ostra- 
cism by  the  brotherhood,  and  anni- 
hilation through  loss  of  identity.  I 
believe  that  for  mere  mortals  these 
are  irresistible  forces. 

The  various  sorts  of  dependence 
upon  institutions  which  can  under- 
mine the  feminist's  ability  to  make 
proper  use  of  an  establishment  em- 
ployment as  a  resource  for  herself 
and  the  movement  bear  a  rather 
obvious  similarity  to  the  sorts  of 
dependence  the  stereotypic  wife 
has  on  the  stereotypic  husband. 
She  is  tied  to  him  by  economic  nec- 
cessity  and  by  feelings  of  owing 
him  loyalty  because  he  supports 
her,  and  she  loves  him  because  she 


derives  her  sense  of  meaning,  her 
identity  and  status  from  his  gra- 
cious association  with  her.  The  first 
salvation  of  woman  from  her  fallen 
state,  through  her  love  and  mar- 
riage to  Prince  Charming,  was  a  di- 
saster; re-marrying  Prince  Charm- 
ing now,  deceptively  clothed  as  a 
title  and  a  good  salary,  would  be  a 
disaster  of  the  same  magnitude  and 
type. 

It  is,  I  find,  a  fundamental  differ- 
ence between  me  and  many  other 
feminists  I  know  as  colleagues,  that 
I  judge  the  opposition  of  interests 
between  women  and  sexist  (miso- 
gynist) institutions  to  be  such  that 
we  can  be  united  with  them  in  mat- 
rimony or  brotherhood,  or  alien- 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


Piece  of  Pie/33 


ated  from  them  in  sisterhood.  The 
duality  is  so  sharp  because  these 
anti-woman  institutions  offer  (or 
pretend  to  offer)  livelihood  and 
identity,  and  women,  the  dispos- 
sessed and  invisible,  are  dying  for 
these.  As  a  consequence  of  this  the 
integrity  of  a  feminist  working 
within  such  an  institution  must  de- 
pend on  her  alienation  from  it  and 
the  constancy  of  her  adversarial  re- 
lation with  it.  This  orientation  is 
maintained,  not  negatively  through 
resistance  of  temptation  or  a  sys- 
tem of  coercive  pressures  and 
checks  from  other  feminists,  but 
positively,  through  woman-loving. 
This  woman-loving  that  sup- 
ports one's  spiritual  independence 
of  the  establishment  institutions, 
supports  best  if  it  is  not  closeted. 
The  publicity  of  a  primary  and  lov- 
ing identification  with  women 
places  one  in  a  position  both  with 
respect  to  the  agents  of  the  institu- 
tion and  with  respect  to  other  wo- 
men, of  having  to  live  up  to  it  or  be 
a  fool  or  a  fake.  And  the  openness 
of  one's  woman-loving  feminism  is 
necessary  also  to  be  realizing  one  of 
the  most  important  benefits  one's 
own  establishment  employment  can 
have  for  other  women.  This  is  the 
benefit  of  space  in  which  they  can 
be  women  and  feminists  without 
fatal  opposition  and  deprecation. 
One's  status,  authority,  recognition 
and  power,  however  modest,  are 
conveyed  to  those  with  whom  one 
is  identified.  Respectability,  like 
guilt,  travels  by  association,  with- 
out specific  effort  and  without  spe- 
cific control;  and  respectability  pur- 
chases space.  Every  time  one  woman 
moves  or  acts,  she  makes  room  for 


other  women  to  move,  to  act,  to  be 
— if  her  womanness  is  overtly  pres- 
ent as  a  salient  factor  in  the  situa- 
tion, and  not  if  she  is  masquerading 
as  a  man  or  a  neuter. 

The  material  benefits  of  estab- 
lishment jobs  include  the  income, 
the  insurance,  the  access  to  dupli- 
cating machines  and  space  for  meet- 
ings, the  material  support  of  one's 
feminist  work  through  use  of  paid 
"company-time"  for  work,  organiz- 
ing, prosletyzing,  etc.  One  can  and 
should  share  the  wealth  and  re- 
source within  the  community  of 
feminists  through  income-sharing, 
use  and  support  of  membership  in 
feminist  operations  such  as  credit 
unions,  health  clinics,  woman's  cen- 
ters, bookstores  and  so  on.  And 
one's  position  and  whatever  accu- 
mulation of  savings  it  makes  pos- 
sible can  serve  a  community,  and 
not  just  one  person  or  one  house- 
hold, as  sort  of  cushion  for  emer- 
gencies— medical,  spiritual,  mone- 
tary, cop-and-court,  welfare. "ft 

There  are  material  and  political 
benefits  to  be  derived  from  having 
some  of  us  working  establishment 
jobs.  But  integration  into  the  estab- 
lishment bureaucracies  is  not  wo- 
man's final  answer.  I  do  not  think 
we  can  change  the  existing  govern- 
ment, health,  military,  business  or 
educational  establishments  signifi- 
cantly enough  from  within  to  both- 
er it.  The  internal  structures  of 
these  institutions  are  designed  to 
maintain  a  privileged  elite  and  to  or- 

tfSo  far,  in  my  community,  the  handiest  way  to 
handle  this  seems  to  be  through  share-securing  loans 
through  the  local  feminist  credit  union.  This  is  far 
from  perfect,  but  it  is  much  better  than  strictly  person- 
al control  of  allocation  and  it  spreads  the  benefits  be- 
yond one  social  circle. 


34lQuest 


ganize  even  that  elite  in  dominance- 
subordinance  patterns.  The  health 
and  welfare  of  women  ultimately 
require  entirely  different  ways  of 
organizing  things.  If  we  were  to  try 
to  transform  the  existing  struc- 
tures, our  success  would  depend 
partly  on  enlightenment  but  largely 
on  numbers.  We  would  have  to 
transcend  tokenism.  As  long  as  a 
substantial  majority  of  men  are 
benefitting  from  the  male-domi- 
nance within  the  institutions  and  in 
the  world  served  by  the  institutions, 
and  as  long  as  men  are  in  the  sub- 
stantial majority  in  these  institu- 
tions, there  is  simply  no  reason  why 
they  should  want,  tolerate,  or  en- 
courage enlightenment.  The  struc- 
tures maintain  the  tokenism,  which 
in  turn  protects  the  structures. 

My  conclusion,  for  now,  is  that  a 
feminist    can    conscientiously   hold 


and  use  an  establishment  position,  // 
she  is  simultaneously  cultivating 
skills,  attitudes,  identity  and  an  al- 
ternative community,  with  and  in 
which  she  can  function  without 
that  position,  and  which  will  keep 
her  honest  while  she  has  it.  One 
day,  when  some  who  have  been 
working  straight  jobs,  and  some 
have  not,  and  all  have  been  invent- 
ing new  ways  to  survive  and  thrive, 
and  when  the  evolving  negotiations 
between  my  conscience  and  my  pa- 
tience set  a  new  shit-limit  which  is 
found  unacceptable  by  my  employ- 
ers; one  day  the  time  will  be  right 
for  me  to  leave  my  post  on  the 
boundary  and  move  into  the  new 
space. 

Marilyn  Frye  is  a  philosopher,  writer 
and  teacher,  at  present  working  on  a  collec- 
tion of  feminist  conceptual  sermons. 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


Piece  of  Pie/35 


WeWork^ 
clheyfivfit 


Introduction 

There  are  numerous  aspects  of  women's 
work  that  we  did  not  have  the  space  and/or 
the  articles  to  enable  us  to  discuss  in  detail 
in  this  issue  of  Quest.  Therefore,  we  have 
created  a  section  composed  of  brief  excerpts 
from  various  other  articles,  both  published 
and  unpublished.  The  excerpts  and  the  bib- 
liography are  intended  to  introduce  other  is- 
sues that  deserve  more  attention  in  the  fu- 
ture and  to  make  known  to  our  readers 
other  resources  available  on  this  topic. 

On  Women  and  Capitalism  Today 

Excerpted  from  "Women  in  Today's  Ec- 
onomic Crisis",  by  The  Women's  Work 
Project,  Florence  Dinerstein,  Lori  Helm- 
bold,  Nancy  Wiegersma,  Union  for  Radi- 
cal Political  Economics  Political  Education 
and  Action  Project.  Pamphlet  can  be  order- 
ed from:  Women's  Work  Project,  Box  462, 
Silver  Spring,  Md.  20907  for  35C  plus 
25  C  postage. 

How,  specifically,  does  the  cur- 
rent economic  crisis  affect  women? 
Mostly  by  making  us  work  harder, 
while  our  small  funds  have  to 
stretch  even  further.  Everyone 
knows  that  "a  woman's  work  is 
never  done."  As  women  who  work 
in  the  home,  in  times  of  adversity, 
we  are  forced  to  skimp  and  save,  to 
cut  corners,  to  find  new  methods 


of  living  even  more  cheaply,  just  to 
keep  ourselves  and  our  families  go- 
ing. Women  also  now  do  about  40% 
of  all  paid  work,  but  in  the  current 
economic  crisis,  we  are  losing  the 
employment  gains  we  had  begun  to 
make  in  prosperous  times.  We  are 
now  forced  to  take  lower  paying 
jobs,  or  are  shoved  out  of  the  labor 
force  altogether...  . 

Today,  an  ever-increasing  a- 
mount  of  our  needs  is  supplied  by 
goods  and  services  which  we  pur- 
chase. In  the  capitalist  system  of 
production,  a  worker  sells  her  or 
his  labor  to  an  employer  in  ex- 
change for  a  wage,  that  she  or  he 
needs  for  the  purchase  of  necessi- 
ties of  survival.  But  not  only  do  we 
pay  money  for  numerous  products 
to  maintain  our  homes  and  clothes 
and  bodies,  we  also  pay  for  enter- 
tainment and  recreation  (movies, 
bingo,  television),  for  our  needs  for 
closeness  (therapy  and  encounter 
groups),  and  for  yet  other  problems 
(Weight-Watchers  for  dieters).  Cap- 
italism must  constantly  expand  to 
keep  going,  and  has  expanded  into 
more  and  more  areas  of  our  daily 
lives. 

Though  women's  role  as  direct 
producers  of  goods  in  the  house- 
hold has  diminished,  women's  work 
in  the  home  is  a  key  aspect  of  the 


36lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


capitalist  system  of  production.  The 
work  that  women  do  in  the  home 
raising  children,  doing  housework, 
and  taking  care  of  their  husband's 
physical  and  emotional  needs  is  in 
fact  indispensable  to  the  economy... 

Housework  is  unpaid  labor,  and 
so  is  consumption  work.  Many  of 
the  government's  suggestions  for 
dealing  with  the  current  crisis  of 
inflation  are  directed  to  women's 
role  as  consumers:  shop  more  care- 
fully, buy  more  wisely,  don't  waste 
anything.  Consumption  is  vital  for 
the  capitalist  to  earn  profit.  Women 
simply    are    expected    to    consume 
more  efficiently  now  than  in  times 
of  comparative  affluence...  . 

Outside  the  work  force,  a  high 
percentage  of  women  and  minori- 
ties are  on  fixed  incomes.  These  fix- 
ed incomes  do  not  automatically  rise 
with  the  Consumer  Price  Index,  and 
the  people  who  receive  these  pay- 
ments are  dependent  on  changes  in 
laws  for  any  cost-of-living  raises. 
More  than  25  million  American 
families  receive  fixed  incomes  from 
the  government.  Some  of  the  more 
important  sources  are  from  retire- 
ment, disability,  old  age,  unemploy- 
ment insurance,  and  aid  to  depen- 
dent children  (welfare).  Women 
especially  are  heavily  represented  in 
these  programs.  About  11%  of  wo- 
men, as  opposed  to  less  than  9%  of 
men,  were  over  the  age  of  65  in 
1970.  Further,  a  majority  of  those 
receiving  disability  payments  are 
women.  And  90%  of  the  adults  who 
receive  welfare  payments  are  wo- 
men... . 

In  the  post-war  economy,  more 
and  more  jobs  were  created  in  two 
sectors  of  the  economy  which  pri- 


marily use  women  workers:  clerical 
and  service  work....  It  is  not  an  acci- 
dent that  women  have  entered  the 
labor  force  primarily  in  these  low- 
paying  jobs.  Discrimination  in  the 
capitalist  system  contributes  heavi- 
ly to  the  creation  of  'crowded  occu- 
pations', jobs  which  many  people 
compete  for.  Discrimination  is  a 
controlling  device  which  divides  us 
as  workers  among  ourselves  and 
weakens  our  bargaining  power  rela- 
tive to  the  capitalists.  This  is  how  it 
works:  women  (and  minorities)  are 
traditionally  denied  access  to  certain 
jobs  in  society  such  as  managerial, 
professional  and  other  skilled  posi- 
tions. We  are  also  denied  the  train- 
ing needed  to  perform  these  jobs, 
but  even  if  we  obtain  the  training, 
often  the  jobs  still  are  refused  us.  As 
a  consequence,  we  are  'crowded'  in- 
to the  low  skill  occupations  where 
we  compete  with  one  another  for 
the  available  jobs.... 

What  happens  to  all  these  wo- 
men's jobs  in  a  Crisis?. ..Unemploy- 
ment among  adults  over  20  usually 
hits  black  women  (who  are  more 
likely  to  be  working  for  wages  than 
white  women)  and  other  minority 
women  the  hardest.  (It  is  hard  to  be 
precise,  however,  since  "minority" 
includes  women  who  are  black,  Asi- 
an, and  native  American;  but  not 
Puerto  Rican,  Chicana  and  other 
Spanish-surnamed  people  who  are 
included  in  the  white  category). 
Third  World  men  and  women  un- 
der 20  years  have  the  highest  un- 
employment rates  of  all.  Wage 
scales  (how  much  each  group  on 
average  earns)  for  year-round, 
full-time  employees  correspond  to 
unemployment      patterns:      white 


We  Work,  They  Profit/37 


men  are  highest  paid,  followed  by 
Third  World  men,  white  women; 
Third  World  women  are  again  on 
the  bottom.  The  less  we  earn,  the 
less  secure  our  jobs  are!... 

Unemployment  rates  already 
have  increased  to  over  8%  for  the 
entire  labor  force,  and  even  these 
levels  consistently  understate  the 
amount  of  unemployment,  partic- 
ularly for  women,  because  of  the 
methods  used  for  counting  the  un- 
employed. Any  person  who  work- 
ed one  hour  or  more  during  the 
survey  week  is  considered  to  be 
employed.  Any  person  who  is  not 
actively  looking  for  work  because 
she  or  he  has  become  discouraged 
at  not  finding  work  is  considered 
out  of  the  work  force,  and  not 
therefore  unemployed.  In  1973, 
minorities  were  over  28%  of  dis- 
couraged workers,  and  women 
were  over  65%. 

On  Global  Corporations, 
Third  World  and  White  Workers 

Excerpted  from  "Women,  Work  and 
Politics  in  the  US. "  Speech,  at  Theology  in 
the  Americas  Conference,  Detroit,  August, 
1975  by  Michele  Russell.  Printed  in  Rad- 
ical Religion,  Fall,  1976. 

In  terms  of  annual  sales  vis-a-vis 
gross  national  product,  General 
Motors  has  become  bigger  than 
Switzerland,  Pakistan  and  South 
Africa  combined;  Royal  Dutch  Shell 
is  bigger  than  Saudi  Arabia.  Gener- 
al Instruments  Corporation  is  per- 
fectly capable  of  closing  down  its 
New  England  operations  and  idling 
3000  workers  there  while  creating 
5000  jobs  in  Taiwan  at  one-fifth  the 


wages.  The  availability  of  cheap  fe- 
male and  child  labor  is  a  central 
factor  in  these  considerations.... 

In  the  international  social  division 
of  labor  produced  by  the  global  cor- 
porations, women  are  often  a  ma- 
jority of  the  workforce  in  traditional 
industries  such  as  textiles  and  food 
processing.  We  are  also  the  semi- 
skilled white  collar  workforce  un- 
derpinning the  new  computerized 
management  systems  and  financial 
bureaucracies.  Our  economic  des- 
peration continues  to  make  us 
those  who  are  employed  at  the 
lowest  pay  rates  in  rapidly  expand- 
ing labor-intensive  industries  in 
the  Third  World,  such  as  electro- 
nics. Biologically,  women  are  the 
ultimate  source  of  human  regener- 
ation. We  are  the  direct  recipients 
of  the  global  corporations'  popula- 
tion control  schemes  as  well  as 
genetic  experiments  and  consumer 
marketing  strategies  in  the  US  and 
the  Third  World.  In  rural  areas, 
capitalism's  introduction  to  mono- 
culture   as    the    solution    to   food 


381  Quest 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


shortages  has  radically  altered  pat- 
terns of  women's  agricultural  la- 
bor. Every  aspect  of  our  lives  as 
women  has  been  penetrated  and 
conditioned  by  the  organization  of 
these  corporations.  They  have  giv- 
en us  jobs,  a  society  of  relationships 
outside  the  home,  and  an  environ- 
ment of  social  disruption  so  pro- 
found that  our  consciousness  as  a 
group  is  only  at  the  first  stages  of 
formation.  We  have  learned  that 
through  our  labor  we  hold  up  half 
the  sky  and  our  history  has  taught 
us  the  eloquence  of  speaking  bit- 
terness. But  the  complicated  tex- 
ture of  our  lives  remains  hidden 
from  history.... 

By  and  large,  the  Women's  Move- 
ment in  the  US  has  been  content  to 
accept  capitalist  terms  of  incorpor- 
ation; its  development  model  has 
had  a  quantitative  and  accumula- 
tive character  which  assumes  even- 
tual equality  with  the  oppressor.  In 
its  few  transcendent  moments,  it 
has  adopted  a  moral  outrage  poli- 
tics in  which  individual  heroines, 
like  a  Joanne  Little,  who  are  only 
distinguished  by  their  victimiza- 
tion, are  immediately  taken  over  as 
"woman  of  the  year"...  .  Or  femi- 
nists adopt  a  maximalist  rhetoric  in 
which  sexism  gets  elevated  to  the 
primary  contradiction  in  the  world 
since  time  immemorial.  They  have 
argued  for  the  colonial  status  of 
women  as  a  metaphor  rather  than 
a  concrete  historical  condition,  and 
have  often  confused  biology  with 
politics.  I  don't  think  we  have  the 
luxury  to  do  any  of  those  things 
anymore.  It  produces  chaos.  And  it 
is  particularly  confusing  when  we 
try  to  define  "women's  politics"  or 


"women's  issues"  and  then  add  the 
variable  of  race. 

In  my  experience  in  the  Move- 
ment, I  have  seen  black  women 
courageously  attack  the  right  of 
government  to  define  their  chil- 
dren's socialization  in  the  schools. 
They  demanded  community  con- 
trol. They  unmasked  the  racism  in 
the  curriculum  and  the  bankruptcy 
of  the  whole  credentialling  system 
by  proving  their  own  ability  to 
teach.  They  actually  forced  their 
own  access  to  the  educational  pro- 
cess through  para-professionalism 
and  then  wound  up,  in  the  words 
of  one  sister  I  know,  as  "teachers' 
maids,  not  teachers'  aides":  run- 
ning errands,  cleaning  the  class- 
rooms, and  only  accomplishing  the 
further  stratification  of  janitorial 
service.  Reinforced  in  their  chil- 
dren's eyes  as  domestics,  they 
found  themselves  still  under  the 
tutelage  of  white  women  often  half 
their  age  whose  feminist  concerns 
surfaced  in  striking  for  higher  sala- 
ries for  less  work.... 

We  must  ask  ourselves  some  dif- 
ficult questions:  What  makes  the 
black  registered  nurse  resist  hos- 
pital unionization  drives  which 
the  white  Croatian  woman  orderly 
welcomes?  What  perpetuates  the 
tunnel  vision  with  which  white  ca- 
reer women  pressure  their  appor- 
tions to  institute  child  care  facili- 
ties so  as  to  maximize  their  voca- 
tional options  without  regard  to 
the  wage  scales,  welfare  legisla- 
tion, and  institutionalized  values 
which  will  ensure  that  Third 
World  women  will  be  those  tak- 
ing care  of  their  kids?  What 
prompts     black     women     to     say, 


We  Work,  They  Profit/39 


"Please,  Lord,  let  me  have  the  lux- 
ury to  stay  at  home  and  be  a  house- 
wife. ?"  Against  what  historical 
background  should  that  be  judged? 
By  what  feminist  criteria  do  white 
women  celebrate  token  jobs  as 
truck  drivers  when  not  only  the 
mob  connections  but  the  racism  of 
the  trucking  industry  is  legendary 
and  the  unemployment  rate  in  the 
black  community  as  a  whole  con- 
tinues to  be  twice  that  in  the  white? 
None  of  these  are  false  issues. 
They  all  describe  part  of  the  prob- 
lem....Our  problem  is  not  just  that 
the  dominant  patterns  of  socializa- 
tion for  white  women  in  America 
have  been  home-centered,  priva- 
tised, male-dominated,  self-sacrifi- 
cial— they're  all  that  and  more.  And 
they  suffer  cruelly  and  resist  these 
forms  of  exploitation.  It  is  not  just 
that  black  women  in  America  have 
been  on  the  public  auction  block, 
meat  for  sale,  from  day  one.  Slav- 
ery, tenant  farming  and  industrial 
labor  left  little  room  for  bourgeois 
role  differentiation  between  the 
sexes  in  the  black  community.  It's 
not  just  that  in  the  cultural  mystifi- 
cation of  our  society,  black  women 
will  almost  involuntarily  associate 
white  women  with  cloisters  and 
pedestals  and  being  pampered;  and 
white  women  will  flash  "sexual  pro- 
miscuity", ADC,  and  "strength"  in 
characterizing  black  women  as  a 
group.  Black  women  voluntarily 
take  pay  cuts  in  order  to  have  white 
collar  jobs  associated  with  gentility 
while  white  women  voluntarily  sub- 
mit themselves  to  severe  psychologi- 
cal and  physical  hardship,  racing  into 
the  male  preserves  of  the  skilled 
trades,  eager  to  demonstrate  their 


strength  under  the  lash  as  well  as 
enjoying  higher  wages. 

In  present-day  America,  the  black 
community  is  almost  as  socially  and 
economically  stratified  as  the  white 
community.  Black  women,  I'm  here 
to  tell  you,  have  maids  and  they 
have  Tupperware  parties.  And 
white  ADC  mothers  go  hungry  and 
know  the  reality  of  forced  labor.... 

I  touch  on  these  things  in  order  to 
say  to  you  that  in  contemporary 
America  we  experience  at  least  as 
many  varieties  of  subjective  human 
alienation  as  there  are  job  catego- 
ries in  the  system.  Our  immediate 
impulse  as  individuals  fighting  for 
self-respect  is  to  legitimize  only  our 
particular  form  of  victimization.  But 
that  simply  isn't  enough.... 

The  point  is  that  we  ought  always 
to  measure  our  struggles  in  a  collec- 
tive context;  we  ought  always  to 
seek  the  proletarian  standpoint  in 
our  individual  situations,  we  ought 
to  realize  that,  as  Che  Guevara  said: 
"to  be  a  revolutionary,  one  must  be 
guided  by  feelings  of  great  love;" 
and  we  must  never  settle  for  less 
than  the  entirety. 

On  a  Working  Women's  Factory 

Excerpted  from  "When  Workers  Man- 
age" by  Daniel  Zwerdling,  The  Pro- 
gressive July  1974. 

The  women  of  McKaysville  In- 
dustries in  the  north  hill  country  of 
Georgia  are  an  anomaly  in  Ameri- 
can history.  Just  eight  years  ago 
they  were  yanking  900  seams  of 
denim  a  day  under  the  needles  at 
the  nearby  Levi  Strauss  blue-jean 
factory,  trying  to  meet  production 


40/Ques/ 


demands  so  they  would  not  get 
fired,  sneaking  smokes  in  the  toilet 
stalls  so  they  would  not  get  caught, 
and  taking  home  a  $1.25  per  hour 
for  the  privilege  of  having  any 
work  at  all  in  this  jobless  part  of 
Appalachia.  They  went  on  strike. 
Today,  they  are  still  churning  out 
garments— but  this  time  in  a  fac- 
tory which  the  working  women  at 
Levi  founded  and  now  manage 
completely  on  their  own.  The  six- 
year-old  factory  has  struggled,  but 
it  is  surviving — and  testifying  that 
although  there  are  enormous  eco- 
nomic, political,  and  psychological 
obstacles  to  overcome,  working 
people  with  few  resources  but 
skills,  enormous  patience,  and  will- 
ingness to  sacrifice  can  buck  a  giant 
corporation  and  create  their  own 
economic  base.... 

By  most  traditional  American 
business  standards,  the  McCays- 
ville  Industries  operation  is  a  joke. 
The  five  women  who  own  and 
manage  the  factory  work  the  ma- 
chines just  like  the  thirty  others 
they  employ  on  the  factory  floor, 
and  they  pay  themselves  the  same 
rate,  $1.65  an  hour.  Bernice  Rat- 
cliffe  is  boss,  but  in  this  factory  that 
is  hardly  the  word  for  it.  Her  part- 
ners and  fellow  workers  selected 
her.... 

The  factory  had  made  a  few 
thousand  dollars  profit  last  year, 
which  they  plowed  right  back  into 
the  plant.  But  by  any  scales  which 
measure  the  satisfaction  of  the  wo- 
men working  there,  and  the  quality 
of  the  garments  they  produce,  Mc- 
Caysville  Industries  is  a  wonder. 
The  most  extraordinary  thing  is  a 
psychological  climate,  a  relaxed  sort 


of  camaraderie,  which  perhaps  only 
people  who  have  gunned  needles  on 
a  production  line  like  Levi  can  ap- 
preciate.... 

There  is  no  production  standard 
at  the  factory,  so  each  woman 
works  at  her  own  speed....  But  the 
women  actually  end  up  producing 
as  much  per  person  as  large  produc- 
tion factories  in  the  area — and  their 
quality  is  reputedly  tops,  too.... 

The  women  of  McCaysville  In- 
dustries do  not  talk  anymore  about 
whether  they  can  keep  their  com- 
pany alive  but  whether  they  can 
make  it  grow.  They  talk  wistfully 
about  buying  thirty  new  machines 
— "this  man  we  sell  to  says  we  can't 
really  make  any  money  in  this  busi- 
ness until  we've  got  at  least  sixty/7 
Bernice  says  —  and  they  dream  of 
launching  their  own  brand  name 
line  of  clothing  with  their  own  de- 
signs.... 

If  working  women  running  their 
own  factory  is  an  oddity,  she  said, 
she  doesn't  know  quite  why.  "I 
guess,"  Madeleine  said,  "it's  just 
never  been  tested  enough  for 
people  to  know  about  it." 

On  Working  Mothers 

Excerpted  from  an  unpublished  manu- 
script by  Joanna  Knowles. 

The  number  of  working  mothers 
with  children  under  18  reached  13.6 
million  in  1974,  representing  46%  of 
the  total  number  of  mothers  in  the 
United  States.  More  and  more  wo- 
men are  returning  to  work  each 
year  as  their  children  reach  public 
school  age  and  as  the  cost  of  living 
rises.     The     number     of     working 


We  Work,  They  Profit/41 


mothers  without  a  husband  present 
was  11.0  million.  With  alimony  on 
the  decline,  these  women,  with  few 
exceptions,  are  working  out  of  ne- 
cessity. Although  mothers  repre- 
sent 38%  of  all  female  wage  wor- 
kers, and  although  our  needs  and 
the  needs  of  our  collective  27  mil- 
lion children  have  not  been  met,  we 
have  been  relatively  silent.... 

Mothers'  employment  status  or 
'marketability'  is  influenced  drasti- 
cally by  their  children's  pressing 
needs,  which  last  a  continuous  24- 
hour  day.  It  isn't  necessarily  that 
the  children's  care  is  a  mother's  pri- 
mary commitment,  but  that  the 
children  count  on  her,  primarily,  to 
meet  their  needs,  in  other  words,  in 
a  'crunch'  she  will  'come  through.'... 
The  common  'problem'  is  how  do 
we  work  and  take  care  of  the  needs 
of  our  children  —  including  every- 
thing from  taking  some  time  for 
ourselves  to  making  834  meals  a 
year.... 

While  individual  solutions  vary 
according  to  class,  race,  education, 
and  political  stance,  all  mothers 
who  work  have  the  problem  of 
child  care.  Non-mothers  (and  most 
men),  therefore,  have  greater  flexi- 
bility in  job  choice.  When  one  group 
has  less  mobility,  they  soon  become 
exploited.  There  is  no  equal  bar- 
gaining power  between  a  mother 
who  needs  to  work  and  an  employ- 
er who  can  pick  and  choose.  Moth- 
ers are  generally  the  least  market- 
able because  their  options  are  cut 
back  drastically  with  the  time  re- 
straints of  children  and  the  fact 
that  the  hours  which  a  job  requires 
must  coincide  with  the  hours  school 
is  open.  And  the  pay  must  make  the 


work  profitable  after  the  baby  sitter 
is  paid.... 

Some  of  the  services  which 
should  be  available  for  children  of 
working  mothers,  are: 

1.  Free,  high  quality  day  care  cen- 
ters and  schools,  with  transporta- 
tion to  and  from. 

2.  Parents  should  be  compensated 
for  the  costs  of  raising  children. 
(This  is  already  done  to  a  small  ex- 
tent in  Canada). 

3.  Home  nursing  services  to  pro- 
vide care  at  home  when  a  child  can- 
not attend  school  due  to  illness. 

However,  concurrent  with  these 
reforms,  the  attitudes  toward  both 
children  and  mothers  need  revision. 
We  must  seek  to  include  children  in 
our  activities,  not  simply  take  care 
of  them  or  quietly  endure  them.  I 
believe  that  concern  for  children 
may  be  the  strongest  link  among 
women.  It  isn't  a  responsibility  that 
we  should  abdicate  in  search  of  big- 
ger and  better  things.  We  pass  our 
changes  into  their  hands.  Children 
can  be  our  collective  responsibility: 
collective  in  the  purest  sense,  since 
we  cannot  dictate  which  relation- 
ships will  hold  significance  for 
them. 

On  Part-Time  Work 

Excerpted  from  "Are  Working  Women 
Being  Liberated  into  Slavery?"  The  Vil- 
lage Voice,  March  22,  1976,  by  Alex- 
ander Cockburn  and  James  Ridgeway. 

The  troubling  question  now  be- 
ginning to  gnaw  at  the  Women's 
Movement  is  whether  indeed  the 
drive  toward  emancipation  and 
equality  has  not  already  been  sub- 


42lQuest 


sumed  in  the  overall  reorganization 
of  American  capitalism.  To  put  it 
bluntly,  liberation  from  the  home 
and  from  the  man  can  be  retrans- 
lated as  a  form  of  enslavement  in 
the  depressed  areas  of  the  Ameri- 
can economic  system.... 

Several  subtle  trends  are  emerg- 
ing. First  of  all,  there  is  the  evident 
desire  of  business  and  government 
to  hire  women  at  lower  rates  than 
men.  One  example  of  this  is  the 
move  to  replace  full-time  male  em- 
ployees with  part-time  workers  - 
either  men  or  women.  This  can  be 
presented  as  a  progressive  step:  it's 
a  way  of  allowing  women  with 
children  to  have  access  to  part-time 
jobs  better  than  those  now  avail- 
able. It  also  satisfies  certain  desires 


inherent  in  present  life-styles,  with 
male  and  female  partners  shuttling 
between  shared  housework  and 
shared  wage  labor.  Probably  most 
important,  part-time  jobs  may  be 
the  only  way  to  achieve  the  liberal 
goal  of  near  or  full  employment  at  a 
period  when  the  labor  force  is  in 
the  process  of  being  distended  by 
an  enormous  new  influx  of  male 
and  female  recruits. 

But  such  rationalizations  not- 
withstanding, the  practical  political 
consequence  of  part-time  work  is 
simple:  It  lowers  the  costs  of  subsis- 
tence. This  means  social  welfare 
programs  are  reduced  by  the  insis- 
tence that  people  work,  albeit  for 
miserable  rates.  This  is  an  impor- 
tant point.  Government  social  wel- 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


We  Work,  They  Profit/43 


fare  programs  affect  women  far 
more  than  men.  For  instance,  90 
percent  of  adults  receiving  welfare 
payments  are  women.  More  wo- 
men are  alive  over  the  age  of  65, 
and  hence  rely  on  Social  Security, 
Medicare,  etc.  A  majority  of  those 
receiving  disability  payments  are 
women.  The  short-run  prospects 
amount  to  the  tightening  of  a  vi- 
cious circle;  the  social  welfare  pro- 
grams of  the  government  which 
benefit  women  are  sure  to  be  cut. 
With  the  cost  of  living  rising,  wo- 
men alone  or  with  children,  mar- 
ried or  unmarried,  will  be  more  des- 
perate for  work  and  in  all  likelihood 
will  accept  less  pay  and  worse  con- 
ditions to  get  it. 

On  Studies  of  Women  Workers 

The  International  Labor  Office  pub- 
lished a  report  entitled  "Equality  of  Oppor- 
tunity and  Treatment  for  Women  Work- 
ers" (1LO,  Geneva,  1974)  for  its  1975 
conference  held  in  conjunction  with  Inter- 
national Women's  Year.  The  following  ex- 
cerpts are  taken  from  a  critique  of  that  re- 
port presented  to  the  conference  and  written 
by  a  group  of  English-speaking  feminists 
in  Geneva.  (For  a  copy  of  the  full  text,  write 
do  C.R.AC.  7,  Boulevard  Carl  Vogt, 
1205  Geneva,  Switzerland,  and  send 
$1.50).  We  think  their  criticisms  of  this 
report  apply  to  many  studies  on  the  status  of 
women  in  the  U.S.  and  elsewhere. 

As  feminist  women  we  are  com- 
pelled to  raise  issues  with  you.  The 
UN  may  have  declared  1975  as  Wo- 
men's Year,  but  there  is  a  wealth  of 
history,  literature  and  experience 
on  women's  struggles,  transcend- 
ing more  than  a  century,  that  can- 
not   be    ignored.    These    develop- 


ments show  that  the  women's 
movements,  throughout  the  world, 
have  been  and  are  as  diverse  and 
varied  as  the  women  in  them.  Most, 
however,  have  at  least  one  common 
trait:  a  relentless  desire  to  find  al- 
ternative ways  to  work,  to  raise 
children,  to  relate  to  men  and  wo- 
men -  in  short  alternative  ways  to 
live.... 

The  opening  sentence  [of  the  sec- 
tion on  "Social  Infrastructure"]  sets 
the  retrogressive  tone:  "The  key  is- 
sue for  working  women  is  still  how 
to  reconcile  their  home  and  family 
roles  with  their  new  occupational 
status."  First,  why  is  this  an  issue 
for  women  and  not  men?  Second, 
what  is  new  about  women's  occupa- 
tional status?  The  UNESCO  Couri- 
er published  a  chronology  of  wo- 
men's emancipation  and  gave  1788 
as  the  date  in  France  when  wo- 
men's access  to  employment  was 
first  discussed;  it  is  hardly  neces- 
sary to  point  out  women's  contri- 
bution to  the  industrial  revolution, 
etc.  The  lack  of  an  historical  per- 
spective, so  egregious  in  this  re- 
port, is  especially  reprehensible  in 
this  section.  It  is  not  understood 
why  the  time  horizon  has  been 
limited  to  the  past  ten  years,  there- 
by obscuring  the  many  swings  in 
opinion  about  women  workers  and 
the  provisions  made  for  them. 

For  example,  the  section  on  child 
care  omits  any  mention  of  provi- 
sions during  the  second  world  war 
when  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
married  women  with  children 
worked  outside  their  homes.  Once 
again  the  discussion  is  cast  outside 
the  framework  of  economic  and 
industrial  developments.... 


44lQuest 


The  implications  of  the  present 
family  unit  and  structure  for  wo- 
men's personal  and  professional 
lives  are  never  raised.  The  fami- 
ly's role  in  maintaining  the  pres- 
ent economic  and  political  system 
is  never  mentioned,  nor  is  the 
family  ever  questioned  as  a  tool 
for  ensuring  the  well-being  of  the 
present  (and  future)  male  labour 
force.... 

Societies  are  assumed  to  be 
classless,  relations  between  coun- 
tries disappear,  and  the  words  im- 
perialism' and  'oppression'  are 
banished  from  vocabulary.  At  no 
time  is  the  position  of  women  vis-a 
-vis  men  in  the  Third  World  dis- 
cussed, let  alone  the  position  of  the 
Third#World  vis-a-vis  the  First.  Prob- 
ably the  most  commonly  used  word 
is  'integration'  yet  its  consequences 
are  never  examined  or  questioned. 
The  possibility  is  never  entertained 
that  integration  is  a  sop  disguised 
as  a  promise  to  minority  groups 
with  the  intention  of  mystifying 
(and  possibly  permanently  obscur- 
ing) the  fact  that  their  minority  sta- 
tus is  a  consequence  of  the  organi- 
sation of  the  society  that  the  major- 
ity constitutes.  The  possibility  that 
some  women  might  be  worse  off 
for  being  integrated  into  the  op- 
pressed situation  of  their  husbands, 
fathers  and  brothers  is  never  men- 
tioned. The  fact  that  some  minority 
groups  reject  the  culture  of  the 
majority  and  reject  integration  is 
never  raised.  The  idea  that  some 
women  consider  they  have  some- 
thing new  to  offer  which  is  differ- 
ent from  the  norm  of  male-domi- 
nated societies  is  not  conceived. 
The  concept  of  liberation  is  never 


described;  the  report  is  limited  to 
the  elimination  of  discrimination 
and  the  promotion  of  equality.... 

The  discussions  of  flexibility  in 
work,  time  and  labour-saving  de- 
vices, and  time-off,  all  reflect  the 
basic  attitude  towards  women  tak- 
en in  this  report:  women  are  margi- 


n 


9e 


JKk 


nal....It  is  perhaps  this  secondary 
importance  assigned  to  women  that 
accounts  for  the  poverty  of  the  dis- 
cussion; for  example,  under  labour- 
saving  devices,  not  even  the  barest 
suggestion  is  made  that  architects, 
builders  and  designers  might  take 
these  problems  into  account,  that 
building  materials  and  interior  de- 
cors might  incorporate  labour-sav- 
ing (and  safety!)  features.... 

It  is  crucial  that  research  on  wo- 
men be  pursued  by  women  who  are 
feminists  because  of  the  distortions 
frequently  introduced  into  the 
studies  by  those  who  are  not.  For 
one,  women's  contribution  to  socie- 
ty is  often  analysed  without  refer- 
ence to  women's  subordination  and 
serious  consideration  of  its  effects 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


We  Work,  They  Profit/45 


on  the  whole  of  society.  Social 
change  has  involved  women's  tran- 
sition from  one  subordinate  posi- 
tion to  another  -  the  strains  created 
by  this  transition,  and  women's  re- 
sistence  to  or  acceptance  of  it  have 
influenced  the  nature  of  social 
change.  A  second  distortion  is  that 
women  tend  to  be  analysed  as  pas- 
ive  objects  of  history  rather  than 
as  social  actors.  (N.B.  Subordina- 
tion and  passivity  are  not  synono- 
mous.)  A  third  distortion  is  to 
equate  a  study  of  women  with  a 
description  of  the  ways  in  which 
women's  position  differs  from 
men's.  In  this  faulty  approach, 
equality  is  mistaken  for  emancipa- 
tion, yet  women  discussing  their 
social  situation  rarely  come  to  the 


conclusion  that  all  would  be  solved 
if  they  became  just  like  men  -  on 
the  contrary,  it  would  solve  noth- 
ing. A  fourth  distortion  is  the  sub- 
tle slip  from  discussion  of  'women' 
to  considerations  of  'family'.  Alto- 
gether ignored  or  treated  as  a  quite 
separate  question  are  the  actions  of 
women  as  groups  or  individuals 
outside  the  family.... 

In  the  final  section  the  report 
once  again  contradicts  itself,  this 
time  in  a  most  fundamental  way. 
Quite  unexpectedly,  the  idea  that 
women's  problems  are  those  of  so- 
ciety as  a  whole  is  introduced.  We 
agree  with  this  and  ask  why,  then, 
the  whole  report  is  narrowly  fo- 
cused on  women?  Why  has  this  not 
been  said  at  the  outset?...  Why  is 


A6\Quest 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


not  the  whole  report  cast  in  this 
frame  of  reference?...  Why  is  there 
not  at  least  the  idea  that  women  are 
best  placed  to  carry  this  research 
out  themselves?  We  can  only  con- 
clude that  this  report  supports  and 
reinforces  the  status  quo;  we  might 
call  it  a  Whitewash  for  Internation- 
al Women's  Year. 

Quest  Quiz  on 
Workplace  Questions 

1.  What  percentage  of  women  in 
the  U.S.  are  in  the  labor  force? 
(a)  35%  (b)40%  (c)  46%  (d)  54% 

2.  Minority    women    have    labor 

force  participation  rates than/as 

white  women? 

(a)  higher  (b)  about  the  same  (c)low- 
er 

3.   %  of  women  work  full  time  as 

opposed  to  part  time. 

(a)  50%  (b)  63%  (c)  72%  (d)  80% 

4.   %  of  women  with  school  age 

children  are  in  the  labor  force, 
(a)  38%  (b)  49%  (c)  53%  (d)  62% 

5.   %  of  women  will  work  for 

wages  at  some  point  in  their  lives, 
(a)  60%  (b)  75%  (c)  85%  (d)  90% 

6.  Women  are  most  likely  to  be 
working    for    wages   between    the 

ages  of 

(a)  16-19  (b)  20-24  (c)  25-34  (d)  35- 
44  (e)  45-54  (f)  55-64 

7.  Women  constitute %  of  the 

total  labor  force? 

(a)  29%  (b)  32%  (c)  39%  (d)  43% 

8.  Which  of  the  following  state- 
ments is  true? 

a.  Unemployment  rates  for  all 
women  are  higher  than  those  for  all 
men. 

b.  White  women's  unemploy- 
ment rates  are  substantially  the 
same  as  those  of  all  men,  while  mi- 


nority women's  rates  are  much 
higher  than  those  of  all  men. 

c.  White  women's  employment 
rates  are  lower  than  those  of  men, 
but  minority  women  have  higher 
unemployment  rates. 

9.  If  the  median  income  of  men  is 
approximately  $11,400  today,  what 
is  the  approximate  median  income 
for  women? 

(a)  $6400  (b)  $7500  (c)  $8200  (d) 
$9000 

10.  This  income  gap  has  been  

since  1956. 

(a)  narrowing  (b)  staying  the  same 
(c)  widening 

11.  On    the    average,    men    with 

eighth   grade   educations   make  

than/as  women  with  college  de- 
grees. 

(a)  more  (b)  about  the  same  (c)  less 

12.  Rank  the  following  census  cat- 
egories according  to  the  percentage 
of  women  employed  in  each  occu- 
pation: 

(a)  professional/ technical  (b)  mana- 
gers/administrators (c)  sales  (d) 
clerical  (e)  craft  and  kindred  (f)  op- 
eratives (g)  laborers  (h)  service  and 
private  household  workers  (i)  farm 
workers 

Quiz  answers  on  page  48. 

Recent  Materials  on 
Women  and  Work 

"Experiments  at  Work."  Working  Papers  for  a 
New  Society  (Fall,  1976).  (This  special  issue  is 
available  from  Working  Papers,  123  Mt. 
Auburn  St.,  Cambridge,  MA  02138. 
Hobbs,  May.  Born  to  Struggle.  New  York: 
Daughters,  Inc.,  1975.  (Available  from 
Daughters,  22  Charles  Street,  New  York, 
NY  10014.  Born  to  Struggle  is  the  personal  nar- 
rative of  a  London  charwoman  who  success- 
fully organized  the  London  night  cleaners.) 


We  Work,  They  Profit/47 


Kahn,  Kathy.  Hill  Billy  Women.  New  York: 
Avon  Books,  1974. 

Medsger,  Betty.  Women  at  Work:  A  Photographic 
Documentary.  New  York:  Sheed  and  Ward, 
Inc.,  1975. 

Baxandall,     Rosalyn,     Linda     Gordon     and 
Susan  Reverby,  eds.  America's  Working  Women: 
A  Documentary  History — 1600  to  the  Present.  New 
York:  Vintage  Books,  1976. 
"The  Cost  of  Living."   Women:  A  Journal  of 
Liberation  IV:2  (1975).  (This  special  issue  is 
available    from    Women,    3028    Greenmount 
Ave.,  Baltimore,  MD  21218.) 
Davis,  Margery.  "Woman's  Place  is  at  the 
Typewriter:  The  Feminization  of  the  Cleri- 
cal Labour  Force."  Radical  America  Pamphlet. 
(Available  from  Radical  America,  PO  Box  B, 
North  Cambridge,  MA  02140.) 
Edmond,  Wendy  and  Suzie  Fleming,  eds.  All 
Work  and  No  Pay:   Women,   Housework  and  the 
Wages    Due,    1975.    (Available   from:    Falling 
Wall  Press,  79  Richmond  Road,  Montpelier, 
Bristol  BS6  5EP,  England.) 
Robin,  Harriet  H.  Loom  and  Spindle:  Life  Among 
the  Early  Mill  Girls.  2nd  ed.  Kailua,  Hawaii: 
Press  Pacifica,  1976.  (This  re-edition  of  an 
1898  original  is  available  from  Pacifica,  Box 
47,  Kailua,  Hawaii  96734.) 
Seifer,  Nancy.  Nobody  Speaks  for  Me!  Self  Por- 
traits of  American   Working  Class  Women.  New 
York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1976. 
Tepperman,  Jean.  Not  Servants,  Not  Machines: 
Office  Workers  Speak  Up.  Boston:  Beacon  Press, 
1976. 

"Women  and  the  Economy."  The  Review  of 
Radical  Political  Economics,  (Spring,  1976).  (This 
special  issue  of  the  Review  is  available  from 
URPE,  Rm.  901,  41  Union  Square  West, 
New  York,  New  York  10003.) 
Women  Under  Attack."  Crisis  Anti-Report  No. 
15.  (Available  from  Counter  Information 
Services,  9  Poland  Street,  London  Wl 
England.) 


Quiz  Answers 


1.  c.   46%   of   all   women   either  are  em- 

ployed or  seeking  work.  (In  1940, 
women  were  25.4%  of  the  labor 
force.) 

2.  b.  44.5%  of  all  white  women  and  47.9% 

of  all  minority  women  are  in  the  la- 


bor force.  In  1948,  the  figures  were 
31.3%  for  whites  and  45.6%  for  mi- 
norities, but  white  women  under  20 
had  much  higher  labor  force  partici- 
pation rates  than  minority  women. 

3.  c.   72%  work  full  time;  24%  work  part 

time  by  choice  and  4%  work  part 
time  because  of  materials  shortages 
or  inability  to  find  a  full  time  job. 

4.  c.   53%  are  in  the  labor  force;  62%  of 

mothers  with  children  under  18  and 
without  a  husband  are  present  in  the 
labor  force  compared  to  43%  of 
mothers  with  husband  present. 

5.  d.  90%. 

6.  b.  20-24  (This  is  a  change  from  1960 

when  it  was  women  aged  45-54.) 

7.  c.    39%. 

8.  a.   Women  are  47%  of  the  unemployed. 

In  1974,  women  had  a  6.7%  annual 
rate  of  unemployment  while  men 
had  a  rate  of  4.8%.  White  women  had 
a  rate  of  5.3%  and  minority  women 
had  a  rate  of  10.5%  (in  1973).  Of  the 
women  who  are  unemployed,  1/3  are 
so  because  they  are  re-entering  the 
work  force. 

9.  a.   $6400.  The  median  income  for  wo- 

men is  57%  that  of  men. 

10.  c.   The    gap   has    been    widening    since 

1956.  However,  the  trend  since  the 
1930's  has  been  that  women's  wages 
fluctuate  between  55%  and  65% 
those  of  men. 

11.  b.  about  the  same.  Men  with  eight  years 

of  school  make  $9406  (median)  and 
women  with  college  degrees  average 
$9771. 

12.  Occupation  and  percentage  of  women 

wage  workers  in  it: 

1.  clerical  -  34.5% 

2.  service  and  private  household  workers  - 

20.3% 

3.  professional/technical  -  15.6% 

4.  operatives  -  13.1% 

5.  sales  -  6.8% 

6.  managers/administrators  -  5.0% 

7.  craft  and  kindred  -  1.4% 

8.  laborers  -  1.0% 

9.  farm  workers  -  1.4% 


Source  for  statistical  information:  Handbook 
on  Women  Workers,  Women's  Bureau,  Depart- 
ment of  Labor,  Washington,  D.C.  1975. 


ASlQuesl 


New  from  ABC-CLIO = 


Women  in  the  World 
A  Comparative  Study 

Lynne  B.  Iglitzin  and 
Ruth  Ross,  Editors 
Afterword  by  Alva  Myrdai 

The  25  essays  contributed  by  leading 
scholars  describe  the  struggle  of  women 
throughout  the  world  to  gain  a  voice  in 
the  political,  religious,  business,  and 
social  life  of  their  countries.  Alva  Myrdai 
discusses  the  implications  of  women's 
increased  longevity,  calls  for  a  new  policy 
direction  in  regard  to  human  time-use, 
and  outlines  other  areas  in  which  further 
research  will  be  undertaken.  Subject 
index,  xvii,  427  pages.  1976.  $19.75 
case  bound,  $6.50  paper. 


The  American  Search 
for  Woman 

H.  Carleton  Marlow  and 
Harrison  M.  Davis 

This  meticulously  researched  and  docu- 
mented work  traces  the  history  of 
American  thought  on  the  nature  of 
woman  from  the  18th  century  to  the 
present.  By  identifying  and  analyzing  the 
historical  roots  of  American  attitudes, 
Marlow  and  Davis  make  a  valuable 
contribution  to  the  literature  on  the 
present  women's  movement.  They  place 
the  work  of  Benjamin  Rush,  Frances 
Wright,  Lucy  Stone,  Mary  Wollst one- 
craft,  Elizabeth  Stanton,  Ashley  Mon- 
tagu, and  many  others  in  historical  perspective.  Bibliography.  Index, 
xiv,  539  pages.   1976.  $21.75  casebound,  $6.75    paper. 


American  Bibliographical  Center  -  Clio  Press 
Riviera  Campus,  2040  A.P.S.,  Box  4397   I      I      I      I 
Santa  Barbara,  California  93103    |  A  |  B  |  C  | 


CW/49 


Doing  Factory  Time 


The  following  is  an  interview  with  Kyla 
who  worked  in  a  South  Baltimore  factory. 
After  another  woman  moved  from  operator 
(traditionally  a  woman's  job)  to  mater- 
ial handler  (traditionally  a  man's  job),  Ky- 
la decided  to  apply  for  a  mechanic's  job  (al- 
so a  man's  job).  She  finally  got  on  as  a  ma- 
chine adjuster,  working  on  special  experi- 
mental machines  which  no  one  else  wanted 
to  work  on.  A  year  and  a  half  later,  she 
was  harassed  into  quitting  her  job. 

Part  of  the  following  is  from  an  inter- 
view with  Kyla  while  she  was  still  employ- 
ed at  Maryland  Cup  Corporation,  done  by 
Margaret  Blanchard  and  Irene  Reville  of 
Women:  A  Journal  of  Liberation. 
The  rest  of  the  interview  was  done  by  Nan- 
cy Hartsock  and  Carolyn  Hock,  for 
Quest. 

Q:  How  did  the  other  women  re- 
act to  your  getting  jobs  that  wo- 
man usually  didn't  hold? 

K:  Well,  when  Cody  made  a  de- 
cision to  become  a  material  handler 
she  decided  she'd  better  let  every- 
one know,  because  if  she  didn't,  it 
might  turn  into  a  thing  where 
people  were  laughing  behind  her 
back.  We  knew  it  would  get  around. 
Well,  one  of  the  women  she  told 
thought  it  was  fantastic  and  made 
this  big  sign:  "This  is  to  announce 
the  beginning  of  Women's  Lib  here 
at  ...,"  and  she  wrote  all  the  names 
of  the  different  men's  jobs  on  a  big 
piece  of  cardboard  saying,  "All  who 
wish  to  sign  up  to  join  see  me — 
your  local  representative,"  and 
signed    her    name.    She    passed   it 


around  among  all  the  operators  and 
I'd  say  a  good  75%  of  the  operators 
signed  up.  I  think  that  kind  of  en- 
thusiasm was  pretty  typical  of  their 
reactions.  There  was  a  whole  lot  of 
talk  among  various  women — "Well, 
I  think  111  apply  for  this  or  that." 
Most  of  that  fizzled  out,  but  there 
are  now  two  more  women  material 
handlers,  and  after  I  left  another 
woman  got  my  job. 

Q:  Would  you  have  been  able  to 
keep  your  job  and  advance?  Did  you 
want  to  stay  in  this  kind  of  work? 

K:  I  wanted  to;  I'm  sure  I  was 
capable  of  it.  But  I'm  not  sure  I 
would  want  to  now.  I'm  in  favor  of 
women  getting  jobs  like  that,  but 
every  woman  who  does  it  should 
know  what  the  drawbacks  are.  One 
is  the  isolation.  None  of  the  other 
women  ever  gave  me  a  hard  time — 
none  of  them  treated  me  like  a 
weird  fish.  They  were  very 
friendly.  I  sat  with  them  at  lunch; 
we  gossiped  together.  But  there 
was  definitely  some  distance.  For 
example,  I  had  to  dress  differently. 
I  had  to  wear  sloppy  clothes  to 
work  because  I  got  ink  and  glue  and 
grease  all  over  myself. 

When  I  took  the  job,  nobody  had 
any  doubts  that  I  was  smart  enough 
to  learn  it;  but  as  one  woman  put  it, 
she  couldn't  imagine  someone  as 
small  and  feminine  as  me  doing  that 
kind  of  work.  It's  an  image  thing 
more  than  anything  else,  that  par- 
ticular barrier.  It  confuses  people. 


SOlQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


My  image  changed  after  I  became 
a  mechanic.  I  no  longer  appeared 
small  and  feminine  to  anybody. 
First  of  all,  I  gained  weight.  Second 
of  all,  the  circumference  of  my  arm 
increased  about  half.  And  I  wore 
funky  old  clothes. 

I  was  afraid  people  would  think, 
"Oh  well,  she's  just  different";  I 
think  it  takes  a  lot  to  make  these 
changes  lasting  in  people's  minds. 
But  it  has  an  effect,  and  it's  good. 

Getting  men's  jobs  is  not  the  an- 
swer. Except  for  the  money.  I  made 
$3.02  an  hour.  As  an  operator,  I  was 
making  $2.56.  That  made  a  big  dif- 
ference. My  husband  and  I  were 
able  to  live  on  what  I  made  as  a 
mechanic— just  barely,  but  we  did 
manage  it.  Before,  it  would  have 
been  impossible. 

Q:  With  that  experience,  could 
you  get  a  better  job  than  you  could 
with  experience  as  an  operator? 

K:  Well,  I  don't  know  how  ap- 
plicable my  experience  would  be  to 
another  job,  especially  considering 
the  economic  situation  and  know- 
ing people  who  have  good  work  his- 
tories that  can't  get  jobs...  I  didn't 
want  to  risk  it  until  I  had  to. 

In  some  ways,  the  job  was  good. 
I  learned  a  lot.  Now  I  can  try  to  fig- 
ure out  what's  wrong  with  my 
toaster,  and  I'm  not  scared  of  going 
under  the  hood  of  a  car  because  I 
know  if  I  goof,  111  probably  be  able 
to  figure  out  what  I  did. 

But  I  was  being  exploited,  as 
much  if  not  more  so  than  I  was  as  an 
operator.  And  as  an  operator,  I  had 
the  advantage  that  it  was  easier 
work.  There  were  pressures,  and 


there  were  tensions  and  problems, 
but  there's  no  straining — it's  not 
physically  hard.  Also,  it's  socially 
very  easy,  and  you  have  regular 
breaks.  As  a  mechanic,  if  the  ma- 
chines weren't  running,  I  didn't  get 
breaks — other  than  lunch.  I  was 
supposed  to  stay  there  and  work  on 
those  machines. 

But  the  worst  part  was  the  fact 
that  unfortunately  I  had  a  certain 
amount  of  authority  over  the  other 
women  who  were  operators.  It  re- 
ally helped  that  I  had  been  an  oper- 
ator because  if  I  hadn't,  I  wouldn't 
have  understood  what  was  going 
on.  When  you're  an  operator,  the 
frustrations  and  tensions  are  such 
that  you  get  very  angry  at  mechan- 
ics who  can't  or  don't  fix  your  ma- 
chine, or  are  busy  working  on 
someone  else's.  But  when  you're  a 
mechanic,  you  get  furious  at  all 
these  operators  that  don't  watch 
their  machines  and  let  them  jam  up, 
and  then  you  have  to  go  start  the 
damn  thing.  If  I  hadn't  been  an  op- 
erator myself,  I'm  sure  that  the  bar- 
rier between  me  and  the  other  wo- 
men would  have  been  so  high  that 
it  wouldn't  have  been  easy  to  even 
be  friendly.  I  got  furious  every  day 
and  I  had  to  swallow  it  because  I 
knew  it  would  be  unfair  to  direct  it 
against  the  operators.  I  got  furious 
at  the  machines  and  I  got  furious  at 
the  job  because  I  was  being  ex- 
ploited. I'm  amazed  that  the  men 
are  capable  of  being  as  friendly  to 
the  women  as  they  are  in  that  situ- 
ation, because  the  tension  is  just 
heavy,  really  heavy.  There's  pres- 
sure on  everybody  to  produce,  and 
each  group  tends  to  blame  the 
other  group  for  hassles  that  occur. 


Doing  Factory  Time/51 


Q:  Were  operators  and  me- 
chanics working  against  each 
other? 

K:  Yes,  just  because  of  the  way 
it  was  set  up.  That  was  very  un- 
comfortable, especially  because  I 
had  felt  the  operator's  side.  So  I 
couldn't  just  react  to  things  that 
would  happen,  I  had  to  get  my  bear- 
ings every  time.  ./'What's  really 
happening  here...?" 


Q:  Did  you  ever  have  any  direct 
confrontations? 

K:  Yes,  I  did.  It  happened  to- 
ward the  end  when  I  was  being 
more  and  more  harassed  and  up- 
set. They  had  put  me  on  work-per- 


formance probation  after  I  had 
been  doing  the  job  for  a  year  and  a 
half.  It  meant  that  I  worked  by  my- 
self for  30  days  and  they  watched 
me  to  see  if  I  was  doing  all  right. 

Q:  Is  that  a  standard  thing? 

K:  No,  they  do  it  if  there  is 
some  reason  to  believe  that  there  is 
something  wrong  with  your  per- 
formance. They  had  no  reason.  I 
had  gotten  an  absentee  warning, 
but  there  were  some  men  in  there 
who  got  them  every  few  months.  It 
was  clearly  a  sexist  act  on  their 
part.  I  had  worked  by  myself  be- 
fore, and  I  remembered  that  very 
clearly,  and  so  did  everybody  else 
except  the  boss. 

So  the  probation  took  me  totally 
by  surprise  and  really  pissed  me  off. 
I  was  still  into  the  belief  that  I  had 
to  have  that  job,  so  I  was  into  doing 
it  right.  The  fuckers  put  me  on  pro- 
bation and  I  had  to  show  them  I  was 
good,  right? 

I  told  the  operators  that  I  was  on 
probation  and  that  I  was  really  go- 
ing to  have  to  prove  myself  to  those 
jerks,  and  for  awhile  everybody  was 
really  supportive.  But  because  of 
the  tensions  that  are  inherent  in 
the  job,  there  were  conflicts.  For 
example,  operators  are  supposed  to 
start  their  own  machines,  and  for  a 
while  they  weren't  into  doing  that  a 
whole  lot.  If  the  operator  can  get 
her  machine  running,  it  means  that 
I  can  concentrate  on  the  problem 
I'm  concentrating  on,  and  I  don't 
have  to  go  and  worry  about  this 
other  thing.  I  wanted  to  make  pro- 
duction so  I  could  get  off  probation 
and  keep  my  job. 


52lQuest 


©1977     photograph  by  Elaine  Wessel/CWLU  China  Group 


Q:  Was  that  the  way  they  de- 
termined whether  or  not  you  were 
on  probation — when  the  produc- 
tion was  up? 

K:  Yeah.  They  had  a  list  of 
other  things,  like  attitude  and  ab- 
senteeism and  lateness  and  shit  like 
that,  but  it  was  production  they 
were  mainly  concerned  with. 

Q:  Was  it  time-consuming  to  go 
and  start  the  other  machines? 

K:  Oh  yeah.  They  jammed  up  a 
lot.  If  I  had  to  start  them  every  time 
they  jammed  up,  it  would  have 
meant  there  were  a  lot  of  machines 
down  that  didn't  have  to  be  down. 

Q:  So  what  did  you  do  if  some- 
one came  up  to  you  and  said,  "My 
machine  is  jammed. " 

K:  If  they  came  up  to  me  and 
asked  for  help  I  would  help  them.  I 
could  see  all  the  machines,  and  if 
one  was  down  I  would  go  over  to  it, 
unless  I  was  real  tired,  and  then  I 
would  wait  and  see  if  the  operator 
felt  like  starting  it  up.  Sometimes 
she  would. 

There  was  some  racism  oper- 
ating, too.  Sometimes  a  white  oper- 
ator would  feel  like  I  was  giving 
preference  to  a  black  operator.  The 
worst  hassle  came  out  of  that.  One 
day,  a  black  woman  needed  some 
tubes,  so  I  went  over  to  the  other 
machines  and  the  operators  refused 
to  give  them  to  me.  It  had  been  a 
really  bad  day  and  I  was  really  tense 
and  uptight  and  feeling  really 
bitchy;  I  said,  "Oh,  this  is  the  most 
ridiculous  thing  I  ever  heard  of," 


and  I  just  took  the  tubes,  which  you 
are  not  supposed  to  do.  So  because 
I  took  those  tubes,  one  woman 
didn't  speak  to  me  for  a  week.  I  just 
decided  the  best  thing  I  could  do 
was  just  be  nice  to  her  and  do  my 
job  and  calm  down  and  ignore  it. 
She  finally  started  talking  to  me 
and  explained  that  she  hadn't  really 
been  into  being  pissed  off,  but  this 
other  woman  had  really  gotten  on 
her  nerves  and  she  was  just  sick  of 
the  whole  thing,  and  was  taking  it 
out  on  me.  She  sort  of  apologized, 
and  I  said,  "Well,  I'm  real  glad  you 
said  that  because  it  really  didn't  feel 
good  having  you  be  mad  at  me."  It 
was  all  cool  after  that. 

Q:  Why  did  she  get  so  upset? 

K:  Every  single  woman  there 
had  bad  nerves.  Everyone  popped 
Valiums  like  crazy. 

Q:  Is  that  an  occupational  dis- 
ease? 

K:  Yes.  Absolutely.  You're  in  a 
situation  where  you  have  a  lot  of 
responsibility  and  very  little  con- 
trol, and  those  who  have  power 
over  you  are  continually  harassing 
you,  treating  you  like  a  juvenile  de- 
linquent. They  never  give  you  cred- 
it for  anything  you  accomplish. 

Q:  How  does  that  work  for  op- 
erators? 

K:  Well,  there  are  inspectors 
who  come  around  and  look  at  your 
cups.  They're  women;  that's  how 
women  advance.  They  get  to  be  in- 
spectors and  make  a  few  cents  more 


Doing  Factory  Time/53 


an  hour  and  that's  the  cut-off  for 
that  woman's  type  of  advancement 
in  the  company.  So  we  had  an  in- 
spector come  around  and  look  at 
the  cups  and  check  them  for  de- 
fects. The  inspectors  would  be  fair- 
ly strict  because  they  had  their  own 
boss  who  told  them  what  they 
could  accept  and  if  they  let  some- 
thing go  by  that  was  too  bad,  they 
would  get  into  trouble.  So  they  had 
to  "tag,"  which  meant  they  put  a 
piece  of  paper  on  the  case  which 
said,  "do  not  use,"  and  if  an  opera- 
tor got  tagged,  it  went  on  her  rec- 
ord. Everybody  got  tagged  at  one 
point  or  another,  but  you  didn't 
want  to  get  tagged.  So  on  the  one 
hand,  you  had  to  try  and  please  the 
inspector.  On  the  other  hand  the 
bosses  wanted  to  pack  everything 
that  could  possibly  go — like  don't 
throw  out  good  cups.  No  one  knew 
quite  where  the  line  was. 

Q:  Did  you  do  any  organizing 
on  the  job? 

K:  Cody  and  I  first  got  the  jobs 
just  because  we  needed  jobs.  We 
had  no  intention  of  organizing. 
When  Cody  said  she  wanted  to  be  a 
material  handler,  and  they  passed 
around  the  Women's  Lib  sign-up 
sheet,  it  was  really  nice.  It  was  a 
joke,  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  a 
celebration.  We  just  really  dug  it. 

Then  we  started  thinking,  well, 
maybe  it's  possible  to  do  some  or- 
ganizing. The  first  thing  we've  got 
to  do  is  get  a  union  in,  right? 

We  got  a  handful  of  people  to- 
gether and  we  contacted  the  ma- 
chinists' union.  We  had  heard  they 
were  a  good  union.  But  they  told  us 


"No,  we  can't  do  it  because  if  you're 
in  the  AFL-CIO,  different  unions 
have  different  territories,"  and  they 
said  we  should  talk  to  the  paper- 
workers'  union.  We  kind  of  didn't 
want  to,  because  we  had  heard  all 
kinds  of  bad  stories  about  them; 
they're  a  lousy  union,  terrible 
union.  But  we  said,  "OK,  if  you 
can't  do  it,  that's  the  way  it  is."  So 
we  contacted  the  paperworkers  and 
they  led  us  on  a  merry  chase  for  like 
three  months,  saying,  "Oh  yeah, 
far  out;  we'll  do  this,"  and  not  doing 
it;  "Well  call  you,"  and  not  calling; 
"We'll  send  you  this  material,"  and 
not  sending  it. 

So  we  contacted  the  machinists 
again  and  said,  "Listen,  we've  got 
this  problem:  we  really  want  to  be 
organized  but  the  paperworkers  are 
really  dragging  their  heels,  and 
we've  done  everything  we  know 
how  to  do."  The  union  official  we 
talked  to  said  he  couldn't  do  any- 
thing without  talking  to  the  paper- 
workers,  but  he  would  try  and 
work  it  out.  The  next  thing  we 
knew,  they  called  us  to  a  meeting. 
The  machinists  had  talked  to  the 
paperworkers,  and  they  had 
brought  in  a  third  union — bakery 
and  confectionary  workers — be- 
cause we  had  a  bakery  department. 
They  had  worked  out  this  deal 
without  even  discussing  with  us 
what  we  wanted.  The  machinists 
would  represent  Universal  Ma- 
chine; the  paperworkers  would  rep- 
resent the  paperworkers,  and  the 
bakery  would  have  its  own  union. 
They  wanted  to  create  a  craft  union 
situation. 

It  was  a  horrible  experience.  All 
of  a  sudden  here  are  these  strange 


54lQuest 


guys.  They've  obviously  made  deci- 
sions without  us.  They  sat  up 
there,  these  men,  and  tried  to  im- 
press each  other,  and  we  couldn't 
get  a  word  in  edgewise.  We'd  try  to 
ask  a  question;  they  would  inter- 
rupt. They  wouldn't  answer  the 
question;  they'd  just  brag  about 
this  and  harangue  us  about  that, 
and  argue  with  each  other.  We 
were  pissed  off  because  they  had 
gone  behind  our  backs,  and  because 
of  the  way  they  dealt  with  us  in  the 
meeting.  Also,  most  of  us  didn't 
want  a  craft  union  situation. 

Q:  Was  this  mostly  women? 

K:  There  were  some  men  in- 
volved; the  majority  were  women. 
Anyway,  we  had  a  meeting  alone 
right  after,  and  decided  we  didn't 
want  to  have  anything  to  do  with 
these  people.  We  [United  Electrical 


Workers],  which  is  not  AFL-CIO, 
and  begged  them  to  organize  us.  So 
they  sent  this  guy  down  to  meet 
with  us. 

UE  treated  us  very  well.  The  man 
that  came  to  see  us  was  very  cons- 
cious of  both  the  racial  and  sexual 
issues  at  this  plant,  and  knew  the 
right  questions  to  ask,  and  treated 
everybody  with  utmost  respect.  He 
left  saying,  "You  people  really  de- 
serve a  good  union.  I  can't  make  a 
decision  right  now;  we  have  to  see 
what  our  resources  are,  but  111  let 
you  know."  So  they  gave  us  an  or- 
ganizer. 

The  UE  method  of  organizing  is 
very  intelligent.  You  keep  it  an  ab- 
solute secret;  you  move  slowly  and 
with  caution;  and  you  don't  make 
any  overt  moves.  You  create  an  or- 
ganization before  you  come  out  in 
the  open  and  affiliate,  so  that  when 
you  pass  out  cards  and  have  an  elec- 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


Doing  Factory  Time/55 


tion,  it's  just  a  formality.  This  of 
course  was  how  we  wanted  to  do  it, 
because  that's  the  only  way  people 
felt  safe  doing  it,  but  the  problem 
was  we  didn't  know  what  we  were 
doing  and  didn't  know  what  we 
were  up  against  and  there  was  not 
enough  dedication  on  anybody's 
part,  including  ours.  I  believe  if  two 
or  three  dedicated  people  were  will- 
ing to  give  ten  or  fifteen  years  of 
their  lives  (and  I'm  serious  about 
that  figure)  that  factory  could  be 
organized.  But  we  were  not  willing 
to  make  that  long-term  commit- 
ment. 

We  would  set  goals  for  ourselves 
and  wouldn't  be  able  to  meet  them, 
and  people  started  dropping  away, 
people  stopped  coming  to  meetings. 
People  did  not  have  enough  self- 
confidence  and  enough  belief  in  the 
process  to  put  up  with  the  agony  of 
all  that  frustration.  They  just  said, 
"I'm  not  doing  it,  I'm  not  going  to 
do  it."  Though  for  awhile  a  few  of 
us  were  still  attached  to  the  idea  of 
"we've  got  to  get  this  union  in,"  we 
all  eventually  felt  the  same  way. 

Another  problem  was  that  many 
of  our  co-workers  had  no  concep- 
tion that  we  actually  do  have  the 
power  to  change  things.  People  be- 
lieved the  union  was  going  to  come 
in  and  make  things  better.  And  UE 
is  not  into  that.  UE  is  into,  "You're 
going  to  make  things  better.  We're 
going  to  help  you  and  we're  going 
to  back  you  up,  but  you're  going  to 
make  the  decisions;  it's  your  power 
that's  going  to  change  things." 
People  couldn't  relate  to  that.  It's 
like,  "When  is  the  union  going  to  do 
something?  When  is  the  union  go- 
ing to  help  us?" 


Q:  Is  that  because  people  are  so 
used  to  being  told? 

K:  Yes.  It's  crippling.  Too  many 
people  aren't  able  to  see  the  possi- 
bility in  themselves  of  taking  some 
kind  of  power  and  making  indepen- 
dent decisions,  uniting  with  other 
workers. 

Q:  Do  you  think  you  were  re- 
sented toward  the  end? 

K:  I  don't  know.  I'm  sure  there 
were  things  we  could  have  done 
better  if  we  had  understood  the  sit- 
uation better.  Anyway,  what  we 
finally  did  was  to  just  tell  the  few 
people  excited  about  it  and  willing 
to  work.  No  one  was  ready  to  com- 
mit ten  or  fifteen  years  to  organ- 
izing a  union. 

Q:  How  much  time  did  you 
spend  on  organizing? 

K:  We  contacted  the  machinists 
while  Cody  and  I  were  still  opera- 
tors. It  ended  a  few  months  before 
she  was  fired  and  I  was  harassed 
into  quitting.  I'd  say  roughly  a  year, 
maybe  a  little  longer. 

Q:  What  kind  of  harassment  was 
there? 

K:  They  didn't  do  anything  for 
a  long  time  directed  at  the  union  or- 
ganizing. But  the  harassment  was 
constant.  That's  the  way  they 
treated  people.  They  particularly 
treated  women  bad.  The  mechanics 
had  this  cameraderie  with  the  man 
who  was  the  direct  head  over  the 
three  shift  leaders.  They  had  a  bud- 


56lQuest 


dy  relationship  and  he  would  give 
them  shit  sometimes,  but  they  sort 
of  didn't  take  it  seriously  a  whole 
lot  and  they  would  say  their  mind 
to  him  and  they  would  hang  out 
with  him.  And  of  course  I  didn't, 
and  he  continued  to  treat  me  like  he 
treated  the  other  women. 

Q:  Even  though  you  changed 
jobs? 

K:  Yeah. 

Q:  What  do  you  think  the  solu- 
tion is? 

K:  It's  necessary  for  some  wo- 
men to  break  into  jobs  usually  held 
by  men.  That's  very  important.  But 
that  won't  solve  all  the  problems. 
Other  changes  have  to  happen.  I'm 
not  sure  what  all  those  other 
changes  are.  If  the  situation  were 
one  where  working  people  con- 
trolled their  workplace,  solving  all 
kinds  of  problems  would  be  much 
easier.  But  now,  even  if  all  women 
could  get  the  kind  of  job  I  had,  what 
kind  of  job  is  that?  We're  still  being 
exploited.  Even  if  jobs  were  dis- 
tributed regardless  of  sex,  most 
women  would  end  up  in  exploitive 
jobs  just  because  most  jobs  are  that 
way. 

Q:  Do  you  think  you  could  have 
worked  at  this  job  for  a  long  time, 
the  way  you're  feeling  now? 

K:  Well,  yeah,  I  could  back  then, 
though  sometimes  I  thought  I'd 
rather  be  a  housewife,  take  six 
months  off  and  do  absolutely  no- 
thing   but    be   a   housewife.    That 


would  have  been  a  luxury,  it  really 
would.  Because  I  could  do  what  I 
wanted  when  I  wanted  to,  and  I'd 
be  working  with  my  own  things, 
that  I  had  control  over.  It  would 
have  been  really  nice  for  me.  My 
husband  was  not  going  to  say,  "OK, 
now  you've  decided  to  be  a  house- 
wife, you've  got  to  stay  home; 
you've  got  to  do  it  right."  Having 
no  kids  helps  too. 

There's  a  big  difference  between 
having  a  career  that  fulfills  some 
need  in  you,  and  having  to  work  for 
money  in  a  shit  job.  Having  to  work 
for  money  in  a  shit  job  is  no  fun  for 
anybody.  It  can  be  just  as  oppres- 
sive as  being  stuck  in  the  housewife 
role.  We  tend  to  view  a  woman  go- 
ing out  and  getting  a  job  as  a  posi- 
tive thing.  It  isn't  always  a  positive 
thing.  I  know  a  lot  of  women  who 
still  have  to  do  all  the  housework 
and  do  all  the  kid-taking-care-of, 
and  meal  cooking,  etc.  Yet  they  also 
have  to  work  a  full-time  job.  Those 
women  are  in  really  bad  shape,  and 
I'm  sure  sometimes  they  would  love 
to  be  nothing  but  housewives. 

Q:  Do  you  think  they  are  worse 
off  for  having  a  job? 

K:  It's  hard  to  say.  I  mean  you 
do  get  money  and  some  sort  of  eco- 
nomic independence,  so  you  have  a 
little  more  say  over  your  own  life. 
But  they  are  killing  themselves  to 
get  that  independence. 

Q:  That's  where  the  notion  of 
oppressive  independence  is  a  really 
important  thing.  I  have  been  think- 
ing about  the  women  who  have  left 
their  husbands  and  aren't  working 


Doing  Factory  Time/57 


who  have  to  get  on  welfare.  The 
price  of  leaving  is  just  that  much 
higher. 

K:  Lots  of  women  just  figure 
that  is  that  and  don't  leave  the  man. 
Which  is  worse?  Being  married  to 
the  wrong  man,  or  married  to  the 
state  welfare  system?  But  getting  a 
job  and  moving  up  creates  its  own 
problems  too.  When  you  move  up 
from  the  bottom  you  control  other 
women. 

Q:  Were  you  in  that  situation? 

K:  Well,  I  wasn't  too  much  in 
control  but  I  did  have  a  certain 
amount  of  power,  unofficially,  and 
it  was  real  clear  that  some  things 
that  were  in  the  interests  of  mech- 


anics were  not  in  the  interest  of 
operators,  because  our  jobs  were  so 
different.  They  didn't  want  to  be 
hassled,  and  a  lot  of  times  that  was 
contradictory. 

I  had  been  trying  to  get  indepen- 
dence for  myself  by  taking  a  mech- 
anic's job  and  I  liked  the  work.  But 
the  sexism  reached  a  point  where 
the  job  was  no  longer  worth  it.  I 
was  in  this  position  where  we  need- 
ed the  money  and  it  took  me  awhile 
to  see  a  way  out  of  that.  That  was 
not  the  route  for  me,  at  all. 

Q:  The  money? 

K:  The  route  to  independence 
did  not  exist  for  me  at  Maryland 
Cup. 


Victimology 

An  International  Journal 


Focuses  on  the  victim,  on  the  dynamics  of  victimization,  on  rehabili- 
tative, preventive  and  legislative  measures.  Its  NEWSLINE  section 
contains  relevant  information  on  meetings,  new  periodicals,  books, 
programs,  and  news  of  interest  to  victim  assistance  centers.  Quar- 
terly, $17  (Individuals),  $25  (Libraries  &  Institutions) 


Visage  Press  Inc.,  3409  Wisconsin  Ave.  NW,  Washington  DC  20016 


581  Quest 


GQiecI^aise 


By  JANET  RECHTMAN 


Today.  Eleven  o'clock.  By  the 
time  the  clock  finished  striking,  she 
would  be  in  there.  They'd  both  be 
seated  and  comfortable,  legs 
crossed,  pleasantries  completed. 
And  she'd  say  her  piece.  "So  help 
me  god. 

"Listen,  you  bastard,  gimme  my 
due!  I  took  it  on  the  nose  with  you 
when  times  got  tight. ..now  I  want 
some  of  the  gravy!"  She  had  him  by 
the  tie.  His  face  was  turning  purple. 
"Goddammit!  Give  me  an  answer!" 

Gesticulating  desperately,  he 
pointed  at  his  blackening  lips  and 
tried  to  push  her  away,  efforts  that 
only  tightened  the  noose  around 
his  neck. 

Annalee  let  go,  rocking  in  secret 
distress.  No.  No,  that  wouldn't  do 
at  all.  If  she  attacked  him,  he'd  fire 
her  for  sure. 

"Ed,  I  wanted  to  thank  you  for 
the  ten  dollar  raise  you  gave  me  last 
week,  but,  like  I  said  then,  I  really 
expected  more.  After  all,  your  busi- 
ness has  increased  in  the  last  few 
months  and  I've  stayed  on  here  two 
years  without  a  raise.. .even  took  a 
cut  for  a  while  when  times  got 
bad." 

That  was  it.  A  calm  rational  ap- 
proach to  which  he  would  respond, 
"You're  getting  well  paid  already 
for  what  you  do.  A  secretary  get- 
ting one  seventy-five  a  week!  Tell 
me  where  else  you  can  find  that! 
And  you  get  the  chance  to  write 


copy,  too,  to  learn  the  business.  Lis- 
ten, I'd  rather  be  conservative  with 
the  money  and  give  you  a  bonus  at 
the  end  of  the  year." 

"Hell,  yes,  you  would!  But  Massa 
Lincoln  done  freed  the  slaves,  suh, 
and  I  am  prepared  to  defend  the 
honor  and  integrity  of  the  whole 
fuckin'  proletariat,  you  fat  cat, 
leeching  off  the  blood  of  the  salt  of 
the  earth!"  Yes,  get  a  vampire  with 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  plant  the  long 
stake  in  its  heart  and  hang  laundry 
from  the  crosspiece.  She  would 
fling  heavy  crosses  at  him  shot 
from  the  crossbow  of  her  wrath... 
You  pig!" 

"Look  here,  young  lady,  it's  time 
you  learned  a  thing  or  two  about 
working  for  somebody,"  he  would 
drone  on.  "You  do  what  you're  told 
or  there  are  plenty  of  other  girls 
who  would  love  to  have  your  job." 

"Girls!"  Annalee  would  laugh... 
no,  cry.  Cry  because  she  knew  he 
was  right.  Because  she  knew  that  if 
she  played  this  game  to  win,  she'd 
be  just  like  this  insecure,  striving 
man  whose  sole  existence  could  be 
wiped  out  by  the  whim  of  a  client. 
But  she  didn't  want  to  make  him 
rich,  either,  not  by  selling  herself 
cheap. 

"Girls!  Jesus  Christ,  Ed!  I  have  a 
master's  degree  and  am  a  published 
poet.  Wasn't  for  me  you  wouldn't 
be  doing  as  well  as  you  are — you  try 
to  find  two  people  to  take  my  place. 
You  can't!"  That  was  true,  wasn't 
it?  "But  like  some  kinda  fool,  I  go 
on  doing  a  good  job  for  you  even 


The  Raise/59 


though  I  know  damn  well  I  won't 
get  anything  for  it." 

"Yo'  the  fool  then,  honey!"  A 
third  voice,  pitched  in  heavy  crack- 
er, oozed  like  honey  into  the  conver- 
sation. "That  man  payin'  yew  an 
awful  lot  for  the  'mount  of  wuk 
yew  dew.  Hell,  he  be  gone  mos' 
times  enehow.  Then  yew  dew  what 
yew  want  behine  his  back.  Leave  it 
alone.  Yew  ain't  gonter  be  there 
ferever  noways." 

"Why  you  jive  turkey!  Whutchou 
mean  talkhV  that  way!  My  people 
done  been  livin'  like  that  for  years 
and  we  think  it's  time  folks  who 
work  for  a  living  had  they  share  of 
dignity!"  Another  voice,  urban,  ex- 
claimed, "Sheyit!  If  I  was  gone  steal 
from  some  muthuhfuckuh,  I'd  do  it 
to  his  face.  If  he  don't  wanta  sheyre 
the  wealth  wif  me,  then,  honey,  I'm 
gonta  sheyre  it  wif  him!  Ya  dig!" 

"Jesus  Christ,  Annalee,  get  up! 
You'll  be  late  to  work.  And  set  the 
alarm  for  ten  thirty  before  you  go.  I 
gotta  return  a  reserve  book  to  the 
library."  A  fifth  voice.  This  one  was 
real. 

"I'm  up.  I'm  up!  And  set  your  own 
goddamn  alarm." 

"Ohhohoho!  A  grouch!  God  pre- 
serve me  from  the  grouch!" 

"God  preserve  you  from  the 
masses  of  people  when  they  come 
to  rip  the  hearts  out  of  graduate 
students  and  open  the  stacks  at  uni- 
versity libraries."  God  preserve  us 
both  from  the  treadmill.  "You  bet- 
ter finish  school  quick  before  all  us 
straining  proletarians  get  tired  of 
carrying  you  on  our  backs." 

"Wave  the  red  flag  high,  Rosa! 
When  you  ask  for  that  raise,  show 
him  your  true  colors." 


"By  eleven  today,  you  may  have 
to  go  out  and  get  a  real  job,  Raskol- 
nikov,  schveetie.  And  I,  I  will  be  a 
hausfrau  who  writes  beautiful  po- 
etry. But,  can  I  stand  the  sacrifice? 
Can  the  hand  that  penned  Your  old 
TV's  not  worthless,  it's  worth  more,  when 
you  trade  at  M  &  T  T.V.  Appliance  set- 
tle for  mere  deathless  verse?" 

"Tune  in  tomorrow,  set  the  a- 
larm,  and  get  out,  Maud  Gonne. 
See  you  this  PM." 

As  usual,  when  Annalee  was 
troubled,  her  mom  rode  into  work 
with  her.  She  sat  above  her  daugh- 
ter's left  eye,  one  spike  heel  dug  in- 
to the  muscle  of  Annalee's  brow. 

"You  know  you  agreed  to  work 
for  that  salary,  Anna.  And  he  has 
been  awfully  generous  in  the  past." 

"Threaten  to  quit!"  her  father 
rumbled  from  his  seat  in  her  stom- 
ach. "I  know  1  would.  It's  just  like 
the  union.  I  won't  have  one  in  my 
factory,  but  if  I  was  out  there 
workin'  for  me,  I'd  sure  as  hell 
join  one." 

"But,  sweetheart,  it's  not  wo- 
manly to  be  so  concerned  about 
money.  That's  your  husband's 
problem." 

"Leave  my  husband  out  of  this! 
I'm  making  it  on  my  own.  If  I  was  a 
man  I'd  have  to.  You  sound  just 
like  Ed,  'If  you're  short  on  money, 
put  Dave  to  work.  Hell  never  get  a 
job  anyway,  with  a  Ph.D.'"  And 
sonofabitch  I  had  lied  and  said  that 
Dave  worked  part-time,  instead  of 
saying  that  we  were  discussing  how 
much  my  time  was  worth,  not  my 
family  income. 

"No  cool.  No  panache,  Annalee. 
When  I  was  young,  I  put  together 
enough  money  to  build  a  factory  by 


60lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


the  time  I  was  twenty-two.  Sheer 
nerve  did  it.  Lotsa  cool/7 

Annalee  pulled  over  to  the  side  of 
the  road.  She  felt  an  irresistible 
urge  to  vomit,  which  passed  pres- 
ently. Her  head  throbbed,  "You 
know  you  could  just  accept  things 
as  they  are  and  keep  quiet.  Start 
looking  for  another  job  if  that 
makes  you  feel  better,  but  remem- 
ber, it's  only  a  year  till  Dave  fin- 
ishes and  you  don't  really  want  a 
career  in  advertising  anyway.  Why 
not  mark  time?" 

"Why  you  soun'  jes  laike  huh  mo- 
thuh." 

"You  get  a  lot  of  freedom  on  this 
job.  You  can  write  and  use  the  copi- 
er. And  no  matter  where  you  go 
you'd  have  to  put  up  with  prob- 
lems. Besides  you  know  damn  well 
green  poet  ain't  particularly  high- 
paying  work." 

"Freedom,  my  ass!  Shutup  and 
say  who  you  are.  Some  Unka  Tom 
Honkey!" 

"Trying  to  rationalize  weakness 
...avoid  confrontation.  You  know 
she  can't  decide  to  do  nothing. 
That's  letting  Ed  get  away  with 
murder."  Annalee's  stomach  was 
killing  her. 

"'Sides,  if  you  ain't  part  uh  the  so- 
lution, you  part  uh  the  problem." 

"So  you  insist  on  stabbing  your- 
self to  make  him  feel  a  prick." 

"He  is  a  prick!  You  sound  just  like 
my  mother,  and  look  where  she  is 
today." 

"Whadda  you  care!  You  aren't 
her.  And  you'll  get  them  all,  in  your 
writing.  Just  think  how  Edll  want 
to  own  you  when  you  make  it. 
'Annalee?  She  used  to  work  for  me 
...strange  girl,  like  all  artists. ..had  a 


lot  of  problems.  I  helped  her  out. 
But  he  won't,  because,  right  there, 
in  everything  you  write,  he'll  be 
staring  back  at  his  ugly  self." 

"A  copout!  Who  the  hell  are  you? 

"I'm  you,  you  boob.  You're  talkin' 
to  yourself!  You  do  it  all  the  time. 
Trying  to  be  louder  than  all  those 
other  voices  you  got  ain't  easy.  And 
then,  half  the  time,  you  won't  listen 
anyway.  I  don't  make  you  miserable 
enough.  You  oughta  write  down  all 
those  voices  and  sort  them  out... 
find  out  where  your  head  is  at." 

"Umhhuh,  maybe  later.  Got  to  go 
to  work  right  now." 

"Sheyit,  man!  You  know  she  ain't 
gone  do  a  thing  she  say!" 

Janet  Rechtman,  a  member  of  the  Atlan- 
ta Women's  Poetry  Workshop,  has  been 
published  in  Southern  Exposure  and 
the    Atlanta  Gazette. 


for  Gay  Women: 

GAIA'S  GUIDE,  1977 

Annual  discreet  pocket  size  international  bar/club 
guide  and  complete  directory.  This  fourth  edition: 
All  USA  plus  40  other  countries.  3000  listings.  Cen- 
ters, switchboards,publications,resources,  services, 
retreats,  restaurants  and  much  much  more.  S5.00 
only  from:  gaia's  guide,  115  New  Montgomery 
Street,  San  Francisco,  Calif.  94105.  (discreet  mail 
order  only  —  two  weeks  delivery  on  all  orders). 
Also  in  D.  C.  at  lambda  rising,  1724-20111  Street, 
N.W.  and  lammas  women's  shop,  32i-7th  Street, 
S.E.,  and  in  Baltimore  at:  the  31  st  street  shop, 
425  E.  31st  St.,  and  lesbian  community  center, 
3028  Greenmount  Ave.  How  could  you  be  a  Les- 
bian without  it?  Centers,  switchboards,  retreats, 
publications,  and  much,  much  more. 


The  Raise/61 


Critique  &  Commentary  B*- 

Beyond,  "Beyond  Either/Or  Feminist  Options" 
By  ZILLAH  EISENSTEIN 

I  share  Charlotte  Bunch's  commitment  to  reassert  a  feminism 
"which  is  both  radical  and  independent  and  which  integrates  the  po- 
litical, cultural,  economic  and  spiritual  dimensions  of  women's 
lives."1  I  agree  that  the  women's  movement  must  have  an  autono- 
mous political  base  and  can  see  how  a  politics  of  non-alignment  pro- 
tects this  position.  I  think  it  is  important  to  state,  as  Charlotte  does, 
that  "non-alignment  is  not  a  withdrawal  from  politics:  It  simply 
means  that  one  is  not  automatically  attached  to  one  of  the  dominant 
lines  or  factions..."2  However,  defining  the  politics  of  the  women's 
movement  as  non-aligned  feminism  leads  to  serious  problems  be- 
cause doing  so  does  not  speak  to  the  issue  of  factionalism  within  the 
movement  today.  It  pretends  that  women  do  not  already  have  estab- 
lished political  commitments  to  socialism,  or  radical  feminism,  or  les- 
bian-feminism, or  socialist-feminism,  or. ..or...  The  question  of  align- 
ment, as  Bunch  states  it,  is  a  question  about  how  the  movement 
should  relate  to  other  left  (often  male)  groups.  However,  we  also 
need  to  talk  about  how  we  relate  to  each  other.  How  does  the  com- 
mitment to  non-alignment  help  us  work  across  and  through  the  fac- 
tionalism within  the  women's  movement.  Non-alignment  between 
feminist  groups  divides  up  our  power  and  impact.  My  point  is  this: 
Charlotte  Bunch  says  that  we  need  to  move  beyond  'either/or'  polit- 
ics and  I  think  that  within  our  separate  factions  we  have  started  to  do 
this.  But  because  of  the  lack  of  dialogue  between  factions,  this  has 
been  communicated.  More  specifically,  radical  feminists  have  become 
more  explicitly  anti-capitalist;  lesbian-feminists  have  come  to  deal 
with  the  relation  of  political  control  expressed  in  heterosexual  or- 
ganization and  state  repressiveness;  socialist-feminists  now  readily 
embrace  the  critique  of  pasts.  Political  identification  may  differ,  and 
priorities  may  not  be  ordered  exactly  alike,  but  the  most  progressive 
elements  of  each  of  the  factions  could  organize  together.  It  might  be 
too  idealistic  to  ask  that  those  involved  in  organizing  forget  their  dif- 
ferences, but  it  is  realistic  to  believe  that  we  can  organize  around  the 
analysis  that  unifies  us. 

This  brings  me  to  a  major  criticism  of  Bunch's  discussion  of 'either/ 
or  options.  Her  article  does  not  do  justice  to  the  spectrum  of  thought 


62lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


developing  within  the  women's  movement.  This  is  most  evident  to 
me  in  her  discussion  of  socialist-feminism.  This  may  be  because  I  am 
active  as  a  socialist-feminist  as  part  of  a  collective  in  Ithaca,  N.Y., 
and  have  taught  socialist-feminist  theory. 

Bunch  says  that  socialist-feminism  lacks  a  radical  feminist  perspec- 
tive, but  it  is  the  recognition  of  radical  feminism  and  the  way  it  has 
redefined  the  priorities  of  a  socialist  analysis  that  is  at  the  core  of  the 
commitment  of  our  collective.  Marxist  class  analysis  is  the  thesis, 
radical  feminist  patriarchal  analysis  the  antithesis,  and  from  the  two 
comes  the  synthesis  of  socialist-feminism. 

"Thus  integrated,  neither  the  feminist  questions  nor  the  Marxist 
method  remains  the  same  as  they  were  separately.  The  Marxist 
method  recognizes  the  sexual  spheres  of  power  and  the  feminist 
questions  require  an  understanding  of  the  specific  historical  'pro- 
cesses of  power/"3 

The  analysis  defines  the  two  mutually  dependent  systems  of  capi- 
talism and  patriarchy  as  core.  Although  some  in  my  group  would  dif- 
fer on  priorities,  all  could  essentially  accept  Bunch's  commitment  to 
beginning  an  analysis  of  patriarchy  by  dealing  with  its  manifesta- 
tions in  capitalism,  imperialism,  and  heterosexism.4 

Bunch's  discussion  suffers  from  two  additional  problems.  First, 
she  equates  socialist  women  with  socialist-feminists.  You  can  be  a 
lesbian  and  not  be  a  lesbian-feminist.  You  can  also  be  a  socialist  wo- 
man and  not  a  feminist — this  was  evident  in  many  of  the  earliest  so- 
cialist formulations  of  'the  woman  problem.'  Second,  Bunch  equates 
the  development  of  socialist-feminist  theory  with  the  Antioch  Con- 
ference of  1975.  I  don't  think  any  socialist-feminist  would  deny  that 
the  conference  was  more  Marxist  than  it  was  feminist.  But  is  that 
really  so  surprising?  The  author  herself  acknowledges  the  advantage 
held  by  pre-existing  political  groups  and  political  philosophies.  They 
(established  socialist,  Marxist,  and  Marxist-Leninist  groups)  had  the 
advantage  at  the  conference.  They  were  organized.  But  as  a  result  of 
the  conference,  through  the  whole  process  of  criticism  and  analysis, 
socialist-feminist  analysis  gathered  new  clarity.  If  the  development 
of  socialist-feminism  is  a  process,  then  the  belief  that  it  could  be  com- 
pleted in  a  one-time  conference  is  more  destructive  than  productive. 
What  is  needed,  now  that  we  have  begun  to  define  socialist-  femi- 
nism, are  further  meetings  for  the  new  developments  to  gain  expo- 
sure. 

I  have  spoken  mostly  about  socialist-feminism  because  I  have  been 
in  this  area  of  the  movement.  I  am  hesitant  to  embrace  'nonaligned 
feminism'  because  it  does  not  speak  with  sufficient  explicitness  to 
the  multiple  challenge  of  patriarchy,  capitalism,  and  racism.  Femin- 
ism is  important  as  a  political  term  because  it  makes  explicit  the  com- 
mitment to  the  destruction  of  patriarchy.  It  is  not  an  untroubled 


Critique  and  Commentary/63 


term — it  often  has  been  interpreted  as  a  white,  middle-class  pheno- 
mena with  racist  and  bourgeois  overtones.  Nevertheless,  many  of  us 
have  embraced  the  term  because  of  the  historical  and  political  strug- 
gles that  are  a  part  of  its  statement.  The  explicit  commitment  to  so- 
cialism also  needs  to  be  stated.  Although  we  have  chosen  to  disasso- 
ciate ourselves  from  the  male  left  and  its  practice,  it  is  important  to 
remain  consciously  connected  to  the  struggle  against  capitalism. 

Although  I  am  active  in  the  Ithaca  socialist-feminist  collective,  a 
non-aligned  group,  I  believe  that  a  coalition  among  radical  feminists, 
lesbian-feminists,  and  socialist  feminists  is  possible  and  necessary. 
The  politics  of  cultural  feminism  and  political  reformism  raise  seri- 
ous problems  for  a  working  coalition.  Although  coalition  work  with 
them  would  be  more  limited,  the  larger  coalition  between  socialist- 
feminists,  lesbian-feminists,  and  radical  feminists  would  struggle  for 
unity  on  shared  goals.  The  dichotomy  between  reform  and  revolu- 
tion may  be  part  of  the  'either/or7  politics  we  can  move  beyond. 
Bunch  names  the  problem. ..the  Western  capitalist/imperialist/racist 
heterosexist  patriarchy../'5  A  coalition  among  us  is  needed  to  destroy 
it. 

Footnotes 

1.  Charlotte  Bunch,  "Beyond  Either/Or:  Feminist  Options,"  111:1  Quest:  a  feminist  quar- 
terly (Summer,  1976),  p.  3. 

2.  Ibid.,  p.  6. 

3.  Zillah  Eisenstein,  "Some  Notes  on  the  Relations  of  Patriarchal  Capitalism,"  Un- 
published paper,  Department  of  Politics,  Ithaca,  N.Y. 

4.  Op.  cit.,  Bunch,  p. 6. 

5.  Ibid.,  p.  6. 

Zillah  Eisenstein  is  an  Assistant  Professor  of  political  philosophy  at  Ithaca  Col- 
lege and  has  been  active  in  the  women's  movement  for  several  years. 


FAAR 

NEWS 

Feminist  Alliance 

Against  Rape 

Bi-monthly  Newsletter 


Over  200  groups  worldwide  are  or- 
ganized against  rape.  Their  political 
and  tactical  struggles  are  of  interest 
to  all  feminists.  Read  F.A.A.R.  News 
for: 

•  news  of  innovative  anti-rape  pro- 
jects   being    developed    by    women. 

•  analysis  of  issues  and  problems 
which  face  women  committed  to  stop- 
ping rape  .  .  .  prisons,  reformism,  pro- 
fessionalism, funding,  rape  preven- 
tion, etc. 

Annual  subscription  rates: 
$5/individuals,  rape  groups 
$10/institutions 

P.O.  Box  21033 
Washington,  D.C.  20009 


641  Quest 


TheGFeministGWorkplace 


Interview  with 
Nancy  MacDonald 


This  interview  of  Nancy  MacDonald 
was  conducted  by  Lexi  Freeman  of  the 
Quest  staff  and  by  Jackie  MacMillan,  a 
former  member  of  the  Rape  Crisis 
Center,  founder  and  member  of  the 
Feminist  Alliance  Against  Rape,  and 
member  of  the  theme  development 
committee  for  this  issue  of  Quest. 

Nancy  McDonald  recently  resigned 
as  administrator  of  the  D.C.  Rape  Cri- 
sis Center.  The  Center's  primary  goal  is 
to  work  towards  elimination  of  rape  by 
attempting  to  deal  with  rape  in  a  com- 
prehensive way.  It  provides  direct  ser- 
vices to  rape  victims  through  counsel- 
ing and  the  dissemination  of  medical 
information;  it  provides  programs 
aimed  at  educating  people  politically 
about  rape  (primarily  in  the  D.C.  Pub- 
lic Schools);  and  it  works  to  reform  in- 
stitutions connected  with  rape,  includ- 
ing the  police  department,  hospitals 
and  the  legal  system.  The  bulk  of  the 
funding  for  the  Center  comes  through  a 
contract  with  the  D.C.  Government. 

This  interview  was  conducted  with 
Nancy  to  gain  some  insight  into  the  ex- 
perience one  woman  has  had  working 
intimately  and  over  a  long  period  of 
time  in  a  feminist  workplace;  why  she 
chose  to  work  there  and  what  she  per- 
ceives as  the  advantages  and  disadvan- 
tages of  such  a  work  choice. 

While  listening  to  the  tape  of  this  in- 
terview,   Lexi    and    Jackie   found    them- 


selves both  disagreeing  with  and  elab- 
orating upon  some  of  Nancy's  com- 
ments. Many  observations  about  the 
Center  corresponded  to  their  own  fem- 
inist workplace  experiences.  At  the 
same  time,  some  of  Nancy's  comments 
seemed  to  apply  to  a  particular  type  of 
organizing.  In  their  companion  piece 
which  follows  the  interview,  Lexi  and 
Jackie  attempted  to  draw  some  general- 
izations regarding  various  aspects  of 
feminist  workplaces. 

L:  What  are  some  of  the  reasons 
that  women  choose  to  work  at  the 
Center? 

N:  There  are  many  different  rea- 
sons. Some  women  are  motivated 
by  a  sense  of  outrage  caused  by  an 
individual  attack  against  them  or 
someone  close  to  them.  Others 
have  come  to  an  understanding  of 
the  kinds  of  institutional  prejudice 
and  discrimination  that  exist  against 
women,  again  perhaps  through  an 
individual  experience,  and  they,  too, 
want  to  do  something.  Some  are 
bored  or  unfulfilled  in  their  regular 
jobs,  and  are  anxious  to  work  with 
other  women  to  change  things.  Wo- 
men have  also  come  to  the  Center 
from  other  crisis  centers  after  mov- 
ing to  D.C.  A  lot  of  women  express 
a  desire  to  work  directly  with  vic- 
tims. New  women  come  especially 
because  they  want  to  counsel  vic- 
tims, and  often  do  not  necessarily 
feel  the  other  work  of  the  Center  is 


The  Feminist  Workplace/65 


as  important  as  counseling  and  di- 
rect contact  with  victims.  Often  wo- 
men who  come  to  the  Center 
haven't  thought  about  rape  in  politi- 
cal terms,  and  some  don't  have  very 
much  experience  in  organizing.  So 
it's  a  very  mixed  group. 

L:  If  that's  the  case,  what  process 
of  political  education  and  conscious- 
ness-raising on  the  issue  of  rape 
goes  on  at  the  Center,  and  what 
structures  have  been  set  up  for 
training  women  to  work  at  the  Cen- 
ter? 

N:  We've  experimented  and  we've 
changed  our  structures  continually 
to  deal  with  this,  mainly  because 
there's  no  guarantee  that  once 
you've  hung  around  the  Center  for 
awhile  you're  going  to  have  a  politi- 
cal consciousness  about  the  act  of 
rape.  From  the  beginning  it  was  felt 
that  no  special  skills  were  needed  to 
deal  with  rape  victims  other  than 
empathy  and  the  fact  that  you  were 
a  woman.  We  never  felt  that  you 
had  to  have  counseling  experience 
or  anything  like  that;  we  felt  that 
you  could  learn  what  you  needed  to 
know  from  the  women  at  the  Cen- 
ter. 

Training  has  been  very  informal 
in  the  past,  although  it  has  become 
more  structured.  Our  original  ori- 
entations were  seminars  where  wo- 
men who  had  been  around  the  Cen- 
ter for  a  while  would  talk  in  small 
groups  about  areas  where  they  had 
particular  knowledge,  such  as  medi- 
cal treatment,  counseling,  speaking, 
or  whatever.  The  knowledge  wo- 
men gained  was  primarily  from 
working  on  the  phone  and  from  be- 
ing in  the  Center  and  seeing  how 


things  ran.  Reading  was  encour- 
aged— the  Center's  own  literature 
and  books  we  felt  had  a  good  analy- 
sis of  rape.  Now  the  women  who 
are  operating  the  Center  have  a 
formally  structured  training  pro- 
gram, which  has  ten  weekly  ses- 
sions, and  additional  political  dis- 
cussions on  specific  topics.  They 
structure  training  more  tradition- 
ally now,  because  a  lot  of  women 
who  came  felt  disoriented  and 
needed  more  structure.  Training 
has  always  been  something  we  felt 
we  would  change  based  on  the 
needs  of  the  women  who  were 
there  at  the  time. 

L:  To  the  extent  to  which  you 
have  different  levels  of  involve- 
ment in  the  Center,  what  kinds  of 
structures  have  evolved  for  deci- 
sion-making? 

N:  Originally,  members  had 
weekly  meetings  and  all  decisions 
were  made  then.  There  was  a  Steer- 
ing Committee,  which  was  com- 
posed of  the  heads  of  committees  in 
specific  areas  such  as  counseling, 
self-defense,  and  so  on;  the  Steering 
Committee  decided  overall  policy. 
Regular  day-to-day  decisions  were 
held  over  for  the  weekly  meetings. 
With  the  advent  of  a  paid  staff,  it 
evolved  that  more  and  more  deci- 
sions on  a  day-to-day  basis  were 
made  by  the  paid  staff,  simply  be- 
cause they  were  around  more. 
Weekly  meetings  were  no  longer 
necessary;  meetings  are  now  held 
monthly,  and  we've  been  trying  to 
develop  new  structures  to  keep 
more  women  involved  in  decision- 
making. Of  course  the  staff  who  are 
there  every  day  will  make  more  de- 


66lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  3,  winter,  1976-77 


cisions  than  the  people  who  aren't, 
but  we  wanted  women  who  were 
committed  to  the  Center  for  a  long 
time  but  weren't  being  paid,  to  have 
participation  in  decision  making. 
One  way  this  has  been  done  is  to 
distinguish  between  members  of 
the  Center  and  volunteers.  A  volun- 
teer is  a  woman  who  has  joined  the 
Center  and  is  being  trained  but  has 
not  yet  made  a  long-term  commit- 
ment to  our  work.  A  member  is 
someone  who  worked  at  the  Center 
for  six  months,  has  gone  through 
training  and  is  obviously  going  to 
be  around  for  a  while;  members 
have  the  same  decision-making  ca- 
pacity as  the  paid  staff. 

Another  structure  for  decision 
making  is  that  on  major  decisions 
between  meetings,  three  other 
people  have  to  be  consulted  by  the 
woman  who  is  dealing  with  the 
matter  individually.  For  example,  if 


Time  called  up  and  wanted  an  inter- 
view, the  woman  who  took  the  call 
would  have  to  discuss  it  with  three 
other  women  before  making  a  com- 
mitment. We  have  been  very  cons- 
cious of  keeping  all  the  Center 
members  involved  in  decisions,  not 
just  those  who  are  paid. 

J:  The  Center,  from  my  experience, 
is  an  organization  women  can  come 
into  without  any  background  in  the 
women's  movement  and  learn 
about  it  there,  whereas  a  lot  of 
groups  want  only  women  who  have 
some  movement  background  or  ex- 
perience. Do  you  consider  this  one 
of  the  functions  of  the  Center? 

N:  Looking  back  it's  a  place  where 
a  lot  of  women  have  come  who 
would  not  consider  themselves 
feminists,  but  through  their  work 
with  the  Center,  they  come  in  con- 
tact with  the  political  ideas  of  the 
women's  movement.  They  see 
these  ideas  in  relation  to  a  concrete 
problem.  This  experience  breaks 
down  barriers  that  exist  between 
many  women  and  the  women's 
movement.  Black  women,  for  in- 
stance, who  saw  the  Center  as  a 
white  woman's  place,  came  and  saw 
women  trying  to  deal  with  racism 
and  dedicated  to  meeting  the  needs 
of  black  women  in  the  community. 
Also,  a  lot  of  straight  women  at  the 
Center  had  their  first  conversation 
with  a  woman  they  knew  was  a  les- 
bian. 

It's  a  place  where  the  political 
ideas  of  the  movement  are  person- 
alized— divested  of  all  those  trap- 
pings that  are  so  alienating  to  so 
many  women — because  just  sitting 


photograph  by  Ginger  Legato 


Interview/67 


around  talking  and  dealing  with 
whatever  you  have  to  do,  and  learn- 
ing by  doing,  breaks  down  barriers. 
It  doesn't  always  work,  obviously, 
there  have  been  straight  women 
who  have  left  the  Center,  freaked 
out  about  the  fact  that  someone  is  a 
lesbian;  some  women  are  alienated 
by  a  political  analysis  of  rape,  others 
put  off  by  a  chaotic  working  situa- 
tion. But  at  least  it's  a  beginning.  I 
see  that  now  as  something  really 
important. 

J:  I've  heard  women  talk  about 
the  Center  as  different  from  the 
rest  of  the  women's  movement,  and 
I  think  that's  largely  because  many 
women  get  their  idea  of  the  move- 
ment from  the  media,  and  they 
haven't  previously  been  exposed  di- 
rectly to  any  kind  of  feminist  opera- 
tion. The  Center  is  not  that  radical- 
ly different  from  a  lot  of  other  fem- 
inist groups;  it's  just  that  the  direct 
contact  between  women  there 
breaks  down  some  of  the  myths 
about  what  the  women's  move- 
ment is  like. 

L:  What  do  you  see  as  important 
attributes  of  the  Center  as  a  femi- 
nist workplace? 

N:  One  is  the  fact  that  you  can  re- 
tain a  large  measure  of  control  over 
your  workplace.  As  a  group  we  set 
the  hours,  divide  the  work,  deter- 
mine the  salaries,  and  hire  and  re- 
lease the  staff,  based  on  our  judg- 
ment of  the  best  way  to  operate. 
The  decisions  we  make  may  ulti- 
mately be  incorrect,  and  a  lot  of 
times  after  we've  decided  some- 
thing, six  months  later  we  kick  our- 


selves; but  we  have  the  responsi- 
bility, and  we  learn  how  to  make 
decisions  by  making  them.  That's 
one  area  where  most  women  have 
very  little  experience,  and  for  new- 
comers especially,  it  can  be  very  in- 
timidating. I  think  that's  where 
support  in  making  decisions  is  im- 
portant. 

Another  positive  aspect  of  the 
Center  is  that  it  provides  for  sup- 
port in  dealing  with  personal  prob- 
lems. If  you  are  working  in  a  regu- 
lar job  and  your  kids  get  sick  or  you 
need  to  look  for  a  place  to  live, 
that's  your  problem.  If  you  have 
leave  time,  fine;  otherwise,  too  bad, 
and  if  you  can't  deal  with  it — very 
well,  that  just  means  you're  incom- 
petent. At  the  Center,  though,  we 
feel  that  as  long  as  you  get  your 
work  done  and  the  phone  is  cov- 
ered, if  you  have  to  take  off  a  couple 
of  days  to  look  for  a  house  or  some- 
thing like  that,  that's  all  right.  We 
see  problems  that  women  face  as  set 
in  a  political  context.  That  realiza- 
tion, for  women  who  come  there,  is 
very  important. 

Also,  there  is  the  possibility  for 
self-education  and  development  in  a 
supportive  context  at  the  Center. 
When  you  come,  you  have  an  op- 
portunity to  learn  about  health, 
peer  counseling,  fundraising,  speak- 
ing, workshops — all  kinds  of  stuff — 
and  you  do  it  in  a  supportive  atmos- 
phere. You're  encouraged  to  try 
things  you  never  thought  about  do- 
ing before,  and  this  is  important, 
both  for  your  self-concept  and  for 
the  needs  of  the  Center  as  well.  At 
the  Center,  women  can  break  out  of 
traditional  "female"  behavior  pat- 
terns without  fear  of  being  ridiculed 


68lQuest 


or  censured  for  trampling  on  male 
egos.  Most  important,  you  under- 
stand things  that  happen  to  women 
as  political  acts  in  a  larger  frame- 
work, and  you  see  both  the  need  for 
change  and  the  possibilities  for  it. 

J:       You  can  make  things  happen. 

N:  Also,  you  can  see  a  lot  of  con- 
tradictions right  up  front.  You  can- 
not escape  racism;  there's  no  way 
you  cannot  see  what  happens  to 
black  women  in  the  criminal  justice 
system,  as  opposed  to  what  hap- 
pens to  white  women.  There  is  no 
way  you  can  ignore  classism — what 
happens  when  an  upper-class  wo- 
man goes  to  an  institution  like  the 
police,  compared  to  what  happens 
to  a  lower-class  woman.  It's  right 
there.  There's  just  no  way  you  can 
avoid  it. 

Something  else  that  was  impor- 
tant to  me  was  the  chance  for  per- 
sonal contact  with  women  who  are 
organizers  and  leaders,  because 
elsewhere  you  don't  really  have  ac- 
cess to,  or  day-to-day  contact  with, 
women  who  are  role  models  in 
these  areas.  Seeing  that  develop- 
ment potential  as  a  possibility  for 
themselves  is  very  important,  es- 
pecially, I  think,  to  young  women. 

J:  What  are  some  of  the  negative 
aspects  you've  found  working  at 
the  Center? 

N:  One  of  the  worst  things  was 
the  fragmentation.  Because  the  re- 
sources are  limited,  everybody  has 
to  do  a  lot  of  different  things.  You 
begin  to  feel  you  can  never  com- 
plete a  task,  never  accomplish  any- 


thing, only  just  begin  to  keep  your 
head  above  water.  You  just  about 
get  things  straight  and  then,  say,  a 
funding  crisis  comes  up,  which 
means  everything  has  to  be  drop- 
ped to  deal  with  City  Council.  Or 
you  lose  your  office  and  you  have 
to  look  for  a  new  one,  and  you  drop 
everything  to  deal  with  that.  This  is 
extremely  frustrating. 

Next,  you  see  the  same  problems 
over  and  over  again.  No  day-time 
volunteers;  people  who  come  a- 
round  three  or  four  times  and  then 
disappear — these  are  perennial 
problems.  When  you've  been  at  the 
Center  for  a  long  time,  it  seems  as 
though  you  never  get  anywhere  in 
dealing  with  rape — women  just 
keep  on  calling.  And  too,  the  lack  of 
financial  resources  creates  really 
difficult  choices;  one  salary  is  open: 
should  we  hire  a  Spanish-speaking 
woman,  or  a  black  woman?  What 
do  you  do?  Dealing  with  this  kind 
of  dilemma  absorbs  a  lot  of  energy, 
and  in  the  end  there  is  really  no 
right  decision  you  can  make.  It  can 
be  physically  and  emotionally  ex- 
hausting. 

I  think  the  negative  things  work 
in  two  ways:  number  one,  they 
cause  people  to  burn  out;  women 
resist  and  try  to  cope  with  them 
and  deal  with  them  until  they  are 
too  burned  out  to  do  anything  else. 
At  the  same  time,  while  you  are  in 
the  process  of  being  burned  out, 
you  learn  very  hard  lessons  about 
your  own  personal  strengths,  about 
your  priorities,  about  political  reali- 
ties, about  your  own  energy  and  its 
limitations.  I  think  sometimes  we 
can  do  everything  and  be  anything, 
and  then  we  find  out  that  that  isn't 


Interview/69 


true.  It's  a  very  difficult  but  very 
important  thing  to  learn.  So  in 
some  ways  I  see  the  negative  things 
as  just  as  important  as  the  positive 
ones.  One  concrete  way  these  neg- 
ative experiences  are  modified  is 
through  the  interaction  of  old  and 
new  members,  and  this  combina- 
tion of  perspectives  helps  all  the 
members  overcome  negative  exper- 
iences. 

L:  I  want  to  discuss  the  question 
of  volunteerism,  because  that's 
an  issue  that  comes  up  all  the  time 
in  feminist  organizations.  How  do 
we  solve  the  problems  that  arise 
from  having  paid  staff  and  non-paid 
staff,  and  what  do  you  think  are 
some  of  the  drawbacks  volunteer- 
ism  poses  in  feminist  organiza- 
tions? 

N:  I  think  volunteerism  is  a  draw- 
back. It  has  a  lot  of  negative  effects. 
It  limits  the  participation  of  some  of 
the  Third  World  and  working-class 
women  because  these  women  need 
money  to  survive  and  they  just 
don't  have  the  luxury  of  volunteer- 
ing. It  also  creates  friction  between 
people  who  are  paid  and  people  who 
are  not  paid.  People  who  aren't  paid 
for  their  work  sometimes  take 
themselves  less  seriously.  (They  are 
not  as  dependable — they  don't 
think  their  work  is  as  important  so 
their  self-concept  is  affected.)  Vol- 
unteerism also  affects  the  way 
people  look  at  an  organization; 
people  don't  think  much  of  volun- 
teers. Outside  the  organization,  the 
work  of  volunteers  isn't  taken  seri- 
ously. People  tend  to  feel  that  vol- 
unteers aren't  capable  of  handling 


anything  more  than  shitwork. 
They  don't  see  volunteers  as  people 
who  are  capable  of  doing  every- 
thing anyone  else  can  do. 

L:  To  me,  the  question  of  volun- 
teerism, however,  is  sometimes 
even  more  complicated  than  that, 
because  I'm  not  sure  that  every  wo- 
man who's  a  volunteer  in  a  feminist 
organization  would  choose  to  take  a 
full-time,  paid  job  there  even  if  she 
could.  What  are  some  of  the  rea- 
sons women  would  choose  to  work 
full-time  in  a  feminist  organiza- 
tion? 

N:  First,  it's  not  something  you 
just  go  out  and  do,  like  getting  a 
regular  job.  I  don't  think  it's  some- 
thing you  choose;  it's  something 
you  see  a  need  for  doing  and  you  do 
it.  If  you  get  paid  for  it,  that's  good 
— that  means  you  can  eat. 

L:  Do  you  seek  a  job  in  the  move- 
ment in  the  same  way  you  look  for 
other  jobs? 

N:  No,  the  Movement  is  some- 
thing you  come  to  for  other  rea- 
sons, like  political  commitment.  It's 
definitely  not  the  same  kind  of  pro- 
cedure you  go  through  when  you 
look  in  the  want  ads  to  find  a  job. 

L:  You've  mentioned  that  it's  a 
way  of  accomplishing  political  goals, 
and  that's  one  of  the  biggest  rea- 
sons women  choose  to  work  in  a 
feminist  organization.  But  what 
does  it  mean  to  that  woman  in 
terms  of  a  long-range  career?  Does 
she  limit  her  participation  in  the 
feminist  organization  to  two  years, 


70lQuest 


and  then  go  out  and  get  a  job  some- 
where else?  And,  if  she  does,  what 
does  that  mean  for  continuity  in  the 
women's  movement  and  in  feminist 
organizations? 

N:  Often  negative  working  condi- 
tions preclude  long-term  commit- 
ment to  feminist  workplaces.  When 
women  burn  themselves  out,  they 
are  no  longer  able  to  function  pro- 
ductively in  a  group.  One  way  the 
Crisis  Center  has  dealt  with  this  is 
to  have  a  Board  of  Trustees  which 
is  made  up  of  some  of  the  founders 
of  the  Center,  as  well  as  others  with 
a  long-term  commitment  to  anti- 
rape  organizing.  The  trustees  par- 
ticipate in  the  hiring  of  the  admini- 
strator and  oversee  long  range  poli- 
cy and  goals  for  the  Center.  Thus, 
those  women  who,  for  a  number  of 
reasons  choose  not  to  participate  in 
the  day-to-day  workings  of  the 
Center,  can  maintain  long-term  in- 
put and  continuity. 

L:  How  does  the  Center  maintain 
a  balance  between  resolving  these 
internal  struggles  and  accomplish- 
ing its  external  goals? 

N:  Well,  I  don't  think  we  have  ev- 
er really  resolved  this.  WeVe  never 
let  the  internal  structure  become 
our  priority.  All  along,  if  something 
didn't  work,  we  simply  changed  it; 
we  never  made  having  a  perfectly- 
functioning  place  our  main  goal. 
There  have  been  times  when  prob- 
lems haven't  been  dealt  with,  when 
things  haven't  been  resolved,  when 
structures  haven't  been  created  or 
changed  because  the  most  impor- 
tant thing  was  to  keep  the  Center 


functioning.  But  I  think  we've 
struck  a  pretty  good  balance.  One 
way  to  provide  internal  continuity 
is  through  written  policy.  In  1975 
we  synthesized  a  lot  of  ideas  from 
position  papers  and  other  sources 
into  a  comprehensive  written  poli- 
cy. We  went  over  the  minutes  from 
weekly  meetings  and  all  the  written 
material  at  the  Center,  and  we 
wrote  down  the  political  ideas  that 
the  old  members  had  been  carrying 
in  their  heads — about  victims,  about 
the  criminal  justice  system,  about 
internal  operations,  and  so  on,  as 
well  as  office  procedures.  That  gave 
us  framework.  All  this  can  be  re- 
ferred to;  you  can  hand  it  to  some- 
body to  read,  and  she  can  get  an  idea 
of  what  is  going  on  in  the  Center.  It 
is  important  for  accountability  as 
well,  particularly  with  the  diversity 
of  women  at  the  Center.  In  femi- 
nist workplaces,  ordinarily,  women 
have  a  shared  level  of  conscious- 
ness about  feminism  and  politics. 
Because  the  Center  isn't  that  way, 
there  are  inevitable  conflicts;  the 
women  there  don't  share  the  same 
politics.  A  conflict  arose,  for  in- 
stance, when  a  woman  did  some- 
thing that  was  contrary  to  a  deci- 
sion made  at  a  steering  committee 
meeting — because  she  felt  it  was 
the  right  thing  to  do.  When  it  was 
found  out,  we  had  a  series  of  meet- 
ings which  ultimately  ended  in  her 
resignation.  Now  we  have  a  clause 
at  the  front  of  the  policy  statement 
saying  that  members  of  the  Center 
have  a  responsibility  to  abide  by  its 
policies,  to  act  in  accordance  with 
the  by-laws,  to  attempt  to  change 
them  when  necessary,  and  to  resign 
only  when  changes   acceptable  to 


Interview/71 


J 


them  do  not  occur.  This  seems  to  be 
the  only  solution  when  women 
don't  all  share  the  same  goals. 

L:  The  fact  that  you  have  been 
able  to  attract  a  diverse  group  of 
women  to  the  Center  is  a  credit  to 
your  ability  to  reach  out  to  the 
community.  I'd  like  to  hear  about 
that. 

N:  I  have  felt  that  the  Center  has 
made  a  real  effort  to  reach  other 
women,  especially  through  printed 
matter  and  speaking.  I  think  it  is 
important  to  translate  politics — 
which  can  be  so  alienating — into 
something  concrete.  When  you  give 
a  speech  entitled,  "The  Politics  of 
Rape,"  for  instance,  people  don't 
know  what  you're  talking  about.  So 
you  point  out  that  rape  is  a  political 
act  because  it  is  used  as  a  tool  by 


men  to  limit  the  mobility,  behavior 
and  ultimately  the  power  of  wo- 
men. You  say  that  rape  functions  in 
the  interest  of  all  men,  and  to  the 
detriment  of  all  women.  While  not 
all  of  us  will  be  criminally  raped,  we 
all  know  the  fear  of  rape,  and  it  al- 
ters our  lives  considerably — the 
threat  of  rape  affects  where  we  live 
— and  with  whom —  when  we  go 
out  and  where,  and  so  on.  When 
you  relate  these  concepts  to,  say, 
housing  security,  or  being  on  the 

street  after  working  late women 

start  thinking  about  things  they 
have  never  even  thought  of  as  poli- 
tical before,  and  that  they  certainly 
didn't  associate  with  feminism. 

It  is  really  important  that  the  pol- 
itics of  the  women's  movement  be 
translated  into  concrete  experience, 
and  be  brought  to  other  women.  I 
think  that  outreach  can  best  be  ac- 


721  Quest 


©  photograph  by  Elenore  Pred 


complished  through  speaking  and 
writing  about  very  concrete  things. 

L:  Let  me  ask  one  more  question: 
what  do  you  see  as  the  long-range 
direction  for  the  Center  in  terms  of 
your  financial  survival? 

N:  Recently  the  Center  has  been 
through  a  crisis  in  which  the  entire 
contract  for  the  community  educa- 
tion program  ($29,000,  practically 
the  entire  operating  budget)  was 
cut  from  next  year's  D.C.  budget. 
Dealing  with  the  cutoff  of  funds 
often  has  a  very  concrete  effect  on 
organizing  activities — the  main  ob- 
jectives of  an  organization  may  be 
sidetracked  while  organizers  fight 
for  salaries  and  survival.*  We've 
had  other  problems  with  the  City 
funding  agency  during  the  past  few 
years — subtle  and  not-so-subtle 
forms  of  harassment,  including  city 
monitoring  of  our  speeches  and  de- 
mands for  background  information 
on  all  Center  members.  We  had  to 
learn  how  to  deal  with  bureaucrats; 
when  to  fight,  when  to  compro- 
mise. It  takes  a  lot  of  time  and  ener- 
gy to  keep  on  top  of  things.  We'd 
like  to  establish  some  form  of  inde- 
pendent enterprise  to  sustain  our 
work — we've  discussed  a  self-de- 
fense school  quite  seriously,  and  I 
joke  about  starting  a  restaurant, 
but  we  haven't  hit  on  anything  vi- 
able yet. 

One  of  the  positive  elements  of 
our  recent  battle  with  the  city  was 
the  impressive  amount  of  commu- 
nity support  and  pressure  we  mar- 

*For  a  complete  discussion  of  the  Crisis  Center's 
funding  battle,  see  the  Feminist  Alliance  Against 
Rape  Newsletter.  (November-December,   1976). 


shalled  in  defense  of  our  funding.  It 
was  very  plain  to  the  City  Council 
that  we  were  not  going  to  go  away, 
that  our  demands  had  to  be  met, 
and  that  others  support  our  work. 
Although  next  year's  funding  is  still 
not  definite  there's  a  sense  now 
that  the  funding  for  the  Crisis  Cen- 
ter just  can't  be  lopped  off  the  bud- 
get. I  think  that  the  ongoing  strug- 
gle of  the  Crisis  Center  demon- 
strates the  tenacity  of  most  femi- 
nist workplaces  in  dealing  with  con- 
tradictions. We  are  going  to  keep  on 
until  we  reach  our  goal,  the  elimi- 
nation of  rape  from  our  lives. 

Nancy  McDonald  was  a  member  of  the 
DC  Rape  Crisis  Center  for  two  years.  She 
was  Hotline  Coordinator,  and  also  handled 
the  general  administration  of  the  Center  for 
a  year.  Presently,  she  is  an  administrator 
with  the  National  Center  for  Urban  Ethnic 
Affairs,  in  Washington,  D.C. 

Building  Feminist 
Organizations 

By  ALEXA  FREEMAN 
and  JACKIE  McMILLAN 

While  listening  to  a  tape  of  this 
interview  we  found  ourselves  stop- 
ping the  tape  recorder  to  discuss 
different  points  that  were  raised. 
We  are  convinced  of  the  importance 
of  building  feminist  organizations 
in  the  movement,  and  it  is  our  hope 
that  this  interview  will  stimulate 
discussion  for  you  as  it  did  for  us. 
There  are  three  issues  we  would 
particularly  like  to  address:  how 
does  a  feminist  organization  oper- 
ate  as   an  environment  for  doing 


Building  Feminist  Organizations/73 


feminist  work;  the  question  of  why/ 
how  a  woman  comes  to  work  in 
one;  and  finally,  the  building  of 
long-lasting  commitments  to  our 
organizations. 


What  is  the  feminist  organization 
as  workplace? 

A  feminist  organization  provides 
an  environment  where  work  is 
done  that  in  one  way  or  another 
builds  and  strengthens  the  wo- 
men's movement — leads  toward 
fundamental  change  in  our  society. 
This  feminist  work  may  be  paid  or 
non-paid,  and  full  or  part-time. 
Feminist  organizations  are  impor- 
tant because  they  provide  a  visible 
power  base  for  feminist  struggle. 
Therefore,  inherent  in  our  defini- 
tion of  the  feminist  organization/ 
workplace  is  that  it  must  be  con- 
trolled by  feminists.  No  matter  how 
supportive  the  relationships  are 
that  might  exist  within  the  wo- 
men's studies  department  of  a  uni- 
versity, or  at  an  abortion  clinic,  and 
no  matter  what  the  political  goals 
of  the  individual  women  working 
there  are,  such  places  cannot  be 
considered  feminist  organizations 
unless  those  women  control  overall 
policy.* 

*  Many  women  who  identify  as  feminists  feel  that 
they  can  do  feminist  work  in  traditional  workplaces. 
While  this  is  possible,  we  feel  that  it  is  much  more  dif- 
ficult than  working  directly  through  independent  femi- 
nist organizations.  Feminists  working  in  traditional 
institutions  can  do  various  forms  of  workplace  organi- 
zing. In  addition,  feminists  who  have  credentials  can 
obtain  positions  of  relative  power  in  policy-making 
levels  of  private  or  public  agencies.  For  many  years  we 
have  been  saying  that  such  positions  are  important  for 
the  women's  movement.  But  they  are  practically  use- 
less to  us  as  political  tools,  unless  individual  women 


Feminist  workplaces  can  vary 
tremendously  with  respect  to  focus, 
activities,  financial  base,  etc.  The 
feminist  organization  can  provide  a 
product  or  service  to  a  particular 
community  as  well  as  jobs  and  skills 
development  to  its  workers.  It  can 
engage  in  research  or  provide  edu- 
cational services.  It  can  transmit  ed- 
ucation, or  ideas,  through  various 
media.  It  can  engage  in  reform  acti- 
vities. A  feminist  organization  can 
incorporate  any  or  many  of  these 
activities  for  a  number  of  constitu- 
encies. Though  some  feminist  or- 
ganizations are  financially  self-sup- 
porting, others  operate  on  public  or 
private  grant  money,  through  in- 
come sharing  among  members  or 
through  combinations  of  these  rev- 
enue structures.  In  short,  feminist 
organizations  are  diverse.  And  this 
diversity  is  positive  in  many  re- 
spects; it  reflects  the  grass-roots 
nature  of  the  women's  movement. 
We  are  beginning  to  build  stronger 
and  more  sophisticated  organiza- 
tions based  on  our  own  experiences 
dealing  with  problems  and  contra- 
dictions. We've  learned  a  lot  from 
our  successes  and  from  our  fail- 
ures. Our  organizations  are  essen- 
tial not  only  for  the  concrete  goals 
they  set  out  to  perform  but  as  the 
visible     structural    forms    of    the 

holding  these  positions  have  ties  with  independent  fem- 
inist organizations.  Feminist  organizations  acting  as 
support  groups  can  enable  feminist  professionals  to 
share  responsibility  for  decision  making  and  provide 
structures  for  accountability.  Such  structures  can  en- 
courage professionals  to  take  risks  that  they  would  not 
and  could  not  take  in  isolation. 

For  further  discussion  on  the  issue  of  professional- 
ism, see  Feminist  Alliance  Against  Rape  News- 
letter (Fall,  1975),  available  from  F.A.A.R.,  P.O. 
Box  21033,   Washington,  D.C.  20009. 


74lQuest 


movement,  the  primary  vehicle  for 
attracting  new  women.  Organiza- 
tions are  also  models  for  the  fu- 
ture—we build  from  the  bases  we 
have  created.  We  are  a  young 
movement  and  do  not  have  a  totally 
clear  theory  and  direction.  But  this 
will  grow  in  part  from  an  examina- 


tion of  the  organizations  we  are 
building.  Work  at  the  feminist  or- 
ganization serves  as  a  base  for  fur- 
ther developing  our  political  ideas. 
This  article  will  focus  largely  on 
the  relationship  between  the  femi- 
nist organization  and  the  individual 
worker.  We  have  tried  to  identify 
some  problems  and  issues  that  are 
common  to  most,  if  not  all  feminist 
organizations.  The  relative  impor- 
tance and  range  of  solutions  will 
vary  according  to  the  nature  of  the 


project.  A  discussion  of  the  feminist 
organization  raises  a  number  of  ad- 
ditional questions  which  are  not 
within  the  scope  of  this  article: 
How  does  a  particular  organization 
relate  to  the  overall  movement? 
How  does  it  relate  to  the  communi- 
ty it  operates  in,  and  possibly 
serves?  What  kinds  of  larger  net- 
works for  support  and  accountabili- 
ty should  the  women's  movement 
be  developing? 

What  Brings  a  Woman  to  Work 
in  a  Feminist  Organization? 

Nancy  has  focused  on  some  of 
the  reasons  women  sought  out  the 
Rape  Crisis  Center.  The  reasons 
why  women  are  initially  attracted 
to  a  feminist  organization  are  var- 
ied. In  many  cases,  a  woman  seeks 
out  the  feminist  workplace  because 
she  is  dissatisfied  with  her  job,  or 
with  her  life  in  general,  and  looks  to 
the  movement  for  a  change  and  sig- 
nificance. Or  a  woman  may  be  out 
of  work  and  looking  for  paid  work, 
specifically  in  a  movement  organi- 
zation. The  work  at  a  particular  or- 
ganization may  relate  to  her  profes- 
sional or  academic  career  interests, 
and  thus  attract  her  for  that  rea- 
son; or  it  might  relate  to  a  personal 
experience  (a  woman  who  has  been 
beaten  by  her  husband  might  be- 
come involved  in  a  wife-abuse  shel- 
ter project,  for  example).  Or  a  wo- 
man might  be  specifically  sought 
out  to  work  at  a  feminist  project  be- 
cause of  her  special  skills.  Some  wo- 
men come  to  work  at  a  feminist  or- 
ganization because  they  want  to 
learn  about  feminism  and  the  wo- 
men's movement.  If  a  woman  comes 


photograph  hy  Ginger  Legato 


Building  Feminist  Organizations/75 


for  any  of  these  reasons,  it  may  be 
hoped  that  she  will  develop  a  basic 
feminist  political  perspective  and 
commitment  to  feminism  through 
her  experiences  there.  In  many 
cases,  women  come  to  work  at  femi- 
nist workplaces  for  clearly  political 
reasons.  They  already  have  a  com- 
mitment to  feminism  and  to  the  po- 
litical purpose  of  the  organization. 
We  certainly  need  to  ascertain  the 
reasons  why  a  woman  initially  seeks 
out  a  feminist  organization.  Such 
insights  can  help  us  to  refine  and 
improve  our  methods  of  outreach. 
However,  the  question  we  particu- 
larly want  to  address  here  is  why  a 
woman  chooses  to  remain  at  a  fem- 
inist organization,  and  to  continue 
her  work  there.  This  question  is 
critical  to  the  survival,  growth  and 
continuity  of  our  organizations. 

What  Makes  for  Long-Lasting 

Commitment  to  Feminist 

Organizations/Workplaces? 

The  immediate  advantages  of 
working  in  a  feminist  organization 
for  the  individual  woman  are  obvi- 
ous**: having  control  over  one's 
work;  learning  new  skills;  develop- 
ing different  self-concepts  and  the 
ability  to  take  certain  kinds  of  re- 
sponsibilities, and  thus  having  a 
measure  of  control  that  is  absent 
from  traditional  jobs;  the  opportu- 
nity to  work  in  a  supportive  atmos- 
phere; and  generally,  the  ability  to 
live  a  largely  integrated  existence 
where  one's  work  is  an  expression 
of  one's  life  and  purpose. 


**These  points  apply  especially  to  full-lime  workers  in 
a  feminist  organization. 


The  organization  also  serves  as  a 
base  for  getting  political  support 
and  criticism.  For  example,  suppose 
that,  due  to  some  special  expertise, 
a  feminist  is  approached  by  net- 
work T.V.  to  appear  on  a  major  talk 
show.  Assuming  that  the  issue  to 
be  discussed  is  in  any  way  political 
(abortion,  inflation,  education,  etc.), 
the  situation  will  be  potentially 
powerful  and  potentially  danger- 
ous. The  woman  will  have  to  decide 
whether  or  not  to  accept  the  invita- 
tion; and  if  she  does,  how  best  to 
exploit  the  opportunity  (without  in 
turn  being  exploited).  While  ulti- 
mately, the  individual  woman  is  ac- 
countable to  no  one  but  herself,  she 
may  want  to  seek  support  and  ac- 
countability in  making  these  deci- 
sions. If  she  belongs  to  a  feminist 
organization  where  there  is  a  high 
level  of  political  trust  she  might 
logically  turn  to  that  group  for  ad- 
vice. Lacking  such  a  base,  a  woman 
often  makes  decisions  after  consult- 
ing individuals — friends,  lovers,  etc. 
By  seeking  accountability  and  sup- 
port from  our  political  organiza- 
tions we  not  only  strengthen  these 
organizations,  but  also  give  individ- 
uals political  and  social  legitimacy 
and  endorsement  for  their  actions 
that  cannot  be  gotten  elsewhere. 

Probably  the  primary  need  that 
the  feminist  organization  fills  for 
individual  feminists  is  to  provide  a 
feminist  organizational  base.  Par- 
ticipation in  feminist  organizations 
is  what  makes  us  part  of  the  wo- 
men's movement.  A  feminist  or- 
ganization provides  an  environ- 
ment where  we  not  only  have 
shared  values  and  assumptions,  but 
where  we  are  doing  work  toward 


76lQuest 


shared  goals.  Without  our  feminist 
organizations,  feminism  is  limited 
to  an  abstract  concept.  At  our 
workplaces  it  becomes  a  living  reali- 
ty. Whether  we  are  full-time  or 
part-time,  paid  or  volunteer  work- 
ers, this  organizational  base  fills  a 
critical  need  for  individual  feminists 
and  for  the  movement. 

The  feminist  organization  as 
we've  described  it  seems  so  attrac- 
tive that  one  wonders  why  anybody 
would  choose  not  to  work  in  a  femi- 
nist organization,  or  why  anyone 
would  choose  to  leave.  Yet,  women 
often  turn  down  the  opportunity  to 
work  full-time  at  a  feminist  organi- 
zation (and  choose  part-time  femi- 
nist work)  and  women  regularly 
leave  paid  and  non-paid  movement 
jobs.  There  are  a  variety  of  person- 
al/political reasons  why  women 
leave.  Economic  realities  are  often 
the  primary  concern:  most  organi- 
zations cannot  afford  to  pay  salar- 
ies and  for  those  that  can  the  pay  is 
usually  not  competitive  with  other 
job  options  a  woman  may  have.  A 
woman  may  leave,  therefore,  be- 
cause she  needs  some  money  or 
more  than  the  organization  can 
provide,  greater  economic  or  job  se- 
curity and  the  opportunity  to  make 
long-range  personal  plans  that  re- 
quire a  stable  situation.  Some  wo- 
men are  giving  up  more  and  risking 
more  than  others  when  they  fully 
commit  themselves  to  a  feminist  or- 
ganization. A  woman  with  children 
is  often  laying  more  on  the  line  by 
foregoing  economic  security  than  a 
non-mother.  A  woman  from  a  more 
secure  economic  background  can 
better  afford  to  take  a  lower  salary 
and  to  give  up  certain  benefits  that 


she  might  have  gotten  from  a 
straight  job.  To  whatever  extent 
possible,  the  feminist  workplace 
must  provide  an  atmosphere  that 
enables  us  to  be  active  and  produc- 
tive as  feminist  workers  without 
becoming  martyrs.  If  our  structures 
are  not  sufficiently  able  to  support 
varying  needs  among  women,  then 
women  will  leave.  Other  reasons 
for  leaving  might  be  that  a  woman's 
self-concept,  social  pressures  or  ca- 
reer aspirations  may  lead  to  a  desire 
for  a  job  that  provides  greater  social 
legitimacy  than  movement  jobs 
generally  do.  Or,  a  woman  may  en- 
counter oppressive  class  or  race  at- 
titudes or  behavior  in  the  organiza- 
tion and  decide  to  leave.  Another 
reason  for  leaving  may  be  a  lack  of 
child-care  and  other  kinds  of  sup- 
port for  mothers.  Finally,  personal/ 
political  conflicts  within  the  organi- 
zation may  become  unresolvable  or 
too  emotionally  draining  for  some 
women.  In  a  feminist  organization 
committed  to  giving  each  woman 
responsibility  and  control  over  her 
own  work  and  to  working  to  devel- 
op a  political  context,  there  is  great- 
er risk  of  conflict.  When  conflict  is 
resolved,  it  is  usually  because  pro- 
cess, accountability  and  commit- 
ment have  been  developed  within 
the  organization.  However,  the 
conflicts  will  exist  and  a  woman 
must  be  willing  to  commit  the  ener- 
gy necessary  to  resolve  them. 

Many  of  these  problems  can  be 
eliminated  or  alleviated;  some,  such 
as  lack  of  security  and  legitimacy, 
will  continue  for  some  time.  How- 
ever, even  if  all  of  these  circum- 
stances disappeared,  women  would 
still   leave    feminist   organizations. 


Building  Feminist  Organizations/77 


For,  in  addition  to  personal  deci- 
sions, feminists  leave  feminist  or- 
ganizations for  political  reasons:  A 
woman  may  feel  that  her  peer 
group  is  too  narrow  and  that  this  is 
stifling  her  political  growth;  or  that 
she  is  becoming  too  focused  on  one 
issue  or  one  aspect  of  the  women's 
movement  and  that  her  perspective 
needs  broadening.  She  may  feel 
that  another  organization  is  mov- 
ing more  in  a  direction  that  inter- 
ests her,  or  that  she  has  more  to  of- 
fer another  group  due  to  special 
skills  or  insights.  If  a  woman  is  do- 
ing non-paid,  part-time  work  at  one 
organization,  and  is  offered  a  full- 
time  salaried  position  with  another 
organization,  she  may  feel  attracted 
by  the  possibility  of  working  full- 


time  in  a  movement  job.  It  may  be 
that  the  organization  itself  has 
been  unable  to  grow  or  evolve  a- 
long  with  the  individual.  It  is  pos- 
sible that  the  woman  who  contin- 
ues to  develop  politically,  or  who 
first  gains  a  feminist  political  per- 
spective in  the  organization,  will  re- 
alize that  this  is  not  where  she 
wants  to  make  her  long  range  poli- 
tical commitment,  and  will  leave. 

At  some  point  an  individual  may 
consider  working  in  more  than  one 
organization  at  once.  There  are 
benefits  to  be  gained  by  the  organi- 
zation in  having  some  of  its  mem- 
bers involved  on  other  projects: 
they  can  bring  back  to  the  organiza- 
tion creative  solutions  and  new 
ideas    for    solving    common    prob- 


78lQuest 


photograph  by  Elaine  Wessel 


lems,  a  strengthening  of  skills,  a 
greater  overall  perspective  on  the 
movement,  an  ability  to  be  flexible, 
etc.  The  major  drawback  is  that  an 
overextended  membership  cannot 
maintain  a  fruitful  commitment  to 
a  workplace  forever.  This  pattern  is 
destructive  for  all  involved,  because 
it  puts  a  special  burden  of  covering 
the  work  and  taking  responsibility 
for  the  organization  on  those 
whose  primary  emphasis  is  there. 

An  organization  is  strengthened 
by  its  members7  diversity.  But  an 
individual  cannot  take  responsibili- 
ty for  an  organization's  survival 
and  growth  if  she  is  spread  too 
thin. 

Our  organizations  need  workers 
who  can  take  primary  responsibili- 
ty for  ensuring  that  the  organiza- 
tion's functions  are  carried  out  and 
that  its  goals  are  realized.  While 
some  women  involved  in  the  femi- 
nist organization  will  place  clear 
limitations  on  their  work,  others 
must  take  responsibility  for  coordi- 
nating this  work  and  for  complet- 
ing jobs  that  remain  undelegated. 
Commitment  doesn't  necessarily  re- 
quire that  each  individual  play  a 
central  role  in  the  feminist  organi- 
zation. It  does  require  that  each  per- 
son take  responsibility  for  ensuring 
that  the  organization's  work  get 
done.  This  may  mean  ensuring  that 
salaries  are  paid  to  full-time  work- 
ers and  that  those  workers  are  held 
accountable  for  the  smooth  work- 
ings of  the  organization. 

Secondly,  commitment  to  a  femi- 
nist organization  presupposes  that 
the  ongoing  work  done  there  is  im- 
portant. Organizations  must  be 
able  to  survive  over  long  periods  of 


time  in  order  to  be  effective  and  to 
be  taken  seriously.  Rapid  turnover 
of  workers  is  a  handicap  to  any  or- 
ganization. For  the  sake  of  efficien- 
cy and  continuity  it  is  important  for 
feminists  to  make  long-range  com- 
mitments to  their  organizations. 

Finally,  in  making  a  commitment 
to  a  feminist  organization,  the  cru- 
cial factor  seems  to  be  the  recogni- 
tion that  personal  interest  is  intrin- 
sically tied  to  feminist  political 
struggle  and  the  understanding 
that  the  development  of  strong  or- 
ganizations is  essential  to  that 
struggle. f  A  feminist  becomes  com- 
mitted to  a  feminist  organization  or 
workplace  because  she  recognizes 
its  importance  to  the  overall  move- 
ment. 

Nevertheless,  for  all  the  reasons 
we  have  discussed  (and  more)  wo- 
men do  leave  and  will  continue  to 
do  so.  Therefore,  it  would  be  useful 
to  establish  certain  processes 
through  which  this  can  be  done 
with  relatively  little  pain,  both  for 
the  more  permanent  members  and 
for  the  organization  itself. 

Major  decisions  that  effect  the 
organization  should  be  brought  to 
that  body  before  a  realignment  of 
involvement.  Clearly,  ultimate  de- 
cisions will  rest  with  the  individu- 
al, but  we  should  strive  for  maxi- 
mizing accountability  to  and  flexi- 
bility in  our  workplaces.  This  will 
allow  women  to  make  long-term 

"f  We  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  all  commitment 
comes  from  purely  altruistic  motives  (or  that  feminism 
is  altruistic!).  While  especially  true  for  full-time 
workers,  some  factors  that  may  motivate  women  in- 
clude certain  personality  traits  (a  need  for  adventure, 
an  ability  to  take  risks,  or  to  endure  stress);  a  tendency 
toward  self-righteousness  or  martyrdom;  a  desire  to 
force  the  world  to  their  own  personal  vision. 


Building  Feminist  Organizations/79 


commitments  more  readily.  A  wo- 
man can  restrict  her  activities 
rather  than  totally  leaving  the  or- 
ganization, if  the  organization's 
structure  permits.  A  woman  may 
elect  to  become  a  board  member 
rather  than  an  active  member,  for 
example.  Because  of  her  past  work 
in  the  organization  she  has  a 
vested  interest  in  the  effective 
continuance  of  the  group.  She  may 
choose  to  take  a  leave  of  absence 
rather  than  to  leave  permanently. 
Or,  if  she  does  choose  to  make  a  to- 
tal break  with  the  organization,  a 
structure  can  be  devised  whereby 
she  can  phase  herself  out,  by  train- 
ing other  women  to  do  her  jobs,  or 
finding  alternative  ways  to  get  the 
work  done  so  that  the  organization 
will  suffer  only  minimally.  Even  if 
an  organization  can  continue  with 
the  loss  of  one  or  more  of  its  mem- 
bers, what  cannot  be  easily  replaced 
is  the  woman's  political  judgment 
and  experience.  In  this  case,  we 
must  look  to  and  try  to  respond  as 
part  of  an  overall  women's  move- 
ment. It  may  be  hoped  that  the  wo- 
man will  be  contributing  to  the  fem- 
inist movement  in  another  capacity. 
We  envision  and  hope  that  the 
women's  movement  will  eventually 
have  broader  structures  for  deci- 
sion-making, through  which  we  can 
determine  major  areas  of  work  to  be 
emphasized,  for  example,  among 
feminists  on  a  city-wide  basis,  or 
larger.  This  could  take  the  form  of  a 
coordinating  council  or  possibly  a 
political  party.  A  woman  could,  in  a 
sense,  request  a  change  of  assign- 
ment via  this  body,  or  possibly  have 
grievance  hearings,  etc.  Such  a 
structure,  while  it  would  produce 


its  own  set  01  problems,  would  nev- 
ertheless alleviate  others.  We  are 
not  suggesting  it  is  the  only  possible 
form  to  take,  only  that  it  is  signifi- 
cant as  an  idea  we've  returned  to  a- 
gain  and  again  in  discussions  about 
problems  that  organizations  have. 
But  for  now  the  individual  and 
small  peer  support  groups  must 
make  these  decisions  alone.  We 
think  that  it  is  important  to  be  flex- 
ible in  this  process,  to  recognize  that 
an  individual's  needs  will  vary  and 
that  at  different  times  an  organiza- 
tion's needs  will  also  vary. 

Women  who  remain  with  an  or- 
ganization see  concrete  results  and 
experience  progress  in  their  work. 
This  kind  of  personal  and  political 
reinforcement  produces  feelings  of 
hope  and  a  realization  of  the  poten- 
tial power  of  feminist  organizations. 
Sustained  by  such  rewards,  we  will 
continue  to  see  the  need  for  and 
share  in  the  work  and  responsibility 
of  building  strong  organizations. 

Thanks  to  Jane  Dolkart,  Marge  Du- 
Mond  and  Valle  Jones  for  their  help,  sup- 
port and  patience  with  this  article. 


mm 

flOlffiR 


SUBSCRIBE* 

Sub  $8.00  per  year 

(Sample  copy    $2  75  by  mai 

|Checks  payable  to 

Tomato  Publications  Ltd 
70  Barrow  Street 
New  York,  NY  10014 

We  are  looking  for  graphic 
and  written  contributions 
We  pay  for  all  work  that 
we  print.  Write  for  details 


A  MAGAZINE  OF  LESBIAN  CULTURE  AND  ANALYSIS 

FALL  '76:  Making  a  Backpack  •  Mouth  Care  •  Photos  by 
Alice  Austen  •  Name  Change  •  Coming  Out  On  Celluloid 
•Giving  Up  Kidz  •  Plus:  analysis,  letters,  reviews,  humor 

WINTER  '76-'77:  Beautiful  4  color  poster  and 
magazinelette 

FUTURE  ISSUES  SPRING  '77  Ethnic  Dykes,  copy 
deadline  Feb  1st  SUMMER  '77  Animals,  copy  dead 
line  May  1st 


80lQuest 


Notes  About  Writing 


We  have  often  been  told  that  Quest  is  abstract  or  "too  hard  to  read." 
We  seek  concrete  suggestions  on  how  to  present  political  analysis  (which 
is  never  going  to  be  "easy  reading"),  more  clearly.  We  try  to  provide  a 
balance  of  different  styles  of  writing  in  each  issue,  but  often  we  do  not  re- 
ceive enough  variety  in  the  manuscripts  you  submit.  Our  goal  in  editing 
is  clarity;  whatever  the  author  is  saying,  we  work  to  make  it  as  clear  as 
possible. 

For  most  of  us,  our  writing  reflects  our  education.  We  were  trained,  if 
at  all,  to  write  "essays"  and  "papers."  It  has  been  suggested  that  women 
who  write  for  Quest  might  experiment  with  a  more  journalistic  style.  We 
don't  know  how  well  it  works  to  use  this  style  for  political  analysis,  but 
we  welcome  such  efforts.  Some  examples  that  might  be  useful  models  are 
articles  in  The  Progressive,  Social  Policy,  or  The  New  Republic. 

We  would  also  like  to  print  more  interviews,  and  we  encourage  you  to 
submit  them.  Another  suggestion  is  taping  a  discussion  and  making  that 
into  an  article.  Much  of  our  history  is  not  recorded  because  activists  sel- 
dom take  time  to  write.  But  it  is  important  to  exchange  our  stories,  our 
growth,  and  our  understanding.  We  would  like  to  create  new  ways  to 
share  this  learning,  since,  though  much  of  our  verbal  dialog  is  our  best 
analysis,  it  never  gets  on  paper. 

For  each  issue,  we  send  out  mailings  and  announcements  to  as  many 
women  as  possible  to  encourage  submissions  to  Quest.  We  also  intend 
the  back  cover  blurbs  as  an  open  invitation  for  articles.  Writing  is  not 
easy  for  any  of  us.  Our  challenge,  as  feminists,  is  to  find  new  ways  to  ex- 
press our  experiences  and  our  analysis  so  that  they  aid  us  better  in  chang- 
ing society. 


Articles  should  be  double  spaced  and  submitted  in  duplicate  (original 
plus  one  copy).  Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10 
typewritten  pages)  for  reviews,  responses,  and  short  articles,  to,  at  most, 
7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where  appropriate,  biblio- 
graphic footnotes  should  be  typed  at  the  end  of  the  article.  All 
manuscripts,  poems,  and  graphics  should  be  original,  unpublished  ma- 
terial and  must  be  accompanied  by  a  stamped  self -addressed  envelope. 


Future  Issues 

RACE ,  CLASS  &  CULTURE 

Spring,  1977  Vol.  III,  No.  4 

While  feminists  create  a  "women's  culture,"  we  learn  about  our  differ- 
ences as  women;  we  must  examine  how  race  goes  beyond  the  color  of  our 
skin  and  class  means  more  than  just  the  money  we  make.  We  seek  articles 
for  this  issue  that  discuss  various  aspects  of  the  relationship  between  poli- 
tical development  and  culture,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  issues  of 
class  and  race.  Copy  Deadline:  November  15,  1976 

KALEIDOSCOPE  TWO 

Summer,  1977  Vol  IV,  No.  1 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  three  years  of  publication  and 
for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics  and 
ideas  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous  articles. 

Copy  Deadline:  February  15,  1977 

INTERNATIONAL 

Fall  1977  Vol.  IV,  No.  2 

Advances  for  women  demand  that  our  analysis  and  strategies  be 
drawn  from  different  angles,  from  different  cultural  and  national  set- 
tings. This  issue  will  be  devoted  to  international  perspectives  and  articles 
with  a  focus  on  varying  feminist  concerns  and  activities,  theoretical  and 
programmatic  developments,  and  how  these  are  affected  by  different  so- 
cio-economic and  governmental  factors.        Copy  Deadline:  May  1,  1977 

BODY  POLITIC 

Winter,  19  Vol.  Ill,  No.  3 

Our  bodies — how  we  use,  view,  and  treat  them — are  basic  to  our 
vision.  We  want  this  issue  to  explore  body  politics  in  its  broadest 
sense,  through  articles  that  discuss:  the  body  industry,  from  birth 
to  death;  feminist  and  environmental  politics;  the  future  of  repro- 
duction, and  its  effect  on  the  female  nature;  dying;  age,  class,  and 
body  perspectives;  health  services  and  insurance  and  the  politics 
of  genocide  and  labor  control,  and  other  topics  with  a  broad-based 
political  relevance. 

Copy  Deadline:  August   15,    1977 


