ISSN  0098-955  X 


QUEST 

a  reminist  quarterly 


THE  BODY  POLITIC 


Quest  Communique 


In  May,  Quest  subscribers  received  a  special  letter  asking  you  to  help 
us  through  this  period  of  financial  crisis.  In  our  letter,  we  explained  our 
situation:  many  people  think  that  we  have  plenty  of  money,  perhaps 
because  of  our  own  high  standards  for  how  Quest  should  look  and  read. 
In  fact,  we  are  primarily  a  volunteer  organization.  Only  two  members  of 
our  staff  are  paid  and  the  rest,  along  with  supporters  in  our  local  com- 
munity, provide  Quest  with  almost  a  third  of  its  funds  in  the  form  of 
donations  and  pledges.  We  have  no  grants,  no  government  funds,  and 
no  university  or  institutional  support.  We  depend  on  individuals  within 
the  feminist  community  for  our  survival. 

In  our  last  Quest  Communique  (see  the  "International  Feminism" 
issue),  we  mentioned  the  need  to  maintain  our  Second  Class  mailing 
privilege  in  order  to  survive:  without  this  permit,  the  cost  of  a  subscrip- 
tion would  be  too  high.  To  keep  our  permit,  we  have  to  mail  out  four 
issues  a  year,  so  that  now  we  must  produce  and  mail  two  more  issues  by 
October  31,  1978.  The  production  costs  to  produce  these  issues  total 
over  $20,000,  despite  radical  changes  in  our  format.  We  are  working  to 
raise  that  money,  but  we  cannot  do  the  fundraising  and  publish  two  more 
issues  without  help  from  our  readers. 

We  asked  our  subscribers  to  help  us  by  sending  in  a  donation, 
renewing  early  or  by  becoming  a  sustaining  subscriber.  Your  response  to 
our  letter  was  really  heartening.  Many  of  you  sent  in  $5.00  to  $25.00 
checks  along  with  names  of  friends  who  might  be  interested  in  receiving 
information  about  Quest.  Thank  you  all  for  your  show  of  love  and  sup- 
port! 

We  are  now  asking  our  bookstore  readers  to  consider  subscribing  to 
Quest  and/or  to  send  in  a  donation.  If  each  non-subscription  reader  sent 
us  $5.00  or  a  subscription,  we  would  have  between  $5000-$9000  — 
almost  half  our  publications  cost.  We've  been  publishing  Quest  for 
almost  five  years  and  we  want  to  go  on  for  at  least  5  more.  With  your 
help  we  will. 

Change  in  Format 

With  this  issue,  we  have  changed  our  format  to  cut  production  costs. 
The  perfect  binding  and  multi-color  cover  were  the  two  most  expensive 
features  of  the  journal  design.  With  this  change,  we  estimate  we  will 
save  between  $4000  to  $500t)  yearly  on  our  printing  bill.  Also,  with  this 
saddlestitch  binding,  we  have  greater  flexibility  in  the  number  of  pages 
we  print. 

Quest  Themes 

Finally,  we  want  to  encourage  you  to  send  us  suggestions  for  Quest 
issue  themes.  We  are  in  the  process  of  deciding  themes  for  our  sixth  year 
and  want  to  be  sure  that  Quest  themes  are  dealing  with  your  needs  and 
interests.  Your  ideas  are  essential  to  the  Quest  process. 


Vol.  IV,  No.  3 
Summer,  1978 


QUEST 

a  feminist  quarterly 

THE  BODY  POLITIC 
Contents 


!  DEFINING  OUR  TERRITORIES 

!   Sidney  Oliver 

UNNATURAL  DIVORCE  of  SPRITUALITY 
&  POLITICS 

|    Hallie  Iglehart 

MANIPULATION  of  the  BREAST 

Polly  Joan 

DEATH  as  a  FEMINIST  ISSUE 

Tish  Sommers 

MENSTRUAL  EXTRACTION 
1  Procedures 

'    Lorraine  Rothman 

Politics 

Laura  Punnett 

LETTERS 

WHO  GETS  SICK  &  WHY? 

Ellen  Hall 

RAPE  RESEARCH:  One  Woman's  Drama 

Paula  Webster 

THREAT  OF  SOCIOBIOLOGY 

Arleen  Rogan 


12 


25 


33 


44 


48 


61 


66 


77 


85 


©Copyright  1978  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights 
reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  prohibited. 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in  January, 
April,  July  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  2000  P 
St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.,  20036,  U.S.A.  Second  class  postage 
paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  is  a  tax- 
exempt,  non-profit  organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C. 
20003. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 
$10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  surface, 
$14.50/year  overseas  air;  $25.00/year  to  institutions,  $3.35/all  single 
issues.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request. 
Bookstores  contact  Women  in  Distribution,  Box  8858,  Washington. 
D.C.  20003  for  ordering  information. 

ISSN  0098-955  X 


4     ! 


^&j       SMi 

)MbI 

-        vm 

Aurnn-oPOLOdr 

I  lAtoR;___JlJlS«>^J-^ 

%p^^^^^^- 

/^<a^sOL5-8§C\ 

Staff 


Managing  Editor 

Beverly  Fisher 
Design  Editor 

Alexa  Freeman 
Promotion  Editor 

Dorothy  Allison 
Editors 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Jackie  MacMillan 

Mary-Helen  Mautner 

Sidney  Oliver* 

Arleen  Rogan* 

Gerri  Traina 


Associates 

Denise  Davis 
Jane  Dolkart 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Sue  Kahan 
Cynthia  Washington 

Assistants 

Jane  Flax 
Ellen  Hall* 
Judith  Jones 
Prudence  MacKinney* 
Andrea  Morrell 
Marjie  Sadin 
Sara  Shepard 
Margaret  Streitenberger 
Lenora  Trussell* 
Helen  Young 

*  Development  Committee 

Cover  Design  by  Laurie  McLaughlin 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  po- 
litical analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  it- 
self, but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the  women's  move- 
ment, possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as  regional  or  national 
conferences,  a  national  organization,  or  a  political  party.  We,  the  edi- 
tors, are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the  movement  several  years 
and  have  reached  a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  ques- 
tions. We  have  been  through  various  ideological  and  activist  meta- 
morphoses and  end  up  feeling  that  our  overall  perspective  is  still  not 
adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle  brought  us?  Closer  to  real  econom- 
ic, political,  and  social  power  for  women?  Closer  to  the  end  of  the  ex- 
ploitation of  and  violence  against  women?  Closer  to  self-determina- 
tion for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  ex- 
pect that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to 
this  process  of  seeking. 


photograph  by  Morgan  Gwenwald 


Defining 
Our  Territories 


By  SIDNEY  OLIVER 

graphics  by  Sara  Shepard 

The  Politics  of  Affirmation 

As  early  as  a  year  ago,  with 
"Kaleidoscope  One/'  Quest  called 
for  expanding  our  conceptual 
territories.  Bev  Fisher  and  Jackie  St. 
Joan  applied  and  extended  the 
perspective  introduced  in  Charlotte 
Bunch's  "Beyond  Either/Or"  in 
"Race,  Class  and  Culture":  "The 
time  has  come  to  move  beyond  our 
subculture.  We  have  to  deal  with 
issues  which  we  have  previously 
avoided  because  they  weren't 
'women's  issues'  as  we  defined  them 
—  issues  which  concern  the  everyday 
lives  or  poor,  working-class  and 
minority  women.  .  .  ."* 

Both  the  view  that  feminism  can 
expand  its  territories  to  include  issues 
which  haven't  previously  been 
defined  as  "women's  issues,"  and  the 
idea  that  whole  health  involves  unity, 
are  affirmative*  concepts.  They  are 

*The  term,  "affirmative,"  implies  several 
things  essential  to  an  effective  feminist 
politics.  The  act  of  affirming  and  the  notion 
that  feminism  is  inclusive  both  imply  an  en- 
titled and  power-full  perspective  on  the  social 
process,  the  dynamics  of  change  and  one's 
relation  to  them.  In  order  to  affirm  something, 
we  must  know  that  we  have  both  the  right  and 
the  ability  to  make  it  firm;  that  involves  a 
positive  (confirming)  direction  and,  when 
made  collectively,  involves  unity. 


not  new.  Each  is  embodied  implicitly 
in  the  self-help  theory  of  the  feminist 
health  movement,  as  Laura  Punnett 
and  Lorraine  Rothman  make  clear  in 
their  articles  in  this  issue.  For  that 
matter,  each  is  embodied  in  the  un- 
derlying theory  of  feminism:  for 
example,  the  notion  that  the  personal 
is  political  is,  above  all  else,  the  affir- 
mation of  the  unity  of  things,  and  of 
the  view  that  whole  health  requires 
claiming  that  unity.  Put  another  way, 
whole  health  —  clarity  of  thought,  vi- 
sion and  feeling,  as  well  as  physical 
and  spiritual  soundness  —  assumes 
that  one  is  entitled  to  infinite 
progress  and  nurturance,  and  that 
both  progress  and  nurturance  depend 
on  recognizing  and  taking  respon- 
sibility for  the  link  between  our 
selves  and  others.5''*  At  the  individual 
level,  this  means  claiming  all  parts  of 
our  selves.  As  Hallie  Iglehart  points 
out  in  her  article,  we  must  claim  not 
only  our  immediate,  indivisible 
physical  person,  but  also  those  parts 
long  since  cut  away  by  the 
patriarchy's  invidious  dualities  (e.g., 
life/death;  us/them;  mind/body). 
Tish  Sommers'  article  on  death  and 
dying  also  illustrates  this  view.  On 
the  collective  level,  it  means  the  gut 
understanding  that  wherever  one  is 
denied    the    possibility    of    infinite 

**For  the  sake  of  clarity,  "others"  as  used 
here  means  everything  not  me  —  including  en- 
vironment. 


A/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


progression  and  nurturance,  there  is 
a  feminist  issue. 

In  the  process  of  working  on 
"Body  Politic/'  we  recognized  again 
the  importance  of  this  point  of  view, 
which  we  have  partially  articulated  in 
the  theme  development  paper  we  sent 
out  to  solicit  articles  for  this  issue: 
"From  birth  to  death,  our  lives  in- 
volve a  tension  between  our  oppres- 
sion as  women  and  the  positive 
experience  of  womanhood;  between 
the  gratification  of  nurturing,  and  its 
exploitation;  between  preoccupation 
with  our  physical  selves  and,  at  the 
same  time,  refusal  to  accept  the 
traditional  rigid  divisions  between 
self/environment;  mind/body,  etc. 
Our  experience  of  this  varies  among 
individual  women  and  is  determined 
and  compounded  by  class,  race, 
ethnic  background,  sexuality  and 
age."  That  we  must  expand  our 
territory    is    clear.    The    remaining 


question  is  how  we  fully  articulate  a 
politics  of  affirmation  and  act 
through  it  in  ways  which  are 
meaningful. 

One  important  facet  of  the  ques- 
tion is  how  to  act  on  this  idea  of  the 
infinite  applicability  of  feminism 
without  expanding  the  definition  of 
feminism  to  the  point  of 
meaninglessness.  Though  that 
problem  isn't  going  to  be  resolved 
here,  certainly,  one  perspective  on  it 
is  the  distinction  between  ideology 
and  theory. 

The  point-of-view  just  expressed 
—  the  concern  of  feminism  with  en- 
titlement, progression  and  nur- 
turance  —  is  much  closer  to  an 
ideology  than  to  a  theory.  An 
ideology  is  "the  combined  doctrines, 
assertions  and  intentions  of  a  social 
or  political  movement."2  Thus,  its 
major  difference  from  theory  is 
perhaps  that  it  is  oriented  much  more 


s^C 


7T 


Detining  Our  Territories/5 


to  the  future  (what  could  be), 
whereas  theory  is  more  directly  con- 
cerned with  explanations  for  the  pre- 
sent. 

Our  theory  begins  with  the 
analysis  that  sexism  is  the  archetypal 
oppression,  and  that  its  corrective  is 
control  of  our  selves  by  women.  This 
is  reiterated  again  and  again  in  this 
issue,  particularly  in  the  analyses  of 
menstrual  extraction  and  its  perver- 
sion by  the  male  medical  establish- 
ment, and  in  Polly  Joan's  examina- 
tion of  the  political  manipulation  of 
the  breast.  The  "control  of  self  by 
self"  analysis  reflects  both  the  direc- 
tion (and  to  some  extent,  the  essence) 
of  an  ideology  of  unity,  progression 
and  nurturing.  First,  it  challenges  the 
fundamental  duality:  male  over 
female/superior  over  inferior.  Se- 
cond, it  posits  the  intrinsic  connec- 
tion between  control  of  self  and 
health,  an  idea  which  may  be  seen  as 
a  basic  affirmation  of  the  strength  of 
women  and  of  the  potential  in  the 
body  politic  for  health.  Third,  it 
recognizes  the  connection  between 
control  of  self  by  others  and  disease. 
And  not  least,  feminist  theory  implies 
a  principle  fundamental  to  any 
successful  movement  for  change  — 
self-love  in  its  relationship  to  loving 
or  caring  for  others.  It  thus  begins  to 
link  the  present  with  the  future 
because  it  recognizes  the  unity  of  op- 
pressions (class,  race,  sexuality, 
nationality,  age  and  so  forth),  and 
understands  that  the  ultimate  unity 
of  direction  depends  on  self- 
affirmation  which  neither  excludes 
the  interests  of  others  nor  leaves  to 
them  exclusively  the  determination 
of  our  own  responsibilities. 

This  analysis  permits  expanding 
our    definition    of    feminism    and 


retaining  its  meaningfulness.  A 
politics  of  self-determination  means 
that  we  define  for  our  selves  what  is 
and  is  not  in  our  interest,  and  that  we 
also  adopt  in  principle  and  in  practice 
the  view  that  others  have  the  same 
inherent  right.  A  politics  of  affirma- 
tion insists  that  our  relation  to  the 
world  is  an  entitled,  not  an  adversarial 
one.  We  are  entitled  to  all  our  poten- 
tialities, including  those  of  which  we 
cannot  yet  conceive.  It  also  means, 
therefore,  that  our  stance  is  offensive 
rather  than  defensive,  positive  rather 
than  negative.  In  terms  of  both 
capabilities  and  conceptual  respon- 
sibilities, it  means  that  our  territory  is 
the  world  —  both  that  which  is 
known,  and  that  which  is  yet  to  be 
disclosed  or  discovered. 

This  analysis  takes  the  point  of 
view  that  women  are  basically 
motivated  by  good  (and  emphasizes 
that  view),  but  it  is  not  a  naive 
perspective  because,  along  with  affir- 
ming our  right  to  be  what  we  can  be, 
it  also  involves  a  number  of  basic 
responsibilities.  For  one  thing,  by 
avoiding  a  conceptualization  of  the 
world  based  on  traditional 
dichotomies  (USA/Them,  for 
example),  it  requires  us  to  include 
what  is  good  for  others  in  our  assess- 
ment of  what  is  good  for  us.  In  other 
words,  both  progress  and  nurturance 
depend  on  our  taking  responsibility 
for  (and  care  of)  the  link  between  our 
selves  and  others.  If  our  focus  is  on 
that  link  and  not  on  the  individual 
person  with  whom  it  connects  us  (or 
object  or  place),  we  can  avoid  adop- 
ting a  paternalistic  perspective,  and 
instead,  adopt  a  caring  and  reciprocal 
one. 

Therefore,  a  politics  of  affirmation 
requires  that  we  address  power  im- 


6/Quest 


balances  such  as  class,  race  and 
sexuality  disparities,  so  that  asserting 
our  right  to  full  expression  of  our 
potential  is  never  done  at  the  expense 
of  others,  and  does  not  at  any  time 
degenerate  to  mean  merely  seeking 
the  individual  solution.  Similarly, 
since  it  requires  self  love,  it  means 
that  we  take  care  of  our  selves,  as 
required,  act  assertively  and  avoid 
mistaking  cowardice  and  passivity 
for  the  expression  of  a  caring  and 
nurturing  ideology.  And  since  it 
defines  "others"  to  include 
everything  that  is  not  us  —  including 
environment  —  a  politics  of  affirma- 
tion also  requires  that  we  assume 
responsibility  for  assuring  that  the 
limited  resources  of  our  environment 
are  cared  for  and  replenished  but  not 
hoarded  and  bartered  in  the  exercise 
of  oppression.  Finally,  it  does  not 
pretend  that  conflicts  won't  occur  in 
defining  and  reaching  for  our  poten- 
tialities. But  it  insists  that  those  con- 
flicts be  resolved  in  the  context  of 
collective  good  via  whatever 
strategies  of  arbitration  are  ap- 
propriate to  the  time,  participants 
and  issues  of  disagreement. 


the  identification  and  analysis  of  new 
ones.  And,  perhaps  most  important, 
most  feminists'  response  to  issues  is 
still  shaped  largely  by  what  I'm 
calling  a  "reactionist"  tendency, 
which  helps  to  restrict  our  vision  to 
the  more  familiar. 

Feminists  have  gone  about  as  far  as 
we  can  in  pursuing  a  politics  of  reac- 
tion —  that  is,  in  making  the  main 
direction  of  much  of  our  thought  a 
response  to  existing  oppressions,  in- 
stead of  focusing  more  on  shaping 
developing  concepts,  acts,  policies 
and  practices.  +  For  example,  while 
we  have  been  vocal  on  some  medical 
atrocities,  and  on  issues  such  as  ERA, 
abortion,  credit  availability,  and 
sexual  violence,  we  have  been  silent, 
primarily,  on  a  whole  series  of  sub- 
jects which  are  not  clearly  and 
exclusively  "women's  issues"  —  i.e., 
issues  tied  to  us  through  biology. 
These  wider  concerns  include,  for 
example,  the  structure  of  a  world 
economics;  policies  and  strucures  for 
the  development,  production  and  dis- 
tribution of  drugs,  chemical  additives 
and  disease-inducing  products  of  all 
types;   standards  and  policies  affec- 


A  Reactionist  View 

As  we  have  worked  on  "Body 
Politic,"  we  have  been  impressed  by 
the  extensiveness  of  subjects,  con- 
cepts and  problems  appropriate  to  an 
analysis  of  body  politics  and  realize 
that  this  issue  addresses  only  a  frac- 
tion of  them.  There  are  several 
reasons  for  this  situation.  Not  least  is 
that  no  one  issue  can  address  any 
subject  comprehensively.  We  are  also 
in  a  period  of  transition  between  the 
articulation  and  analysis  of  old  and 
familiar  aspects  of  body  politics,  and 


+  This  statement  is  not  intended  to 
characterize  all  of  feminism,  but  to  call  atten- 
tion to  what  appears  to  be  a  temporary  lull  in 
our  movement.  The  reactionist  concept  raises 
fundamental  questions,  such  as  whether 
revolution  and  change  are  inevitably  reac- 
tionist; what  relations  exist  between  evolution, 
reaction  and  revolution,  and  how  each  defines 
tactics  and  strategies.  It  is  also  important  to 
understand  that  the  underlying  tenets  of 
feminism  are  inherently  NOT  reactionist, 
because,  although  we  have  created  an 
ideological  structure  on  the  basis  of  existing 
oppressions,  we  have  also  posited  our  selves 
affirmatively  and  in  the  direction  of  a  new 
order.  Instead,  it  is  only  our  preoccupation 
with  gender-specific,  existing  conditions  to 
which  I  refer. 


Defining  Our  Territories/7 


ting  the  safety  (and  even  the  defini- 
tion of)  the  workplace.  In  other 
words,  much  of  our  analysis  has  con- 
cerned, only  or  primarily,  existing  as 
opposed  to  developing  issues,  and, 
only  or  primarily,  subjects  clearly 
female  in  gender.  As  a  result,  many 
gender-unspecified  subjects  which 
would  be  feminist  concerns  if  a 
politics  of  affirmation  were  adopted 
have  been  overlooked.  It  is  this 
tendency  to  limit  our  selves  that  I  call 
"reactionist." 

"Reactionist"  is  not  the  same  as 
"reactionary."  "Reactionary"  means 
the  tendency  toward  a  previous  state 
of  affairs.  Feminism  does  not  and  has 
never  deserved  that  designation.  The 
term  "reactionist,"  however,  retains 
the  root  meaning  —  acting  in 
response  to  something  which  exists  — 
but  unlike  "reactionary,"  does  not 
imply  a  backward  progression. 

We  react  because  we  know  the 
situation  facing  us  requires  that  we 
confront  it  forcefully  and  change  it. 
The  problem  with  a  reactionist 
perspective,  however,  is  simply  that 
it  isn't  as  affirmative  as  we  require 
feminism  to  be.  It  doesn't  go  far 
enough  in  identifying  relevant  issues, 
and  it  doesn't  necessarily  involve  a 
forward  momentum  toward  a  broad, 
new  conceptualization  of  our 
territory.  And  it  doesn't  involve  the 
saving  force  of  initiative  and  self- 
determination  which  characterizes  an 
entitled,  affirmative  politics. 

Thus,  the  reactionist  tendency  — 
which  has  much  in  common  with  a 
policy  of  self -containment3  —  thwarts 
our  ability  to  grow  and  to  continue 
the  progress  of  change  we  have 
begun.  Ultimate  victory  on  the 
existing  issues  under  attack  is  depen- 
dent on  our  gaining  a  broader,  more 


affirmative  force,  not  a  narrower  one. 
The  Houston  IWY  made  it  clear  that 
success  on  the  ERA,  for  example, 
won't  result  from  attention  only  to 
the  ERA,  but  will  occur  only  if  we 
maintain  a  feminist  perspective  broad 
enough  to  include  a  variety  of  issues 
—  e.g.,  national  health  care  and  full 
employment.  Thus,  because  it  limits 
our  ability  to  envision  feminism  as  a 
world  view  capable  of  generating 
analyses  of  all  issues  affecting  the 
quality  of  life,  a  reactionist  politics 
limits  the  issues  we  accept  as  ours  to 
those  which  can  be  linked 
anatomically  to  females.  Therefore,  it 
nurtures  the  view  that  all  females, 
regardless  of  historical,  personal  and 
social  condition,  are  more  alike  than 
not.  And  finally,  it  leads  to 
overlooking  potentially  important 
and  strategic  coalitions  for  building 
our  movement. 

In  short,  an  affirmative  instead  of 
reactionist  view  would  allow  us  to 
look  at  the  long-  and  short-term 
benefits  to  feminism  of  alliances  with 
other  groups  concerned  with  issues 
affecting  the  quality  of  life.  It  would 
also  broaden  our  strategies  and  fields 
of  combat.  As  important,  it  would 
assist  in  generating  a  visible  and  af- 
firmative feminism  at  a  time  when  we 
are  perceived  generally  as  amorphous 
and  merely  threatening  rather  than  as 
clearly-defined  and  reliable.  The  time 
has  come  for  us  to  acknowledge  what 
in  our  respective  environments  we 
want  and  claim  those  conditions 
aggressively,  affirmatively. 

If  we  claim  quality-of-life  issues  as 
ours  and,  as  necessary,  make 
alliances  with  groups,  such  as  trade 
unions,  for  example,  or  environmen- 
tal protection  organizations,  whose 
analyses  and  strategies  we  regard  as 


8/Quest 


both  sound  and  effective,  we  can 
exercise  the  initiative  necessary  to  in- 
crease our  visibility  as  a  movement. 
Such  alliances  will  involve  complex 
issues  of  organization  and  control. 
But  if  we  make  them  selectively  and 
always  within  the  framework  of 
feminism,  we  can  retain  the  direction 
(control)  required  to  strengthen  our 
analysis  rather  than  diluting  it  by 
over-extension  and  co-optation.  This 
analysis  is  being  effected  now  by 
various  feminist  organizations  which 
form  city-wide  coalitions  to  improve 
conditions  affecting  the  entire  com- 
munity. 

A  Period  of  Transition 

At  the  same  time,  as  "Body  Politic" 
reflects,  as  a  movement,  we  are  in  a 
period  of  transition  in  which  we  are 
beginning  to  move  beyond  the 
traditional  gender-specific  con- 
straints to  a  feminist  politics  capable 
of  generating  a  world  view.  But 
"Body  Politic"  also  reflects  the  fact 
that  our  attention  to  such  subjects  as 
sociobiology  (which  Arleen  Rogan 
discusses)  and  protective  legislation, 
chronic  disease  and  population  con- 
trol (examined  by  Ellen  Hall),  has  just 
begun.  While  we  recognize  the  need 
to  move  forward  in  developing  an 
expansive  and  challenging  feminist 
perspective,  we  are  perhaps  not  yet 
sure  what  that  involves,  or  how  to  go 
about  it.  Perhaps  we  are  not  clear 
how  a  feminist  world  view  incor- 
porating these  and  other  concerns 
would  differ  substantively  from  what 
liberals  call  a  "humanist"  movement. 
And  perhaps  also,  while  we  are  in- 
timately familiar  with  more 
traditional  views  of  what  a  feminist 
analysis  of  body  politics  would  in- 


clude, we  are  not  ready,  conceptually, 
to  articulate  fully  our  views  on  sub- 
jects beyond  that  range.  The  process 
of  change,  within  and  without  the 
feminist  movement,  must  entail  not 
only  the  recognition  of  new  direc- 
tions, but  also  a  period  in  which  the 
implications  of  change  can  be 
assimilated.  In  this  phase,  the  old  and 
familiar  can  at  least  be  articulated  and 
the  new  and  recently-perceived  can 
only  be  suggested. 

Thus,  while  "Body  Politic"  both 
reevaluated  familiar  subjects  such  as 
genital  self-help  and  addresses  others 
(as  in  Paula  Webster's  account  of 
working  on  rape),  and  while  it  begins 
the  process  of  moving  into  "new" 
subject  areas,  there  are  many  more 
topics  it  does  not  cover.  These  in- 
clude aging;  links  among  economics, 
sociobiology  and  population  control; 
and  examination  of  the  global  rather 
than  just  the  national  environment. 
We  could  and  have  compiled  endless 
lists  of  other  topics  which  are  in- 
volved in  body  politics.  This  issue 
stands  not  as  a  completion  of  that  list, 
but  as  a  beginning  of  exploring  ideas 
which  we  hope  will  broaden  our  con- 
cepts of  body  politics  and  feminism 
for  future  discussion. 

Another  contributing  factor 
making  it  difficult  for  feminists  to 
discuss  such  new  subject  areas  lies  in 
the  link  between  experience  and 
theory.  As  we  begin  to  challenge 
more  and  more  highly  specialized 
issues,  we  find  ourselves  with  less 
and  less  hands-on  experience,  and 
fewer  and  fewer  activists  know- 
ledgeable about  the  technical  as- 
pects of  these  subjects  as  well  as 
about  their  political  dimensions.  As 
we  move  into  realms  appropriated  by 
the   male    technical   elite,    we   move 


Defining  Our  Territories/9 


literally  out  of  the  experience  of 
feminists.  Consequently,  we  can 
expect  to  confront  more  and  bigger 
obstacles  in  the  development  of  a 
broader  feminist  analysis. 

It  is  not  a  comforting  projection. 
But  it  is  also  a  probability  we  cannot 
afford  to  ignore.  We  have  not  devised 
effective  routes  of  access  to  rarified 
climates  such  as  the  creation  and 
patenting  of  new  life  forms;  psy- 
chotropic drug  research,  manufac- 
ture and  distribution,  genetic 
engineering  and  sociobiology; 
macro-economics;  and  food  and 
chemical  exporting,  to  name  a  few. 
Yet  these  are,  or  at  least  have  the 
potential  to  be,  the  superstructure 
within  which  the  following 
generations  of  feminists  will  be  con- 
strained to  survive.  The  technical 
capabilities  of  the  male  power  struc- 
ture have  expanded.  This  means, 
simply  enough,  that  our  conceptual 
and  strategic  territories  must  expand 
accordingly,  and  immediately. 

Conclusions 

What  are  the  implications  in  all 
this  for  how  we  make  the  decisions 
we  make  individually  and  collec- 
tively? We  are  currently  in  an 
excellent  position  to  examine  and 
learn  from  the  decisions  we  made  in 
defining  and  organizing  around  cer- 
tain political  arenas  and  tactics.  The 
kinds  of  questions  which  must  be 
asked  now,  in  order  to  insure  that, 
fifty  years  hence,  our  contribution 
won't  be  dismissed  as  important  in  its 
day,  but  lacking  in  vision  and 
therefore  in  general  applicability,  are 
numerous.  This  issue  does  not 
provide  an  exhaustive  syllabus,  but 
in  the  process  of  compiling  it,  these 


questions,  in  particular,  arose.  (1) 
Were  we  in  power,  would  we  ad- 
vocate and  practice  some  form  of 
population  control?  If  so,  with  what 
objectives  and  how  would  we  recon- 
cile population  control  with  our  con- 
viction that  women  should  control 
our  own  bodies?  (2)  How  can  we  be 
sure  that  the  strategies  and  analyses 
we  adopt  now  will  not  turn  out  to 
play  into  the  hands  of  the  present 
power  structure?  E.g.,  what  are  the 
various  ways  corporations  have  used 
both  the  adoption  and  repeal  of 
protective  legislation  in  the  interests 
of  their  international  labor 
requirements  rather  than  in  the  in- 
terests of  women  and  men  workers? 
(3)  What  is  the  role  of  feminist 
education  in  addressing  issues  and 
strategies  of  the  near  and  distant 
future?  (4)  Is  organizing  inherently  a 
paternalistic  perspective,  and  if  so, 
how  are  conflicting  priorities  within 
the  movement  to  be  resolved  and 
coalitions  to  be  developed?  (5)  Is 
feminism  presently  in  the  throes  of 
its  own  energy  crisis  and,  if  so,  how 
do  feminists  survive  it  to  create  new 
visions,  ideologies,  strategies, 
organizations  and  structures?  (6) 
How  do  we  redirect  the  popular  focus 
from  its  fixation  on  symptoms  (e.g., 
the  breakdown  of  the  family,  inter- 
preted as  caused  by  leftists,  queers 
and  feminists)  to  causes  (lodged 
deeply  in  sexism,  capitalism,  and 
racism,  etc.)?  (7)  How  might  our 
analysis  of  the  family  be  improved  to 
challenge  the  nuclear  structure  yet  re- 
tain the  nurturing  and  sheltering 
aspects  of  the  "family,"  and  at  the 
same  time,  afford  family  alternatives 
sensitive  to  individual  and  cultural 
differences  and  needs?  (8)  How  do 
we  define  our  responsibility  to  such 


w/Quest 


issues  as  the  expansion  of  mul- 
tinationals, the  question  of 
nationalism,  environmental  issues, 
and  other  important  points  of 
analysis  and,  potentially,  coalition? 

Issues  surface  endlessly:  the  prac- 
tice of  forcing  ill  or  injured  pregnant 
women  to  stay  alive  for  the  sake  of 
the  fetus;  population  control  used  to 
maintain  global  commercial  interests; 
the  use  of  cloning  as  an  ultimate 
weapon  against  women;  the 
technology  and  politics  of  mind- 
control,  to  name  a  few.  We  hope  this 
issue  of  Quest  will  help  in  the  process 
of  generating  theoretical,  ideological 
and  organizational  answers  to  these 
questions,  and  help  in  the  evolution 
of  feminism  as  a  world  view  capable 
of  offering  a  nurturing,  affirmative 
and  unifying  analysis  on  any  issue 
affecting  quality  of  life,  as  it  arises. 


Footnotes 

1.  See  Charlotte  Bunch,  "Beyond  Either/Or: 
Feminist  Options/'  Quest:  a  feminist  quarter- 
ly 111:1  (Summer,  1976),  pp.  2-17;  and  Bev 
Fisher  and  Jackie  St.  Joan,  "Race  and  Class: 
Beyond  a  Personal  Politics,"  Quest:  a  feminist 
quarterly  111:4  (Spring  1977),  pp.  2-14. 

2.  Thorndike-Barnhart  Comprehensive  Desk 
Dictionary  (New  York:  Doubleday,  1965). 

3.  See  Alesia  Kunz,  "From  Self- 
Containment  to  Invidiousness,"  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly  IV:  1  (Summer,  1977),  pp. 
22-25. 


Sidney  Oliver  is  a  lesbian-feminist, 
a  Quest  editor,  a  Southerner  and  a 
writer-researcher.  (Thanks  to  the 
Body  Politic  Development  Com- 
mittee, Bev,  Charlotte,  Lexi  and 
Mary-Helen,  and  especially  to  Mom, 
for  your  help  in  developing  this  ar- 
ticle.) 


U.S.  Postal  Service  Statement  of  Ownership,  Management, 

and  Circulation. 

Title  of  publication:  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 

Date  of  filing:  February  2,  1978 

Frequency  of  issue:  quarterly 

Location  of  known  office  of  publication:  2000  P  St.  N.W., 

Suite  308,  Washington,  D.C  20036 

Headquarters  or  general  business  offices  of  the  publishers: 

same  as  above 

Publisher:  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  P.O.  Box  8843, 

Wash.  D.C.  20003 

Editor:    Dorothy    Allison,    2000    P    St.    N.W.    Suite    308, 

Washington,  D.C.  20036 

Managing  Editor:  Beverly  J.  Fisher,  2000  P  St.  N.W.  Suite  308, 

Washington,  D.C.  20036 

Owner:    Quest:    a   feminist  quarterly,   Inc.,   P.O.   Box  8843, 

Wash.  D.C.  20036;  no  stockholders.  Non-profit  tax  exempt 

educational  organization  under  section  501  (c)  (3). 

Known  bondholders,  mortagees,  security  holders:  none 
The  purpose,  function,  and  non-profit  status  of  this  organi- 
zation and  the  exempt  status  for  Federal  income  tax  pur- 
poses have  changed  during  preceding  12  months:  Final  de- 
termination that  (we)  are  not  a  private  foundation  within 
the  meaning  of  section  509  (a)  of  the  Internal  Revenue 
Code  because  (we)  are  an  organization  of  the  type  described 
in  section  509(a)(2). 


Extent  and  Nature                 Average  no. 

Actual  no. 

of  Circulation                       copies  each  is- 

copies of  single 

sue  during  pre- 

issue published 

ceding  12  mos. 

nearest  to 

filing  date 

Total  no.  of  copies  printed 

5,000 

5,000 

Paid  Circulation 

1.  Sales    through    dealers 

and  carriers,  street  vendors 

and  counter  sales 

1,095 

1,189 

2.   Mail  subscriptions 

1,533 

1,347 

Total  paid  circulation 

Free  distribution  by  mail 

2,628 

2,536 

carrier  or  other  means-  sam- 

ples,    complimentary,     and 

other  free  copies 

Total  Distribution 

314 

188 

Copies  not  distributed 

2,941 

2,724 

1.  Office  use,  left  over, 

unaccounted,  spoiled  after 

printing 

2.  Returns  from  news 

2,059 

2,276 

agents 

-0- 

-0- 

Total 

5,000 

5,000 

I  certify  that  the  statements  made  by  me  above  are  correct 
and  complete. 

Beverly  J.  Fisher 
Managing  Editor 


Defining  Our  Territories/ll 


Unnatural  Divorce 
of  Spirituality 
and  Politics 


By  HALLIE  IGLEHART 

graphics  by  Judith  Jones 

An  unnecessary  and  destructive 
chasm  exists  between  "spiritual"  and 
"political"  feminists.*  It  is  un- 
necessary because  we  are  saying  the 
same  things  about  the  abuse  of  power- 
over  relationships,  the  right  to 
physical  and  mental  health,  the 
destruction  of  the  environment,  the 
importance  of  the  personal  and  the 
political,  the  individual  and  the 
collective,   and   the  necessity  of  the 


*The  patriarchal  use  of  the  terms  "political" 
and  "spiritual,"  and  of  "inner"  and  "outer," 


"material"  and  "psychic,"  as  separate  and  op- 
posing phenomena  is  inaccurate.  However,  we 
are  just  emerging  from  patriarchal  dualism, 
and  do  not  yet  have  words  adequately 
describing  a  synthesis  of  these  areas  of  human 
existence.  Also,  since  the  areas  of  womanspirit 
focuses  on  are  predominantly  extra-rational 
(but  not  excluding  the  rational,  as  the 
patriarchy  would  have  us  believe),  any 
description  of  them  in  analytic  terms  is 
limited.  It  is  something  like  trying  to  describe 
color  with  sound  —  some  communication  is 
possible,  but  many  essential  elements  of  the 
experience  are  missing.  Many  of  the  mis- 
understandings between  "political"  feminists 
and  "spiritual"  feminists  come  from  this 
language  problem.  When  we  use  rational, 
dualistic  terms  to  communicate  wormanspirit, 
we  must  remember  their  inadequacy  and  allow 
our  intuition  and  imagination  to  fill  in  the 
gaps.  Ultimately,  we  need  a  new  definition  of 
feminism  which  includes  all  forms  of  change. 


12/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


overthrow  of  the  patriarchy  on  all 
levels.  We  have  the  same  goals  and 
values,  but  sometimes  use  different 
words  to  describe  them  or  tools  to  ac- 
tualize them.  The  split  between  us  is 
created  and  maintained  by 
patriarchal  dualistic  concepts  of 
"spirituality"  and  "politics."  It  is 
destructive  because  it  prevents  the 
synthesis  of  the  "spiritual"  and 
"political"  approaches  necessary  to 
establish  the  kind  of  world  we  want 
to  see.  When  we  do  make  this  syn- 
thesis within  ourselves  and  within 
the  feminist  movement,  we  will  have 
more  power  than  we  ever  imagined 
possible. 

With  this  article,  I  hope  to  begin  to 
bridge  the  gap  between  "spiritual" 
and  "political"  feminists  by  ad- 
dressing some  of  the  criticisms  of 
womanspirit  (also  known  as  feminist 
spirituality,  women's  spirituality, 
etc.);  by  describing  how  it  is  political- 
ly expedient  for  the  patriarchy  to 
have  us  believe  that  our  "political" 
and  "spiritual"  interests  are  opposed; 
and  by  showing  how  a  synthesis  of 
the  two  is  developing  through 
womanspirit. 

Objections  to  womanspirit  seem  to 
fall  into  three  main  categories:  all 
spiritualities  and  religions  are  op- 
pressive; spirituality  is  escapist;  and 
it  is  a  wasteful  use  of  womantime  and 
womanenergy.  These  attitudes  reflect 
a  shallow  view  of  history,1  of 
spirituality  and  of  its  relationship  to 
political  power.  The  oppression 
associated  with  religion  and  spirit- 
uality is  real  —  in  the  patriarchy.  The 
oppression  of  political  power  is  real 
—  in  the  patriarchy.  To  dismiss  all 
spirituality  as  oppressive,  however,  is 
akin  to  dismissing  all  politics  as  op- 
pressive.   Refusal   to   recognize   and 


deal  with  both  oppressions  is  self- 
destructive.  Moreover,  we  cannot 
build  a  strong  movement  without  re- 
cognizing the  value  of  all  of  our 
work,  and  without  communicating 
and  working  together. 


Womanspirit  Goals 

The  womanspirit  movement  seeks 
to  reclaim  the  spiritual-political 
powers  neglected  or  suppressed 
throughout  the  patriarchal  era;  to 
develop  a  feminist  force  that  attacks 
the  patriarchy  from  all  directions; 
and  to  create  new  ways  of  being  and 
relating.  For  its  first  few  years, 
womanspirit  has  focused  on 
rediscovering  and  strenghtening  our 
"spiritual"  powers  and  knowledge 
through  consciousness-raising  and 
skills-sharing.  We  have  been  studing 
pre-patriarchal  history  and  art; 
collective  mythology  as  a  history  of 
the  process  of  patriarchal  takeover; 
personal  mythology  as  a  tool  for  self- 
empowerment  and  self-knowledge; 
natural  healing  as  effective  and 
people-oriented  medicine;  and  ritual 
as  a  community-creating  device  and  a 
focusing  of  psychic  power.  In  all 
these  areas,  we  use  the  skills  of 
meditation  and  psychic  powers  both 
for  "inner"  clarity  and  for  effec- 
tiveness in  the  "outer"  world.  We 
also  integrate  a  third  layer  of 
awareness  and  practice— a  sense  of 
who  we  are  in  the  universe  and  our 
place  in  the  community  of  earth, 
animal  and  sea. 

By  combining  our  intuitive  powers 
with  our  intellectual  skills,  and  by 
practising  psychical  and  psy- 
chological preventive  medicine,  we 
can    conserve    and    resource    our 


Unnatural  Divorce  of  Spirituality  &  Politics/13 


energy.  And  by  devising  tools  for 
developing  creativity  and  vision  and 
concretizing  these  visions, 
womanspirit  creates  the  new  world 
now,  rather  than  waiting  until  it  is 
too  late. 

The  Dualistic  Split: 
"Spiritual"  vs.  "Political" 

Feminists  who  rely  heavily  on 
theory,  analysis  and  material  values 
(important  approaches,  but  not  all- 
important),  often  dismiss  feminist 
spirituality  as  having  little  "political" 
relevance.  In  so  doing,  they  fall  into 
one  of  patriarchy's  main  traps,  that 
of  dualism:  "If  it's  spiritual,  it  can't 
be  political." 

Emphasizing  dualisms  makes  it 
easier  for  the  patriarchy  to  isolate 
people  from  our  own  power  and  to 
keep  us  struggling  against  one 
another.  Feminists  early  on 
recognized  that  the  patriarchy  used 
dichotomies  such  as  "feminine"  and 
"masculine,"  "black"  and  "white," 
"personal"  and  "political"  to  weaken 
us.  Womanspirit  goes  a  step  further 
and  asserts  that  "spiritual"  and 
"political"  powers  are  inseparable, 
that  the  abuses  of  both  kinds  of 
power  are  the  result  of  the  patriarchal 
mentality  which  views  them  as  an- 
tithetical. Within  these  dualities  is  the 
supposition  that  one  person  cannot 
win  without  the  other  losing,  and 
that  we  must  constantly  be  on  our 
guard  to  protect  what  little  we  have. 

Dualities  do  exist,  but  they  are  no 
more  a  true  description  of  existence 
than  multiplicities  or  holism.  A 
holistic  view  recognizes  that  we  are 
all  one  and  that  to  harm  any  part  is 
harming  our  selves.  A  multiplistic 
view    (i.e. ,    recognizing    many 


experiences)  encompasses  many  fac- 
tors at  once  and  approaches  any 
situation  from  all  sides,  so  that  there 
is  no  one  politics,  no  single  solution. 
In  this  society,  however,  the 
polarities  of  dualism  have  become  so 
exaggerated  that  the  multiplicities 
lying  between  them  (and  the 
wholeness  itself)  have  been  forgotten 
—indeed,  declared  non-existent. 

In  some  societies,  the  interconnec- 
tion of  the  "material"  and  "spiritual" 
worlds  is  recognized  and  valued.2  In 
them,  "politics"  and  "religion"  work 
together  to  create  a  harmonious, 
egalitarian  society.  "Spiritual"  power 
in  more  integrated  societies  grows 
from  the  study  of  the  self  as  a 
microcosm  of  society  and  the  cosmos, 
and  of  "psychic"  forces  and  the 
rhythms  of  nature.  This  "spiritual" 
power  interacts  with  and  affects 
material  reality.  Its  predominant 
expression  is  effective,  non- 
oppressive,  non-manipulative  power; 
it  attunes  itself  to  the  existing  sit- 
uation, sees  how  best  to  work  with 
what  is  at  hand,  and  uses  the 
available  energy.  In  our  dualistic, 
overly  material  technological  culture, 
this  interconnection  is  denied,  to  the 
benefit  of  those  with  material  power. 
Sexist,  racist  and  ethnocentric  at- 
titudes dismiss  this  spiritual-political 
wisdom  as  superstition,  ignoring 
the  concrete  evidence  of  the  power  of 
the  spirit  to  affect  material  reality. 

These  dualistic  elements  are 
manifested  in  the  feminist  movement 
by  a  competitive  "more  political  than 
thou"  attitude  and  by  the  demand  to 
justify  an  inherently  extra-rational 
mode  (womanspirit)  in  rational 
terms.  This  demand  reflects  an 
ethnocentric  attitude  that  politically 


14/Quest 


valuable  tools  cannot  be  developed 
outside  the  established  political 
feminist  arena,  i.e.,  in  spirituality.  In 
proscribing  certain  approaches,  these 
attitudes  make  it  difficult  for  the 
movement  to  grow  and  to  encompass 
more  women  and  more  areas  of  life. 

Spiritual  Oppression 

One  of  the  primary  ways  the 
patriarchy  uses  dualism  to  keep  us 
oppressed  is  by  telling  us  that  we  are 
not  psychically  oppressed,  and  that 
psychic  oppression  and  power  are 
unrelated  to  material  oppression  and 
power.  Debating  whether  psychic  or 
material  oppression  is  greater  keeps 
us  fighting  each  other  rather  than 
fighting  together  against  our  com- 
mon enemy. 


monopoly  emphasizes  sin,  guilt, 
authoritarianism,  fear  and  promises 
of  future  well-being  rather  than  self- 
knowledge,  love  of  self  and  other, 
and  integration  of  inner  power  with 
outer  power.  In  addition,  these 
religions  as  institutionalized  exclude 
women,  the  earth,  and  the  body,  and 
separate  the  emotions  from  the  spirit, 
thus  denying  any  chance  of 
wholeness.  Religion  in  these  terms 
becomes  an  escape  from  dealing  with 
our  own  authority  and  responsibility 
and  with  the  complicated  in- 
terweavings  of  the  daily  issues  of 
mind,  spirit,  body,  emotions, 
religion,  politics  and  society.  The 
patriarchy  knows  that  people  in 
touch  with  their  spirit  are  powerful 
people,  and  does  all  it  can  to  convince 
us    that    the    spirit,    like    power,    is 


^4  *  s  ^^       •. 


4/^^t 
Z* 


Psychic  oppression  is  so  great  in 
the  West  that  we  hardly  know  what 
the  spirit  is.  Ironically,  spiritual 
growth  is  smothered  by  the  very  in- 
stitutions which  purport  to  foster  it. 
Religion  in  the  common  understand- 
ing  of   the  Judeo-Christian-Muslim 


something  to  fear  rather  than 
something  to  love  and  from  which  to 
grow. 

Long  after  people  have  rejected 
traditional  religion,  the  combined 
social,  political  and  economic  forces 
of  patriarchal  education,  advertising 


Unnatural  Divorce/15 


•w 


^1  '^-Srf*«&. 


/ 


^  ""V*  *M#r* 


.''•■..''.?'.i    rff-'-     Ayr 


Li'* 


•'•'■f:  v"  -vi  '£v  c  i 

Br  8$ 

>:%  * 


16/Quesf 


and  entertainment  continue  their 
spiritual  oppression  by  constantly 
demanding  that  we  function  merely 
analytically  and  competitively.  The 
resulting  suppression  of  compassion, 
emotional  and  psychical  comunica- 
tion,  self-love,  and  the  union  of  self 
power  with  collective  power  (all  com- 
ponents of  healthy  spirituality)  is  an 
essential  tool  in  maintaining  power- 
over  relationships  and  sexual,  racial, 
class  and  other  oppression. 

Every  time  we  discredit  ourselves 
and  one  another,  give  over  our  power 
to  another,  or  cut  ourselves  off  from 
our  inner  strength,  we  feel,  con- 
sciously or  unconsciously, 
patriarchy's  power.  We  lose  contact 
with  our  spirituality  and  its  connec- 
tion to  our  "outer"  power. 

Many  instances  of  connection 
between  material  and  psychic  op- 
pression are  subtle  and  complicated. 
Others  are  overt  and  clear.  It  is  com- 
mon knowledge  that  established 
religion  is  often  big  business,  as 
witnessed  by  the  riches  of  many  of 
the  churches,  and  the  willingness  of 
believers  to  turn  over  large  sums  of 
money  to  churches  and  gurus.  Some 
doctors  receive  $45  each  time  they 
pull  the  switch  to  administer  electric 
shock— a  strong  incentive  to  abuse 
the  treatment.3  Cultural,  economic, 
social  and  spiritual  phenomena  all 
affect  one  another.  We  are  not  the 
victims  only  of  psychic  or  only  of 
economic  oppression.  Wherever 
there  is  material  oppression,  there  is 
psychic  oppression  and  vice-versa. 

Thus  far,  the  feminist  movement 
has  primarily  worked  on  the 
"material"  level,  and  we  have  ac- 
complished much  in  a  few  years.  Yet 
many  women  are  put  off  by  the 
exclusively   "political"   emphasis   of 


the  movement,  sensing  the  necessity 
of  developing  other  parts  of  our  lives 
within  a  feminist  framework.  The 
feminist  movement,  without  a  healthy 
spirituality,  can  never  be  effective 
because  it  addresses  only  one  part  of 
our  oppression. 

Spiritual  Power 

Just  as  material  and  spiritual  op- 
pression go  hand  in  hand,  so  do 
political  and  spiritual  power.  The 
womanspirit  movement  emphasizes  a 
consciousness  that  inner  must  always 
be  combined  with  outer,  that  the  psy- 
chic is  inseparable  from  the  material, 
that  political  power  cannot  exist 
without  spiritual  power,  and  offers 
tools  for  developing  our  inner  power. 
We  are  actively  creating  new  forms 
of  cooperative,  creative  and  effective 
power;  we  need  ritual,  psychic  in- 
tegration and  healing  methods  that 
relate  to  us  as  integral  parts  of  the 
natural  forces. 

It  is  inaccurate  to  analyze  separate- 
ly any  of  the  areas  on  which 
womanspirit  focuses,  since  one  of  the 
strengths  of  womanspirit  is  that  its 
many  methods  interweave  and 
strengthen  one  another.  For  instance, 
beginning  a  meeting  with  a  circle  of 
hands  is  at  once  a  meditation,  a  ritual, 
and  a  healing.  Some  methods, 
however,  do  focus  more  on  one  area 
than  another,  and  I  discuss  here,  as 
examples,  two  of  these  areas,  medita- 
tion and  healing. 

Meditation 

Meditation  is  a  key  force  in 
developing  clarity  and  self-authority, 
conserving  energy,  gathering  and 
directing  power,  and  as  preventive 
physical  and  psychological  medicine. 


Unnatural  Divorce/17 


Meditation  is  not  mysterious  or 
foreign.  It  is  anything  that  centers  us, 
allows  the  exclusively  rational  mind 
to  rest  and  the  more  holistic  and  in- 
tuitive mind  to  come  to  the  fore. 
Many  of  us  meditate  but  do  not 
realize  it,  believing  meditation  to  be  a 
secret,  "spiritual"  discipline  learned 
only  from  a  teacher.  All  of  us 
meditated  as  children.  Artists,  scien- 
tists, inventors,  musicians,  and 
others  develop  meditative  techniques 
to  help  them  tap  their  creative  and 
holistic  minds.4  Some  of  us  have 
developed  daily  experiences  such  as 
taking  a  bath,  running,  or 
daydreaming,  into  meditation. 

Meditating  daily,  whether  through 
a  focusing  device  such  as  breathing, 
visualization  or  sound,  helps  clear 
away  extraneous  thoughts,  fears,  or 
tensions.  The  more  practical, 
problem-solving  meditations  offer 
specific  information  and  ideas  for 
projects,  work,  and  relationships  that 
might  otherwise  remain  unresolved. 
Most  of  these  centering  and  problem- 
solving  meditations  take  only  a  few 
minutes  but  save  much  of  the  energy 
we   waste   in   over-analysis,   unwise 


decisions,  infighting  and  splits  over 
ideology  and  personalities. 

The  resistance  to  experiments  so 
effective  and  presumably  un- 
threatening  is  astounding.  One  of  the 
primary  fears  about  meditation,  as 
with  spirituality  in  general,  is  that 
people  will  become  so  involved  in 
their  inner  selves  that  they  won't 
want  to,  or  be  able  to,  act  in  the 
world.  Like  some  aspects  of  both 
spirituality  and  politics,  meditation 
has  been,  on  occasion,  perverted.  But 
the  popularity  of  meditation,  new  age 
spiritualities  and  the  revival  of  fun- 
damentalist religions  is  a  reflection  of 
our  great  hunger  for  contact  with  our 
inner  selves.  This  need  will  not  go 
away.  These  spiritualities,  however, 
have  about  as  much  relationship  to 
womanspirit  as  dictatorships, 
capitalism  and  New  Left  politics  have 
to  political  feminism.  We  grew  out  of 
them,  we  have  been  oppressed  by 
them;  they  are  models  for  what  we  do 
not  want.  But  sometimes  we  use  some 
of  the  techniques  (e.g.,  theory  and 
analysis,  meditation  and  yoga)  in  a 
new  context,  with  new  values  and  a 
new  purpose. 

A  technique  as  simple  as  spending 
a  few  minutes  in  the  beginning  of  a 
meeting  breathing  and  holding  hands 
in  a  circle— an  essential  part  of 
womanspirit  meetings— makes  the 
work  go  faster  and  more  effectively. 
The  participants  leave  the  circle 
energized,  focus  on  the  work  at  hand, 
and  communicate  with  one  another 
on  several  levels.  Disagreements  are 
more  easily  dealt  with,  and  the  united 
forces  of  the  individuals  produce  far 
more  creative  and  powerful  ideas  and 
strategies.  A  concrete  electro- 
magnetic energy  begins  to  travel 
around  the  circle.  This  energy  is  not 


18/ 'Quest 


mysterious:  it  is  the  force  that  is 
tapped  in  healing  techniques  around 
the  world,  from  acupuncture  in 
China  to  laying  on  of  hands  in  black 
communities  in  this  country.  In  a  cir- 
cle of  hands,  people  literally  are 
affected  by  the  collective  energy. 


uses 
in- 


the    meantime,    womanspirit 
meditation  as  a  tool— and  for  its 
herent  value— for  it  will  help  us  win 
the  revolution. 


The  meditative  mind,  whether 
using  breath  awareness,  problem 
solving,  dreams,  psychic  techniques, 
the  /  Ching,  or  the  Tarot,  is  focused. 
It  gives  us  space  to  reflect,  to  let  go  of 
counterproductive  ego  or  reactive  im- 
pulses. It  does  not  avoid  questions  or 
criticism  but  considers  them  and 
makes  clear  and  creative  choices. 
Meditation  also  allows  room  for  the 
intuitive  mind.  Rationalizations, 
doubts  and  fears  recede  so  that  the 
more  holistic  mind  can  offer  its 
perspective. 

Employing  meditation  along  with 
logic  and  verbalization  is  a  deeper 
and  more  energy  conserving  ap- 
proach to  problems  than  exclusive 
reliance  on  the  rational  mind.  Some 
of  the  most  creative  ideas  for 
organizing,  teaching  and  writing,  for 
example,  can  come  from  meditation. 
Sometimes  meditation  makes  outer 
communication  unnecessary  or  paves 
the  way  for  outer  communication 
that  would  have  been  ineffective 
previously.  Perhaps  some  day 
meditation   will   be  unnecessary.   In 


A  vivid  example  of  the  power  of  this 
technique  is  the  experience  of  the 
Psychic  Action  Committee  of  the 
Conference  on  Violence  Against 
Women  in  San  Francisco.  The 
Conference  covered  about  thirty 
different  areas,  ranging  from  lesbian 
self-hatred  to  pornography  to  child 
abuse.  It  attracted  a  remarkably  wide 
range  of  ages,  classes,  races  and 
backgrounds.  The  Psychic  Action 
Committee  of  four  women  was  asked 
to  create  two  workshops  and  a  ritual 
for  closing  the  Conference.  None  of 
us  had  ever  worked  together  before; 
some  of  us  had  never  met;  and  we  all 
came  from  different  backgrounds 
and  approaches.  We  had  in  common 
only  a  commitment  to  integrate  our 
"spiritual"  values  and  tools  with  our 
"political"  ones. 

We  began  each  of  our  planning 
meetings  by  spending  a  few  minutes 
holding  hands  in  a  circle,  focusing  on 
our  breathing,  and  doing  a  relaxation 
exercise.  This  helped  after  a  long  and 
hassled  day,  set  aside  any  thoughts 
distracting  us  from  the  work  at  hand, 
and,  on  a  psychic  level,  helped  us 
break  down  the  barriers  between  us. 

In  four  meetings,  we  designed  two, 
two-hour  workshops  for  two  hun- 
dred women  and  planned  a  ritual  that 


Unnatural  Divorce/19 


could  direct  the  energy  of  a  thousand 
women  who  had  spent  a  weekend 
dealing  with  violence.  Both  the 
workshops  and  the  ritual  not  only  ac- 
complished all  our  purposes  but  were 
also  achieved  through  meetings 
shorter  by  half  and  more  enjoyable 
than  most  of  the  other  planning 
meetings.  Two  of  the  conference  coor- 
dinators told  us  how  different  our 
meetings  were  compared  with  some 
of  the  others,  which  were  sometimes 
hindered  by  conflict  and  communica- 
tion problems. 

Healing 

An  equally  essential  tool  is  healing. 
It  includes  not  only  "curing" 
someone  after  she  is  sick  (the  main 
focus  of  patriarchal  medicine),  but 
also  preventing  illness  through  atten- 
tion to  cycles,  diet,  warning  signals, 
self-knowledge,  and  energy. 

Too  many  of  us  are  helpless  in  the 
face  of  patriarchal  medicine.  How 
can  we  say  we  are  effecting  political 
change  when  we  consistently  give  up 
our  bodies,  our  health  and  our 
authority  to  a  male-dominated  power 
structure  incapable  of  healing  us  no 
matter  how  much  power  we  gain 
within  it? 

Patriarchal  medicine  is  based  on  a 
distrust  of  the  body's  own  healing 
powers,  and  on  denial  both  of  our  in- 
dividual healing  potential  as  well  as 
that  of  nature.  It  is  dominated  by  an 
excessive  use  of  surgery  and 
chemicals,  and  a  methodology  that 
separates  the  body  from  the  mind 
and  emotions  and  treats  each  organ 
separately.  Socializing  this  medicine, 
having  more  women  doctors,  or  ob- 
taining more  control  in  hospitals  and 
clinics  are  not  the  only  solutions  to 
our  health  problems.  We  do  not  need 


more  of  a  medicine  that  often  makes 
us  sicker,  disempowers  us,  relies 
excessively  on  chemicals  and  surgery, 
and  is  ignorant  of  natural  healing. 
While  western  medicine  has  some 
useful  approaches  and  techniques, 
most  (such  as  drugs  and  surgery)  are 
extremely  traumatic  and  should  be 
used  only  as  last  resorts,  as  in 
Chinese  medicine.  Preventive 
medicine,  medicinal  herbs,  laying  on 
of  hands,  psychic  healing  and  an  un- 
derstanding of  the  interconnection  of 
emotions,  mind  and  body  provide  a 
far  more  effective  and  self- 
empowering  basis  for  our  medicine. 

Natural  healing  relies  primarily  on 
the  healing  powers  of  the  earth  and 
the  entire  human  being.  It  is  the 
predominant  form  of  medicine  in  the 
world,  although  it  is  quickly  being 
threatened  in  newly  industrialized 
countries  by  drugs  and  surgery.  Until 
the  Crusades,  natural  healing  was  the 
only  form  of  medicine  in  the  West  for 
tens  of  thousands  of  years  and  has 
been  practiced  primarily  by  women.5 
It  still  prevails  in  this  country  among 
people  with  less  access  to  established 
medicine— such  as  older  and  poorer 
people,  and  in  some  rural  com- 
munities, ethnic  groups,  and  first 
world  cultures. 

Most  of  us  still  operate  (though 
perhaps  unwillingly)  under  the  belief 
that  the  doctor  is  god.  We  may  resist 
and  hate  him,  but  we  still  turn  to  him 
when  our  health  is  on  the  line.  It 
takes  great  courage  and/or  despera- 
tion to  decide  to  heal  oneself  through 
natural  methods.  It  means  taking  a 
major  step  away  from  the  patriarchy, 
both  internally  and  externally.  It 
means  withdrawing  money  and 
authority  from  the  patriarchy  and  en- 
trusting our  health  to  our  own  skills 


20/ Quest 


and  those  of  our  sisters.  It  mans  tap- 
ping into  the  heritage  of  centuries  of 
women  healers  and  relying  on  the 
power  of  the  earth  through  herbs.  It 
means  understanding  and  using  the 
electro-magnetic  currents  which  con- 
tinually run  through  our  bodies  and 
affect  our  health.  And  it  means 
beginning  to  know  and  listen  to  our 
own  bodies  and  judgment. 

This  self-empowerment  is  one  of 
the  most  dramatic  aspects  of  natural 
healing.  There  is  incredible  power  in 
discovering  that  expensive  and 
alienating  cancer  surgery,  mechanical 
abortion  or  antibiotic  treatment  is 
often  unnecessary,  and  that  cure 
through  natural  methods  both  works 
and  regenerates.  The  discoveries  are 
accompanied  by  an  overwhelming 
sense  of  personal  and  collective  vic- 
tory—knowledge and  power  not 
often  experienced  in  the  day-to-day 
struggle  against  the  patriarchy.  As 
each  women  goes  through  the  natural 
healing  process,  she  adds  to  the 
growing  collective  knowledge.  And 
most  importantly,  we  get  well  rather 
than  sicker. 

Some  object  to  natural  healing 
methods  because  they  are  not  readily 
available  and  take  too  much  time.  But 
in  the  long  run,  natural  healing  takes 
less  time  since  the  healing  is  deep  and 
lasting,  rather  than  merely  sup- 
pressing symptoms  which  may  flare 
up  later,  more  critically. 

The  relative  unavailability  of 
natural  healing  methods  is  a  crucial 
matter— and  one  that  points  up  the 
need  for  a  coalition  of  "spiritual"  and 
"political"  forces.  Effective  natural 
healers  are  continually  harrassed 
with  arrests,  fines,  and  imprisonment 
by  the  AMA,  drug  industry  and  gov- 
ernment   power    bloc— our    latter- 


day  witch  hunters.**  Propaganda, 
prejudice,  derision  and  fear  are  also 
weapons  which  have  been  used  effec- 
tively to  keep  power  from  natural 
healers.  Finally,  natural  healers  are 
not  covered  by  medical  insurance  or 
government  health  programs. 
Developing  self-healing  tools  is  dif- 
ficult and  time-consuming  in  such 
conditions.  Many  women  do  not 
realize  that  these  healing  methods 
exist,  and  that  other  women  are 
researching  them  and  struggling  to 
make  them  available  to  more  than  a 
few  interested  or  privileged  people.  + 

Bodywork  (some  versions  of 
which  are  known  as  laying  on  of 
hands,  acupressure,  energy  work, 
massage,  polarity  therapy,  shiatsu)  is 
an  important  aspect  of  natural 
healing  because  of  its  accessibility, 
universality,  effectiveness  and 
relationship  to  power.  In  this  coun- 
try, laying  on  of  hands,  familiar  to 
first-world  cultures  and  old- 
fashioned  healers,  is  now  being  used 
by  white  middle-class  bodyworkers. 

Bodywork  demands  a  direct 
knowledge  of  one's  own  body- 
energy,  sensitivity  to  another's,  and 
an  understanding  of  the  energy  that 
moves  through  all  living  things  and 


**The  more  effective  and  accessible  a  natural 
healer  or  collective  is,  the  more  likely  it  is  that 
it  will  be  persecuted.  To  date,  those  arrested 
includes  midwives,  alternative  cancer  healers, 
herbalists,  homeopaths,  and  bodyworkers. 

+  lt  often  takes  great  courage  to  give  up  es- 
tablished beliefs  and  access  to  recognition.  We 
are  all  badly  in  need  of  the  knowledge,  skills 
and  resources  of  natural  healers.  Distrust  from 
our  sisters  only  weakens  all  of  us;  com- 
munication, support  and  cooperation 
strengthen  us.  Through  such  support  we  can 
work  together  on  all  approaches  —  the  quality 
of  our  medicine  as  well  as  its  availability. 


Unnatural  Divorce/21 


through  the  furthest  reaches  of  the 
universe.  It  is  powerful,  but  easily 
tapped. 

This  is  a  hands-off  society;  people 
are  rarely  touched  except  sexually  or 
violently,  but  anyone  who  has 
touched  or  been  touched  by  another 
in  a  soothing,  healing  way  has 
experienced  laying  on  of  hands.  We 
need  touch  like  we  need  food  and  air. 
Physical,  mental  and  emotional  ten- 
sions accumulate  in  the  body  and 
need  to  be  released,  much  as  we  need 
to  shit.  In  our  society,  the  causes  of 
these  tensions  are  not  removed,  and 
the  tensions  are  released  through 
sickness,  sex  or  violence. 

Laying  on  of  hands  can  create  an 
intimate  exchange  between  the  healer 
and  the  healed.  It  cuts  through 
alienation,  rationalizations  and 
paranoia.  The  communication  goes 
far  deeper  than  the  usual  intellectual 
verbal  exchange— we  feel  it  in 
muscles,  blood  and  bones,  as  well  as 
in  our  emotions  and  thoughts.  Such 
openness  is  more  possible  because 
both  people  open  up  to  one  another 
and  become  one  person,  sharing  the 
same  electromagnetic  life  energy.  The 
healer  offers  her  energy;  the  healed 
allows  her  self  to  become  vulnerable. 
Both,  literally,  visit  one  another's 
territory  in  a  way  that  we  normally 
only  experience  in  making  love.  A 
healing  experience  as  enjoyable  as 
making  love  reflects  a  different 
definition  of  healing.  It  is  a  fresh  field 
for  us  to  develop  according  to  our 
most  daring  visions. 

The  way  bodywork  is  practiced  in 
the  womanspirit  movement 
emphasizes  the  relatively  equal 
relationship  between  healer  and 
healed.  We  are  all  familiar  with  the 
feeling  of  gratitude  and  dependency 


possible  when  we  are  healed.  The 
dynamic  is  often  perverted  when  one 
person  has  power  over  or  knowledge 
beyond  that  of  the  other,  as  in  typical 
parental  and  medical  relationships. 
But  in  womanspirit  the  commonprac- 
tice  is  that  of  a  trade:  "you  work  on 
me;  I'll  work  on  you."  The  healer 
becomes  the  healed,  setting  up  the 
kind  of  cooperative  power-sTiaring  es- 
sential to  preventing  and  curing 
sickness. 

Such  vital,  equal  and  intimate 
relationships  are  rare;  we  can  develop 
more  of  them.  Having  shared 
bodywork,  it  is  much  more  difficult 
for  us  to  become  alienated,  paranoid 
or  overly  competitive  with  one 
another,  for  we  have  touched  souls 
and  power.  Because  we  are  much 
closer  on  many  non-verbal  levels, 
verbal  communication  is  easier,  we 
understand  each  other  much  more 
quickly,  and  move  to  yet  another 
level  of  creativity.  For  example,  a 
workshop  on  self-hatred  and  suicide 
and  cooperation  at  the  1977  Feminist 
Forum  in  San  Francisco  which  was  so 
full  of  pain  that  women  began 
massaging  one  another.  At  that 
crucial  moment,  the  experience  of 
being  touched,  soothed,  caressed  and 
cared  for  did  more  to  heal  per- 
manently the  self-hatred  than  any 
discussion  would  have.  It  was  an  es- 
sential first  step  in  breaking  down 
the  patriarchal  fiction  that  we  are 
worthless  and  unlovable. 

Conclusion 

The  womanspirit  movement  is  a 
necessity,  not  a  luxury.  Without  it, 
we  are  operating  with  only  half  our 
potential  tools  and  power.  What  we 
think  we  want  is  based  on  what  we 


22/ 'Quest 


J?&>.  .• 
■*£&•%'^1:■■r. 


*.*.*•: 


--  *>.*2  <v#  v--'-'. '  *  "   -  ' . 
;;;.;*:;•-..  **z*-  -^^  >*-•* 


>r 


Unnatural  Divorce/23 


think  is  possible;  one  of 
womanspirit's  most  important  func- 
tions is  to  create  and  implement  a 
feminist  vision.  We  need  tools  such 
as  meditation,  personal  mythology, 
natural  healing,  dreamwork,  study  of 
matriarchal  history  and  mythology, 
and  ritual  to  reach  beyond  the 
possibility  laid  out  for  us  by  the 
patriarchy.  We  cannot  wait  until 
after  the  revolution  for  the  new  order 
to  rise  up,  phoenix-like,  out  of  the 
ashes  of  the  old.  We  need  to  lay  the 
groundwork  now  through  lifetimes 
of  hard  work  in  researching, 
experimenting  with  and  practicing  a 
new  integration  of  "politics"  and 
"spirituality."  We  need  new  ways  of 
healing,  self-knowledge,  self-power, 
new  ways  of  being  and  relating  to 
ourselves,  one  another,  the  earth  and 
the  cosmos.  If  we  neglect  them,  we 
will  only  create  a  new  version  of  the 
overly  competitive,  dualistic, 
rational,  technological  patriarchy. 

Ultimately,  the  goals  of  spirit- 
uality and  of  revolutionary  politics 
are  the  same:  to  create  a  world 
in  which  love,  equality,  freedom 
and  fulfillment  of  individual 
and  collective  potential  is  possible.  If 
we  unite  the  two  approaches  to  these 
common  goals,  we  will  experience 
this  fulfillment. 

/  want  to  thank  Leni  Schweninger,  Lee 
Schwing,  Charlene  Spretnak,  Lucky  Sweeny 
and  Juanita  Weaver  for  our  talks  about  this  ar- 
ticle, and  especially  Sidney  Oliver  for  her 
detailed  suggestions  and  Mary-Helen  Mautner 
for  her  editing. 

Footnotes 

1.  Space  considerations  prevent  me  from 
describing  here  our  heritage  of  spiritual  and 
political  unity  during  Paleolithic  and  Neolithic 
times  and  its  loss  through  the  patriarchal 
takeover.  For  information  on  this  subject,  see 


Merlin  Stone,  When  God  Was  a  Woman  (New 
York:  Dial  Press,  1976);  Anne  Kent  Rush, 
Moon,  Moon  (New  York:  Random  House/ 
Moon  Books,  1976);  and  Adrienne  Rich,  Of 
Woman  Born  (New  York:  W.W.  Norton  and 
Co.,  1976),  pp.  84-110. 

2.  See,  for  example,  Sandra  Roos,  "Roots  of 
Feminine  Consciousness  in  Prehistoric  Art," 
(unpublished  manuscript,  1976);  Patricia  Gar- 
field, "Learned  from  Senoi  Dreamers," 
Creative  Dreaming,  (New  York:  Ballantine, 
1974);  John  Nance,  Gentle  Tasaday:  A  Stone 
Age  People  in  the  Philippines  Rain  Forest 
(New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace,  Jovanovich, 
1977). 

3.  See,  e.g.,  Madness  Network  News  III,  1 
(April,  1975). 

4.  Patricia  Garfield,  "Learned  from  Creative 
Dreamers,"  Creative  Dreaming  (New  York: 
Ballantine,  1974). 

5.  Barbara  Eherenreich  and  Deirdre  English, 
Witches,  Midwives  and  Nurses:  A  History 
of  Women  Healers  (Old  Westbury,  N.Y.:  The 
Feminist  Press,  1973). 


Hallie  Iglehart  has  been  leading 
womanspirit  groups  for  four  years 
and  has  written  a  handbook  on 
womanspirit,  to  be  published  this 
year. 


A  MAGAZINE  OF  LESBIAN  CULTURE  Aty0 


Sample  copy  V  75  by  mail 

Checks  payable  lo  / 

Tomaio  Publications  v 

70  Bam>w  Si  ^J1 


^ 


£ 


l 


ft  *\     ° 

*  en  >   jo  & 


DYKE  \ 


A  QUARTERLY 


'  ^/VALYSIS  AND  INTERVIEWS 


24/Quest 


*&\AanipulatioTi 


Ik 


ofthe^iBast 


By  POLLY  JOAN 

graphics  by  Johanna  Vogelsang 

My  hands  stretch  to  quiet 
the  trembling  animal 
my  dogs  have  dragged 
home 

to  stroke  and  free 

at  least  one  natural  mother 

unbrainwashed 

by  Western  man 

to  nurse  her  young 

The  breasts  of  Third  World  Women 

hang  low 

while  their  babies  die 

on  American  bottles 

The  newest  multi-million  dollar 
woman-sell  is  bottle  feeding  in 
under-developed  countries.  In  the 
name  of  better  health  and  healthier 
babies  the  American  corporate  man  is 
preying  again  on  women's  breasts, 
exporting  manipulation  of 
motherlove  and  motherguilt. 
However,  this  time  corporate  death  is 
on  his  hands  because  bottle  feeding 
in  underdeveloped  nations  usually 
results  in  child  homicide.  "Although 
breast  feeding  has  advantages 
everywhere,  it  is  now  recognized  that 
for  about  two-thirds  of  the  world's 


population,  bottle  feeding  of  infants 
is  highly  undesirable,  and  in  many 
instances  placing  an  infant  on  a  bot- 
tle might  be  tantamount  to  signing 
the  death  certificate  of  the  child.  Bot- 
tle feeding  is  responsible  for  a  huge 
amount  of  childhood  illness  and  for 
many  many  deaths."1 

In  his  monograph  on  The  Promo- 
tion of  Bottle  Feeding  By 
Multinational  Corporations,  Michael 
Latham,  of  the  Cornell  University 
Program  on  International  Nutrition 
and  Development  Policy,  gives  two 
main  reasons  why  bottle  feeding  is 
such  a  serious  public  health  problem 
for  infants  of  the  poor  anywhere.  He 
notes  first  the  common  practice  of 
overdiluting  the  formula,  due  in  large 
part  to  its  comparatively  high  costs. 
This  results  in  an  inadequate  nutrient 
intake  and  slow  starvation  for  the 
baby.  In  1963,  while  working  in  Tan- 
zania, Latham  reported  that  the  cost 
of  adequately  bottle  feeding  a  six 
month  old  infant  was  equivalent  to 
half  the  minimum  wage  in  that  coun- 
try. He  questioned  then  how  a  family 
could  allow  over  half  of  their  income 
to  be  spent  on  the  food  of  their 
youngest  member. 

The  second  cause  of  death  Latham 
cites  is  poor  hygiene.  Milk  is  an 
excellent    medium    for    deadly 


Manipulation  of  the  Breast/25 


organisms  and  when  left  un- 
refrigerated  or  watered  down  with 
water  from  a  ditch  or  low  lying  well 
(sometimes  the  only  source  of  water 
in  many  parts  of  the  world),  the 
results  can  be  deadly.  Latham  sums 
up  his  nutritional  position  toward 
bottle  feeding  with  the  statement: 
"Lactation  is  a  normal  and  natural 
process  common  to  humans,  and 
other  mammals,  and  it  usually 
provides  an  optimal  diet  for  the  new- 
born. That  breast  feeding  .  .  .  should 
have  declined  so  rapidly  in  many 
developing  countries  is  a  strange  and 
unfortunate  happening.  It  is  perhaps 
as  unusual  as  if,  in  the  early  part  of 
the  21st  century,  it  became  the  nor- 
mal practice  for  a  large  proportion  of 
the  human  race  to  have  babies  by 
Caesarian  section,  to  receive  their 
nutrients  by  intravenous  infusions, 
and  to  urinate  through  catheters."2 

In  tandem  studies  with  Latham, 
Ted  Greiner  reports  corroborating 
evidence.  "More  and  more  Third 
World  mothers  who  can  neither  af- 
ford a  breast  milk  substitute  nor 
prepare  it  hygienically  are  taking 
their  infants  off  the  breasts  at  ever 
younger  ages.  Diluted,  contaminated 
feeds  are  resulting  in  protein-energy 
malnutrition,  usually  accompanied  if 
not  triggered  by  gastroenteritis  and 
diarrhea.  Other  infections  are  often 
synergistically  involved.  Death  is 
commonly  the  outcome."3 


The  Colonization  of  the  Breast 

Unfortunately,  most  Western 
women  recognize  the  seductive  pull 
toward  bottle  feeding  from  our  own 
painful  histories.  It  is  less  'primitive,' 
more  chic  to  use  a  bottle.  We  can  go 


public,  go  to  work.  We  are  less  tied  to 
our  babies  open-mouthed  need  for 
mother,  and  only  mother.  However, 
since  the  onset  of  the  Industrial 
Revolution,  an  apparent  patriarchal 
need  to  control  motherhood  has 
systematically  toyed  with  a  mother's 
real  need  for  more  freedom.  While 
the  male  indutrial  complex  has  been 
willing  to  hold  out  carrot  promises  of 
freedom  with  the  bottle,  it  has  not 
been  willing  to  hire  women  equally 
into  the  workforce. 

I  do  not  think  it  was  simply  coin- 
cidence that  bottle  feeding  was  in- 
troduced about  the  same  time  that 
women  got  the  vote.  It  sounded  sup- 
portive of  women's  rights  on  the  sur- 
face. The  bottle  would  free  mothers 
to  work  while  someone  else  fed  the 
baby.  However,  while  it  supposedly 
freed  the  women,  it  kept  the  breast 
for  private  homes.  No  nursing 
exposure  in  public  would  now  be 
needed.  As  we  know,  before  the  ad- 
vance of  the  bottle,  breast  feeding  in 
public  was  a  natural  part  of  the 
culture.  To  counteract  what  I  feel  was 
a  growing  fear  of  the  free  woman, 
exactly  whose  breast  it  was,  was  the 
male  trade-off  that  went  with  the  in- 
troduction of  bottle  feeding. 

Also,  the  introduction  of  bottle 
feeding  brought  money  into  the 
economy  and  that  fact  did  not  go  un- 
noticed. The  new  mode  created  for 
women  was  a  gold  mine,  so  fan- 
tastically lucrative  that  advertising 
took  a  careful  psychological  turn.  In 
order  to  increase  profits,  an  appeal 
was  made  (and  is  still  being  made)  to 
reach  the  mother  still  at  home,  the 
woman  who  is  not  working,  who  is 
still  breast  feeding  her  children. 
Naturally,  as  a  mother,  she  wants  the 
best  for  her  baby.  With  sterile  bottle 


26/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


milk  she  does  not  have  to  fear  her 
mother's  milk  is  perhaps  unhealthy 
because  maybe  mother  is  un- 
healthy? The  gambit  alludes  to  the 
possibility  that  a  mother  may  be  un- 
wittingly transferring  unwholesome 
breast  milk  to  her  baby,  even  though 
it  is  well  known  medically  that  "even 
poorly  nourished  mothers  seem  to 
produce  milk  of  adequate 
quality. "4The  advertising  suggests 
that  the  mother  will  not  have  to 
worry  any  more  about  not  having 
enough.  Does  your  baby  cry?  Are 
you  sure  your  own  milk  is  enough? 
The  ads  are  worded  in  such  a  way  as 
to  trigger  in  the  mother  a  sense  of  in- 
adequacy.  Inadvertently,  it  is 
suggested,  she  may  be  starving  her 


child.  A  tinge  of  guilt  begins  to  nag 
the  new  mother  in  the  face  of  this 
new  thought,  strongly  buttressed  on 
one  hand  by  her  doctor  and  pediatric 
journals,  and  on  the  other  by  the 
male  demand  for  forever  youthful 
breasts,  riding  high,  riding  beautiful. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  male 
introduction  of  bottle  feeding  coin- 
cided with  the  development  of  the 
"mammary  gland  fixation. "5The 
possible  increase  in  mobility  for 
mothers  who  bottle  fed  somehow 
became  inseparably  linked  with  the 
need  for  a  woman  to  have  forever 
young  breasts.  The  result  was  that 
this  new  threat  distracted  a  mother 
who  might  think  about  what  to  do 
with  her  free  time  now  that  she  was 
less  tied  to  her  home  and  child,  and 
carefully  channeled  her  potential  into 
another  male-oriented  box  — 
overattention  to  staying  young  and 
attractive.  Also,  whether  the  myth  of 
the  horrible  breast  sag  was  con- 
sciously  created   or   not,    the   un- 


Manipulation/27 


deniable  result  has  been  that  the 
possibility  of  the  diminishing  appeal 
to  a  man  of  a  woman  with  breast  sag 
costs  millions  as  women  madly  fight 
to  keep  their  breasts  young. 

Breast  sag,  as  a  result  of  nursing 
one's  children,  is  in  itself  erroneous. 
Herstory  suggests  that  the  breast,  as  a 
muscle,  is  less  likely  to  sag  if  a 
woman  breast  feeds  than  if  she 
doesn't.  In  any  case,  any  unused 
muscle  will  eventually  lose  its  muscle 
tone,  and  in  the  case  of  the  breast, 
will  naturally  tend  to  carry  lower 
with  disuse.  Regardless  of  these  well 
hidden  facts,  the  legend  that  the 
sexual  woman  and  the  mother  are 
somehow  separate  beings  has  been 
well  advertised.  Both  myths  play 
upon  a  woman's  emotions.  Both 
serve  to  undermine  a  woman's  sense 
of  her  body  as  adequate  in  and  of 
herself.  Both  create  an  artificial 
necessity  relieved  by  buying.  Clearly, 
both  myths  cushion  the  market.  One 
side  veers  sales  toward  the  forever 
young  and  beautiful  girl  and  the 
other  creates  false  needs  for 
becoming  the  super  mother. 

By  the  late  fifties  manipulation  of 
the  breast  was  big  business.  It  is  not 
ridiculous  to  say  that  promotion  of 
the  breast  and  the  syndromes  created 
around  society's  image  of  woman  has 
held  up  a  significant  part  of  our 
economy  (at  least  the  part  that  hasn't 
been  maintained  by  war).  The  drive 
for  a  woman  to  remain  young  sup- 
ports a  constantly  changing  garment 
and  cosmetic  industry— no  grey  hair, 
wrinkles  or  horrible  age*  spots. 
Successful  advertising  which  pro- 
motes a  stay-young  conciousness  in 
women  grosses  innumerable  profits. 
Cups  to  stuff  our  hills  into  -  up-out 
pointed-rounded-wired-added     to- 


subtracted  from-lace-elastic-tight  - 
diets-clothes-home-decors-to  fit  the 
cup-fit  the  image.  Coupling  the  bot- 
tle mother  cult  with  the  youth  cult, 
this  same  woman  is  encouraged  to 
want  a  home  to  go  with  her  youth, 
drapes  and  bedspreads  to  match, 
dishes  to  see  her  face  in,  clothes  ALL 
clean,  creative  playthings  and 
Twinkies  because  she  cares  enough 
to  do  the  very  best  for  her  children. 
In  the  end  it  all  caters  to  the  same 
fairy  tale— How  to  remain  young  and 
sexy,  and  a  better  mother  all  at  the 
same  time. 

How  we  have  paid  for  this  separa- 
tion of  ourselves  into  two  artificial 
women  who  are  not  ourselves!  The 
agony  that  our  natural  bodies  were 
never  good  enough  in  themselves  to 
be  either  lovers  or  mothers  robbed  us 
of  the  ability  to  accept  our 
womanhood  as  a  whole  being.  We 


have  been  bifuracted  into  two 
separate  breast  beings  who  have  no 
relationship  to  the  ground  of  feeling 
we  walk  on,  our  breasts  bouncing. 
What  has  been  done  to  our  minds, 
our  image  of  ourselves  as  intelligent 
beings  is  a  whole  other  story.  This 
heritage  is  being  passed  on  to  our 
sisters  in  the  Third  World,  the  same 


28  /Quest 


obviously  successful  advertising 
pitch,  the  same  psychological 
manipulation,  the  same  manipulation 
of  women's  breasts  for  a  buck. 

Must  their  breasts 

dry  and  their  children  die 

unprotected  by  a  mother's  milk 

reaching 

for  a  male  culture 

dominated  by  the  dollar 

Will  these  women 

also  be  told 

when  the  reasons  thin 

how  their  nursing  breasts 

lose  their  beauty  for  men 

how  they  can  expect 

rejection? 

Referring  again  to  the  paper 
quoted  earlier,  Greiner  states  that 
baby  food  companies  such  as  Ross 
Laboratories  (Similac),  Bordens,  Nes- 
tle, etc.,  continue,  through  carefully- 
worded  advertising  campaigns,  to  in- 
fluence the  women  in  these  countries 
into  rejecting  their  own  breasts  in 
favor  of  bottle  feeding  by  creating 
false  needs  for  man-made  milk,  even 
in  the  face  of  overwhelming  evidence 
supporting  the  fact  that  bottle 
feeding  is  extraordinarily  dangerous 
to  the  health  of  infants  in  under- 
developed countries. 6Bottle  feeding  is 
growing  in  Third  World  countries 
and  Third  World  women  are  buying 
this  fatherly  interpretation  of  a 
mother's  needs,  even  as  we  have.  The 
results  of  this  "sell"  will  be 
significantly  worse  psychologically 
for  Third  World  women  than  it  has 
been  for  women  in  the  U.S. 

Those  of  us  who  have  gone 
through  significant  consciousness- 
raising    have    experienced    the    un- 


believable cost  in  understanding  the 
breast  myths,  how  we  have  denied 
our  femaleness  by  believing  the 
breast  myths,  denying  the  feelings  of 
our  honest  bodies  and  minds  by 
accepting  and  supporting  the  male- 
developed  dualistic  breast  culture. 
How  much  more  devastating  for 
Third  World  women  to  have  to  even- 
tually feel  all  of  that  agony  plus  the 
realization  that  they  have  also 
allowed  their  own  children  to  die  by 
denying  them  a  mother's  breast? 

How  many  of  us  could  face  that 
and  live?  It  is  not  idle  thinking  to 
wonder  if  the  suicide  rate  for  mothers 
in  underdeveloped  countries  will  go 
up  in  exact  proportion  to  the  even- 
tual filtering  of  a  feminist  con- 
sciousness into  these  countries. 

Although  American  feminists  now 
write  in  abundance  about  the  rape  of 
the  breast  as  a  sex  symbol,  there  is 
noticeably  little  outrage  about  the 
manipulation  of  women's  breasts 
into  a  bottle  culture.  Perhaps  there  is 
still  too  much  ambivalence  toward 
motherhood  as  a  female  trap  for 
feminist  women  to  really  face  the 
destructiveness  which  the  bottle  syn- 
drome has  created  in  this  country. 
The  bottle  still  represents  a  form  of 
freedom,  giving  mothers  an  escape 
hatch. 

Unfortunately,  it  is  the  male 
possessiveness  of  the  breast  because 
he  sees  the  breast  sexually  rather  than 
functionally  that  continues  to  keep 
many  mothers  in  this  country  am- 
bivalent about  whether  to  nurse  or 
not.  Also  society's  complete  com- 
parmentalization  of  children  until 
they  reach  a  certain  age  continues  to 
force  a  woman  to  make  a  choice  she 
shouldn't  have  to  make— whether  to 
nurse  or  bottle  feed,  whether  to  go 


Manipulation/29 


back  to  work  or  stay  home.  The  La 
Leche  League  has  done  a  real  service 
by  reinforcing  the  value  of  breast 
feeding,  but  many  feminists  still  do 
not  see  their  efforts  as  any  more  than 
continuing  to  structure  women  into  a 
motherhood  trap  rigidly  tied  to  home 
and  child.  If  in  fact  the  naturalness  of 
the  phenomenon  could  be  fought  for, 
then  women  and  babies  could  be  a 
part  of  every  working  office.  The 
time  must  come  when  it  is  not  a 
denial  of  feminism  to  want  to  be  a 
mother  and  to  want  to  nurse  a  child. 


Motherhood 

The  feminist's  ambivalence  toward 
motherhood  is  the  only  explanation  I 
can  come  up  with  to  explain  the 
strange  quiet  which  has  accompanied 
the  well-documented  horror  stories 
about  bottle  feeding  advertising  ac- 
tivities   in   underdeveloped    nations. 


As  yet,  there  is  no  action-oriented 
campaign  zeroed  in  on  the  AMA's 
continued  mindless  support  of  bottle 
feeding  corporations.  Exporting  this 
mentality  to  our  Third  World  sisters 
means  almost  certain  death  for  many 
women,  but  there  are  similar  reasons 
to  attack  the  bottle  feeding  syndrome 
on  our  own  turf.  With  our  generally 
higher  standard  of  living  in  this 
country,  bottle  feeding  can  be  as 
physically  healthy  for  a  child  as 
breast  feeding,  but  we  tend  to  pre- 
tend that  the  lure  for  a  mother  to 
dilute  expensive  formula  in  this 
country  in  order  to  stretch  a  budget 
does  not  exist.  It  does. 

There  is  another  reason  to  support 
a  changed  attitude  toward  breast 
feeding,  which  is  really  a  more 
developed  attitude  toward  women  as 
women.  The  fact  that  it  comes  out  of 
my  life  as  a  mother  is  important,  but 
its  heightened  consciousness  does  not 
have  to  be  limited  to  motherhood. 
Contrary  to  the  experience  of  most 
women,  it  has  been  as  a  mother  that  I 
have  enjoyed  my  greatest  freedom  to 
be  a  woman.  Only  with  my  children 
have  I  been  free  to  love  and  free  to  be 
myself.  I  never  felt  I  had  to  separate 
myself  into  two  women,  one  sexual 
and  the  other  a  mother.  Only  with 
my  children  (who  didn't  know  any 
better)  was  it  natural  to  be  the  whole 
woman  I  am.  As  a  result,  my 
memories  of  breast  feeding  and  child 
raising  have  been  both  reciprocally 
sexual  and  sensual,  self-giving,  in- 
tensely enriching  and  fully  female. 

Perhaps  it  was  because  I  never 
bought  into  the  socially  prescribed 
American  mother  role.  Strongly  in- 
fluenced by  my  reading  about  Native 
Americans  and  by  my  own  ancestral 
link,  I  was  more  inclined  to  interpret 


30/Quest 


my  mothering  role  through  Indian 
models.  I  have  always  stood  in  awe  of 
the  power  of  life  to  unfold,  whether  it 
is  a  season,  a  tree,  or  a  child.  I  respect 
its  struggle  and  right  to  be,  and 
therefore  my  own.  Those  models 
provided  me  with  an  egalitarian 
rather  than  an  authoritarian  role  as  a 
mother.  As  a  result,  I  never  had  to 
play  the  injured  party  of  thwarted 
authority  which  so  many  mothers, 
and  practically  all  fathers,  fall  into. 

My  children  and  I  learned  to  trust 
love  and  our  need  for  that  love.  We 
gave  it  when  we  felt  it,  but  we  learned 
to  trust  that  it  was  always  there,  a 
given,  as  inevitable  as  the  miraculous 
tree  adding  its  yearly  ring,  or  the 
geese  returning.  Having  children 
helped  me  to  get  in  touch  with  my 
female  potential  to  support  life,  the 
fact  that  we  were  all  miracles  of  crea- 
tion who  could  create  our  own  lives  if 
we  only  had  a  chance. 

I  believed  in  that  kind  of  freedom, 
and  perhaps  because  I  really  believed, 
I  unconsciously  took  hold  of  the  only 
power  I  was  given  back  in  the  fifties, 
the  freedom  to  raise  my  children  to 
the  kind  of  world  in  which  I  wanted 
to  live  (if  only  at  home).  In  contrast, 
my  role  as  wife,  or  as  intelligent 
woman,  was  tortured  through  all  the 
prescribed  myths  of  the  times.  I 
bought  them  all.  After  a  vicious  fight 
I  am  still  recovering,  and  maybe  will 
never  fully  recover,  but  my  life  as 
mother  has  been  and  remains  the 
place  where  I  have  been  entirely  free 
to  feel  my  femaleness. 

you  get  tougher 
you  learn  to  spit 
say  fuck  it 

but  there  comes 


the  first  summer  night 
when  you  feel  gentleness 

your  daughter 

puts  a  dandelion  bracelet 

on  your  wrist 

and  you  remember 

how  fragile  you  are 

how  flowers 

always  wither 

but  the  rock  survives 

you  understand  why 

becoming  strong 

has  been  no  more  an  answer 

except  survival 

standing  in  your  brown  boots 
ready  to  deal  with 
one-more-stone 

you  find  yourself  crying  over 
a  tender  breeze  and  a  daughter 
who  somehow  hasn't  forgotten 

It  should  not  be  necessary  to 
become  a  mother  for  a  woman  to  ful- 
ly know  the  female  power  of  creation 
and  the  freedom  that  sets  loose.  In 
fact,  motherhood  has  been  so  com- 
mercially pre-packaged  into  artificial 
needs  that  it  is  becoming  harder  and 
harder  for  a  woman  to  find  that 
creative  force  even  there.  It  is  at  the 
level  of  motherhood  that  women 
have  been  the  most  manipulated  and 
damaged  by  the  dualistic  breast  cult. 
Women  should  not  have  to  deny 
their  capacity  to  create  life  and  their 
intense  ability  to  relate  to  life  in  order 
to  be  free  and  equal.  Conversely, 
along  with  the  absolute  control  that 
women  must  have  over  their  own 
bodies,  and  must  continue  to  fight 


Manipulation/31 


for,  women  must  be  free  to  give  in  to 
that  powerful  dynamic  of  mother- 
hood without  losing  their  selfhood, 
and  without  criticism  from  feminists 
that  to  love  being  a  mother  is  not 
feminist. 

Woman  is  of  the  earth  unique. 
Whether  she  decides  to  excercise  her 
ability  to  procreate  should  be  her 
choice,  but  she  needs  to  be  physically 
and  psychically  in  touch  with  her 
female  power  to  feel  creation,  no 
matter  on  what  level  she  chooses.  It  is 
the  women's  natural  ability  to  feel 
life,  as  well  as  create  it.  It  is  this 
which  has  been  so  grossly  twisted  by 
patriarchy.  At  some  level,  all  of  us 
need  to  feel  the  power  that  comes 
from  being  "of  woman  born."7  It  is 
this  expanded  consciousness, 
organized  into  action,  that  feminists 
need  to  come  to  grips  with  to  share 
with  Third  World  women  and 
everywoman. 

The  warm  women  of  Third  World 
who  wrap  a  tourniquet 
on  their  full  breasts 

who  choose  a  diluted  man-made  milk 
whose  children  die  of  malnutrition 
who  listen  to  the  all-wise  father 
selling  them  the  American  way 


Will  women  never  never 

learn 

to  laugh 

the  almighty  sermon? 


Footnotes 

'Ted  Greiner,  The  Promotion  of  Bottle 
Feeding  by  Multinational  Corporations:  How 
Advertising  and  the  Health  Professions  Have 
Contributed  (Ithaca,  New  York:  Cornell  Inter- 
national Nutrition  Monograph  Series,  Num- 
ber 2,  1975),  p.  ii. 

2Ibid.,  p.  iii. 

Hbid.,  p.  2. 

♦Anon.,  "Lactation  and  Composition  of 
Milk  in  Undernourished  Women," 
Nutritional  Review,  37:  2  (1975),  p.  42. 

5Greiner,  p.  iii. 

"Ibid.,  p.  4. 

7Adrienne  Rich,  Of  Woman  Born  (New 
York:  W.W.  Norton,  1976). 

Acknowledgement  is  made  to  Best  Friends  for 
the  reprint  of  my  poem,  "Dandelions." 

For  more  information  a  second  monograph 
on  the  international  problem  of  bottle  feeding 
is  now  available:  Greiner,  Ted:  Regulation  and 
Education:  Strategies  for  Solving  the  Bottle 
Feeding  Problem,  (Ithaca,  New  York:  Cornell 
International  Nutrition  Monograph  Series, 
Number  4,  1977,  Ithaca,  N.Y.)  Copies  of 
either  monograph  may  be  obtained  from  Dr. 
Michael  C.  Latham,  Division  of  Nutritional 
Sciences,  Savage  Hall,  Cornell  University, 
Ithaca,  N.Y.  14853  (Price:  U.S.  $2.50,  in- 
cluding postage). 


do  they  not  know  these  educated 

bottle  men 

will  sip  vermouth 

with  their  arms  around 

a  sold  female 

swapping  vivid  stories 

of  conquest? 


Polly  Joan,  writer  and  editor, 
teaches  writing  at  Tompkins- 
Cortland  Community  College  and  is 
a  senior  poet  with  the  New  York 
State  Poets  in  the  Schools  Program. 


It  is  an  outraged  voice 
that  screams  inside 
two  used  old  breasts 


32/Quest 


Death  r 
as  a  feminist 
issue 


By  TISH  SOMMERS 

graphics  by  Jacqui  Linard 


Recently  I  visited  the  Jack  London 
museum  at  Glen  Ellen,  California, 
and  was  struck  by  this  piece  of  his 
writing: 

"I  would  rather  be  ashes  than  dust!  I 
would  rather  that  my  spark  should 
burn  out  in  a  brilliant  blaze  than  it 
should  be  stifled  by  dry  rot.  I  would 
rather  be  a  superb  meteor,  every  atom 
of  me  in  a  magnificent  glow,  than  a 
sleepy  and  permanent  planet.  The 
proper  function  of  man  is  to  live,  not 
to  exist.  I  shall  not  waste  my  days  in 
trying  to  prolong  them.  I  shall  use  my 
time." 

But  is  there  really  "a  right  to  die?" 
The  Quinlan  case  makes  it  very  clear 
that  there  are  many  diverse  opinions 
on  this  question.  Legally,  is  this  the 
logical  extension  of  the  right  to  life, 
liberty  and  pursuit  of  happiness  that 
we  are  supposedly  heir  to  —  is  the 
right  to  dignity  in  death  a  fundamen- 
tal part  of  the  freedoms  we  defend 
against  state  dictum? 

The  legal  and  medical  professions 
are  in  conflict  over  who  has  the  right 
to  decide  what  death  is,  when  it  oc- 
curs and  who  should  decide.  To  allow 


the  court  to  determine  the  Quinlan 
case,  said  neurologist  Dr.  David 
Posqanzer,  "is  taking  the  judgment 
of  a  doctor  and  putting  it  in  the 
hands  of  those  not  competent  to 
make  a  decision  —  the  courts." 

And,  of  course,  there  are  the 
theological  or  moral  viewpoints  — 
often  in  contradiction.  Father  Gino 
Concetti,  writing  in  the  Vatican 
press,  said,  "A  right  to  death  does  not 
exist  ....  love  for  live,  even  a  life 
reduced  to  'ruin'  drives  one  to  protect 
life  with  every  possible  care." 
Others,  Catholics,  Protestants  and 
Jews  alike,  make  a  strong  distinction 
between  euthanasia  and  allowing 
persons  to  die  without  extraordinary 
efforts  to  keep  them  alive. 

More  recently  new  voices  are  being 
heard  from  —  the  ''new 
professionals"  or  death  counselors.  A 
new  specialty  is  arising,  one  which 
recognizes  that  there  is  a  void  in  the 
handling  of  death.  One  brochure  for 
training  sessions  for  such  counselors 
states,  "Within  recent  years,  many 
have  questioned  whether  our  current 
death  system  is  functional  at  all,  and 
alternatives  have  been  emerging." 
The  old  professionals  —  doctors  and 
nurses  —  treat  death  as  the  enemy 
and  dying  as  defeat,  and  therefore 
treat  the  terminally  ill  as  lepers.  The 


Copyright  1978  Tish  Somers 


Death  a  Feminist  Issue/33 


34/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


new  professionals  seek  to  "transcend 
our  barbaric  isolation  of  death"  by 
providing  the  necessary  counseling 
of  both  patients  and  survivors. 

A  great  deal  of  the  death  con- 
troversy centers  on  technological 
matters  —  the  advances  in  medical 
knowledge  and  machines  that  extend 
life  processes.  There  has  been  a  shift 
toward  death  from  chronic  diseases 
and  the  dying  process  has  been  great- 
ly prolonged  for  most  people.  This 
raises  the  good-bad  ambivalence 
toward  "progress."  The  nursing 
home  industry,  as  it  calls  itself,  is  free 
enterprise's  answer  to  this  extension 
of  the  dying  process.  For  most 
patients,  the  nursing  home  is  the  last 
round-up  —  the  waiting  room  for 
death.  There  are  currently  1  1/3 
million  patients  in  nursing  homes, 
about  three  quarters  of  them  women. 
Despite  the  shockingly  low  figure 
paid  to  sustain  life  in  our  health  care 
system  —  in  California  it's  $19.95  per 
day  —  nursing  home  chains  turn  a 
considerable  profit,  as  has  been  do- 
cumented in  so  many  of  the  recent 
nursing  home  scandals.  The  United 
States  is  the  only  industrial  country 
which  makes  care  for  chronically  ill 
and  dying  human  beings  a  profit- 
making  business. 

This  is,  of  course,  an  extension  of 
the  medical  profession  as  a  whole, 
with  its  fee-for-service  and  profit 
motive  underpinnings.  It  is  not  sur- 
prising that  hospices,  which  are  more 
humanely  conceived  terminal  illness 
facilities,  should  originate  in 
England,  with  its  National  Health 
Service,  rather  than  the  United 
States.  I'm  dubious  if  we  will  ever 
solve  either  the  legal  question  of  the 
"right  to  die"  or  the  medical  dilemma 
of  time  of  death  until  there  is  a  basic 


overhaul  of  the  health  delivery 
system  in  the  United  States. 

But  why  is  this  especially  a 
woman's  issue?  Is  there  a  feminist 
viewpoint  on  death  and  dying?  We 
all  die,  you  say  —  how  can  there  be  a 
special  female  way  of  looking  at  such 
a  universal  question?  Because,  for 
one  thing,  in  all  the  other  views,  there 
is  scarcely  a  mention  of  the  fact  that 
it  is  women  who  deal  most  commonly 
with  the  process  of  dying.  The  last 
person  most  of  us  see  on  earth  is  a 
woman,  the  nurse's  aide  (significant- 
ly one  of  the  least  paid  and  least 
valued  workers  in  our  society),  and 
nurse's  aides  are  overwhelmingly 
female.  Whether  they  work  in  a 
hospital  or  a  nursing  home,  they  are 
not  considered  part  of  the 
professional  team,  and  do  not  take 
any  of  those  courses  on  death  and 
dying.  They  are  the  midwives  of 
death,  who  will  be  replaced  if  it  is 
profitable  to  do  so,  by  the  new 
professionals,  just  as  doctors  replaced 
midwifery  at  the  other  end  of  the  life 
cycle. 

Also  consider  the  parallel  with  the 
birth  process  from  another  angle.  A 
young  feminist  recently  pointed  out 
to  me  that  the  whole  "control  of  the 
body"  question  is  a  replay  of  the  con- 
troversy on  abortion.  Who  should 
make  the  decision  on  whether  to  con- 
tinue an  unwanted  pregnancy  —  the 
woman  who  is  carrying  the  fetus,  or 
doctors,  lawyers  and  theologians?  At 
the  end  of  the  lifespan,  do  we  have 
the  right  to  decide  for  ourselves  when 
our  lives  are  really  over?  Control  of 
our  own  bodies  is  very  basic  to  a 
feminist  view  of  life.  This  control 
should  extend  to  the  end  of  our  lives. 
It  is  a  part  of  taking  responsibility  for 
ourselves. 


Death/35 


Feminists  have  been  tackling  the 
masculine  mind-set  which  glorifies 
technology  and  minimizes  basic 
human  relationships.  The  masculine 
mystique  reinforces  the  economic  un- 
derpinnings of  the  medical  profes- 
sion and  the  power  struggles  which 
are  anti-humanistic.  For  example, 
war  is  the  ultimate  glorification  of 
death.  Pious  statements  about  main- 
taining life  at  all  costs  are  seldom 
directed  toward  the  military,  which  is 
the  greatest  death  industry  of  them 
all.  When  one  nation  is  in  conflict 
with  another,  all  the  rules  about 
dying  and  murder  are  suspended. 
Our  society  censures  suicide,  but  a 
soldier  who  dies  in  a  "suicidal  mis- 
sion" becomes  a  hero.  Pills  for  self- 
destruction  are  provided  for  the 
soldier  on  a  dangerous  mission  across 
enemy  lines  who  might  experience 
torture,  but  pills  to  allow  a  terminally 
ill  patient  to  shorten  the  torture  of 
slow  death  are  forbidden.  The 
shocking  "body  count"  of  Viet  Nam 
was  in  striking  contrast  to  the 
presumed  reverence  for  life  that 
prevents  a  dying  patient  from  saying, 
"no  more  so-called  heroic  efforts." 

One  of  the  least  mentioned  aspects 
of  prolonged  dying  is  who  provides 
the  care,  and  at  what  cost.  As  medical 
expenses  soar  and  government  seeks 
to  curb  expenditures  of  taxpayers' 
money,  the  pressure  mounts  to  sub- 
stitute the  unpaid  labor  of  women. 
All  of  the  efforts  to  move  chronically 
ill  people  back  to  the  home  assumes 
that  the  burden  of  care  will  (and 
should)  be  picked  up  by  the  closest 
female  relative.  A  recent  case, 
described  in  HEALTHRIGHT,  con- 
cerned a  seriously  ill  patient  in  a 
Veteran's  hospital.  "Come  pick  up 
your    husband,    Mrs.    Smith,"    a 


hospital  administrator  said.  When 
she  protested  that  she  was  in  no  posi- 
tion to  care  for  an  incontinent 
patient,  that  she  had  no  training  or 
experience  with  serious  illness,  that 
she  could  not  affort  to  quite  her  job, 
low  paying  as  it  was,  and  that 
emotionally  she  could  not  handle  the 
situation,  she  was  told  that  this  was 
her  duty.  The  whip  of  guilt  was 
liberally  applied. 

I  receive  many  letters  from  women 
in  similar  situations.  One  woman 
writes,  "We  rushed  my  husband  to 
the  hospital  and  it  was  a  medical 
miracle.  When  he  survived  that 
stroke,  I  was  so  thankful.  Now  I'm 
not  so  sure  it  was  a  blessing.  He  is  not 
always  rational  and  cannot  be  left 
alone.  Naturally,  I  had  to  give  up  my 
job.  Financially  we  are  in  terrible 
shape,  but  disaster  will  strike  when 
he  dies.  I  am  57,  and  won't  be  eligible 
for  anything.  I  can't  see  any  way  out." 
One  woman  who  came  into  our  of- 
fice after  her  husband  died  was  in  her 
early  fifties.  Savings  had  been  wiped 
out  by  his  terminal  illness.  She  had 
been  a  homemaker  all  her  life  and 
cared  for  him  to  the  end.  But  now  she 
was  eligible  for  no  benefits,  no  un- 
employment insurance  because  she 
had  worked  without  pay,  and  she 
wouldn't  be  eligible  for  Social  Securi- 
ty until  she  reached  sixty.  She  was  in 
no  condition  to  find  a  job,  and 
employers  don't  want  middle-years 
ex-homemakers  without  recent  job 
experience  anyway.  If  she  had  been 
an  alcoholic  or  drug  addict  she  would 
have  been  eligible  for  help,  but  not 
for  doing  what  was  expected  of  her, 
caring  for  a  dying  relative. 

In  the  early  days  of  N.O.  W.'s  Task 
Force  on  Older  Women,  we  dis- 
tributed a  questionnaire  with  one  sec- 


36/Quest 


tion  on  death.  The  common  thread 
that  appeared  was  "don't  let  me 
become  a  burden,"  or  "I  don't  want 
to  linger  and  cause  trouble."  Perhaps 
it  is  because  we  are  more  conditioned 
to  serving  than  being  served,  but  it 
appears  that  it  was  not  so  much  death 
that  these  women  feared  as  loss  of  in- 
dependence. A  woman  I  know  who 
lovingly  cared  for  her  husband  in  the 
home  for  months  as  he  slowly  died, 
expressed  to  me  feelings  I  have  heard 
often  from  others,  "I  will  not  let  it 
happen  to  my  daughter.  I  shall  take 
care  of  that  myself."  In  fact,  I  have 
not  talked  to  a  woman  who  has  per- 
sonally  experienced   prolonged  care 


of  a  dying  person  who  does  not  dread 
finding  herself  in  the  position  of 
recipient  of  that  care. 

In  a  recent  survey  of  nurses'  at- 
titudes toward  death  and  dying, 
seventy-three  per  cent  responded  in 
favor  of  withholding  treatment  at  the 
request  of  a  dying  patient,  and 
another  twenty-three  per  cent  said 
they  were  slightly  in  favor.  Perhaps 
the  concept  of  natural  death  is  not 
too  far  removed  from  the  concept  of 
natural  childbirth. 

Much  of  the  horror  of  death,  and 
consequently  evasion  of  the  subject, 
may  be  because  the  process  is  so 
much  out  of  our  hands  —  the  loss  of 


fr 


a^ 


^cSm*®^- 


Death/37 


self-determination.  One  woman 
writes,  "Use  my  retinas  and  my 
organs,  if  they  are  useful,  use  my 
body  for  research,  but  don't  force  me 
to  survive  beyond  my  time."  What  of 
the  exceptional  person  who  survives 
despite  every  expectation  that  there  is 


Quinlan  case.  Karen  Quinlan  did  not 
have  a  living  will  and  that  is  a  fun- 
damental difference.  Making  a  deci- 
sion in  terms  of  one's  own  life  when 
one  still  is  in  a  condition  to  do  so,  is 
quite  different  from  having  someone 
else  make  that  decision. 


<^r 


not  a  chance  for  normal  functioning 
again?  What  if  such  a  person  had  a 
living  will?  "One  should  err  on  the 
side  of  saving  this  woman's  life," 
said  Arthur  Dycks,  professor  of 
ethics   at  Harvard,   speaking  of  the 


That  distinction  is  often  blurred  in 
discussions  of  death.  Any  loosening 
of  restrictions  will  be  used  to  control 
life  and  death,  say  some.  "Hospitals 
will  become  Frankenstein  monsters," 
stated  Arthur  Dycks,  and  we  are  con- 


38/Quest 


stantly  reminded  of  the  Nazis.  But 
Hitler's  mass  killing  was  ordered  not 
out  of  mercy,  or  in  the  interests  of  the 
dying,  but  for  the  political  ends  of  a 
"master  race  theory."  Euthanasia, 
when  asked  for  by  a  dying  person,  is 
just  the  opposite.  It  is  the  right  to  die. 
But  as  our  laws  now  stand,  society 
refuses  that  right. 

Curiously,  the  dehumanizing  effect 
of  the  technological  extension  of 
life,  when  it  no  longer  has  meaning  to 
the  individual  to  whom  that  life 
belongs,  is  not  seen  as  moving  us 
dangerously  close  to  that  totalitarian 
nightmare.  I,  for  one,  do  not  want  the 
government,  the  legal  profession,  and 
certainly  not  the  medical  profession 
as  currently  constituted,  to  decide  for 
me  when  my  life  is  over.  I've  battled 
long  enough  against  a  female 
dependency  role  and  for  control  of 
my  own  life,  not  to  want  to  lose  it 
again  at  the  very  end. 

The  essense  of  freedom  is  choice. 
Mine  may  not  be  the  same  as  yours, 
and  I  respect  your  right  to  choose 
among  the  practical  options  that  each 
individual  person  must  face.  In  the 
April,  1977  issue  of  Family  Circle, 
there  was  a  moving  story  by 
Jessamyn  West,  who  tells  how  she 
aided  her  sister,  Carmen,  who  was 
dying  of  cancer.  At  the  end  of  the 
vigil  she  says,  "My  darling,  you  did 
it.  You  had  the  courage.  It  was  a  great 
gift  to  all  of  us.  To  depart  like  a 
courteous  guest.  You  did  not  wear 
out  your  welcome.  You  did  not  linger 
to  cause  us  all  to  suffer.  All  as  you 
planned.  Nothing  more  to  worry 
about  now."  Carmen  chose  the  point 
in  her  dying  process  when  she  could 
still  manage  the  feat,  before  the 
cumulative  effect  of  the  disease  and 
narcotics  robbed  her  of  the  will,  but 


she  needed  her  sister  to  help  her  cir- 
cumvent those  who  might  try  to  pre- 
vent her  and  to  assist  her  through  the 
ordeal  of  change. 

The  law  is  still  unsure  on  such  ac- 
tions. William  Plachta,  a  Palm 
Springs  businessman,  was  arrested 
for  manslaughter  when  he  allowed 
his  terminally  ill  wife  to  die  from  an 
overdose  of  pills.  She  had  been  suf- 
fering for  two  years  from  a 
degenerative  nervous  disorder.  The 
"apparent  omission"  of  any  preven- 
tive action  by  Plachta  was  the  basis  of 
the  charge.  The  spectre  of  euthanasia 
is  raised,  even  when  the  helping  per- 
son is  only  present  to  provide  sup- 
port of  a  personal  decision,  carefully 
determined. 

There  is  no  official  feminist  view 
on  death  and  dying.  No  feminist 
organization,  to  my  knowledge,  has 
ever  passed  a  resolution  on  the 
matter.  These  opinions  are  entirely 
my  own  and  not  necessarily  those  of 
the  National  Organization  for 
Women.  But  it  would  be  a  very  good 
idea  if  women  began  to  talk  about  the 
subject  freely,  and  insisted  upon  their 
input  as  the  controversy  rages.  All 
our  lives  will  be  affected  —  as  sur- 
vivors, as  those  who  are  for  the 
dying,  and  eventually  for  ourselves. 

Not  only  should  we  be  talking 
about  death  and  dying,  but  doing 
something  too.  To  date,  the  dis- 
cussions have  been  very  much  on  the 
abstract  level.  However,  the  Living 
Will*  is  one  concrete  handle,  and  one 
that  is  spreading  nationwide.  Luis 
Kuner,  a  Chicago  lawyer,  has  drafted 
600  such  wills,  but  none  has  been 
tested  in  court.  A  second  concrete 
suggestion  on  which  we  can  work  is 

*See  page  43  for  a  sample  of  a  Living  Will. 


Death/39 


the  Model  Bill,  Death  with  Dignity, 
distributed  by  the  Society  for  the 
Right  to  Die,  which  would  amend  the 
Public  Health  Law  to  permit  an  in- 
dividual to  execute  a  Living  Will. 
You  might  call  it  enabling 
legislation.** 


Also,  on  the  subject  in  which 
emotions  run  so  strong,  and  where 
varying  religious  beliefs  counter  each 
other,  courageous  individuals  will 
play  an  important  part  in  developing 
public  debate.  For  example,  a  75- 
year-old  widow  with  incurable  cancer 
wrote  the  following  in  her  church 
newsletter:  "This  is  the  situation 
from  a  patient's  point  of  view.  It  is  all 
very  well  to  preach  sermons  and 
write  dissertations  on  'the  Right  to 


**California  became  the  first  state  to  enact  a 
right-to-die  law.  Under  it,  any  person  can  fill 
out  a  "directive  to  physicians,"  to  be  attested  to 
by  two  legal  witnesses.  The  form  specifies  that 
if  the  person  ever  suffers  an  incurable  disease 
or  injury  and  it  is  diagnosed  as  terminal  by  at 
least  two  physicians,  the  person's  life  will  not 
be  artifically  prolonged  by  medical  procedures 
or  equipment.  Eight  other  states  now  also  have 
right-to-die  laws. 


Die  with  Decency  and  Dignity.'  It  is 
all  very  well  to  sign  the  Euthanasia 
paper,  before  witnesses,  as  I  have 
done.  Now  I  have  reached  the  point 
of  no  return  .  .  .  after  a  full  and  hap- 
py lifetime,  and  feel  without  regret  or 
bitterness  that  it  is  time  to  stop  .  .  . 
My  doctor,  clergyman,  and  several 
friends  are  most  sympathetic  to  this 
point  of  view,  but  They  Will  Not  Let 
Me  Go.  This  gives  me  a  certain  sense 
of  betrayal.  I  quite  understand  their 
scruples.  The  Hippocratic  Oath,  the 
chance  of  arrest  on  murder  charges, 
possibly  religious  or  moral  doubts.  I 
am  not  asking  anyone  to  make  such 
sacrifices.  I  have  considered  various 
forms  of  self-destruction,  but  do  not 
seem  to  be  equal  to  them  in  my  pre- 
sent condition.  What  I  do  ask  is  that 
this  matter  be  brought  out  into  the 
open,  by  public  reactions,  education, 
discussion  among  professionals  and 
thinking  people  generally,  so  that 
eventually  a  bill  could  be  introduced 
whereby  an  incurably  ill  patient  can 
be  allowed  and  even  assisted,  openly 
and  legally,  to  bring  his  life  to  a  close. 
I  realize  the  entanglements  this  could 


'•&4-C     OLlArOSV 


40/Quest 


involve,  but  any  good  law  has  its 
hazards  ...  I  know  this  will  not  come 
in  time  to  do  me  any  good,  but  I  am 
thinking  of  countless  sick  and  suf- 
fering people  and  their  families." 

This  remarkable  woman  then  set 
forth  techniques  to  accomplish  her 
purpose.  She  suggested  a  council.  "In 
the  presence  of  the  incurable  patient 
(being  of  sound  mind),  a  discussion 
shall  be  held  among  at  least  two  doc- 
tors, a  clergyman,  a  lawyer,  and  a 
number  of  the  Euthanasia  Society 
and  perhaps  another  civic  group. 
Relatives  and  friends  of  the  patient 
may  be  invited.  The  decision  as  to  the 
patient's  right  to  life  or  right  to  death 
would  be  made  openly  and  legally 
with  no  attempt  at  pressure  or  per- 
suasion. If  the  decision  in  favor  of 
euthanasia  is  reached,  the  resolution 
must  be  signed  by  all  who  are  present 
.  .  .  Any  injection  or  other  medical 
process  will  be  administered  by  one 
of  the  doctors  in  the  presence  of  the 
.  .  .  others." 

She  ended  her  letter  by  saying,  "If 
I  felt  sure  that  such  help  would  even- 
tually be  given  to  those  in  my  condi- 
tion, I  would  feel  more  courage  to 
face  what  must  come  next,  and  would 
know  that  my  life  —  and  death  — 
were  not  passing  in  vain." 

As  a  feminist  I'm  not  sure  I'd  want 
that  particular  group  (at  the  present 
time  overwhelmingly  male)  to  be  my 
committee.  But  could  not  the  com- 
position of  the  committee  be  the  deci- 
sion of  the  patient,  and  incorporated 
into  the  Living  Will?  Or,  if  there  are  to 
be  new  professionals  called  "death 
counselors,"  perhaps  their  function 
could  be  expanded.  Might  not  they 
be  negotiators  who  serve  as  a  liaison 
between  the  terminally  ill  and  their 
families,    doctors    and    others    con- 


cerned? They  might  help  as  an  objec- 
tive intermediary  to  clarify  the  prac- 
tical options  available  for  the  dying 
person,  and  the  survivors,  but  the 
decision  should  reside  with  the 
patient.  Doctors  and  nurses  fight  to 
maintain  life,  and  rightfully  so,  but 
someone  needs  to  be  in  the  patient's 
corner.  I  would  hope  these  persons 
would  be  primarily  women,  really 
midwives  of  the  dying,  helping  to 
make  the  passage  easier.  And  under 
these  circumstances,  death  could,  in 
most  circumstances,  take  place  at 
home,  surrounded  by  love  and 
mutual  concern.  That  is  how  I 
visualize  death  with  dignity. 

But  we  are  a  long  way  from  that,  or 
from  any  consensus.  The  basic 
profit-motive  of  the  medical  delivery 
system  mitigates  against  humanistic 
solutions  to  this  problem.  However, 
just  discussing  alternatives  will  en- 
courage individuals  to  decide  for 
themselves,  and  not  wait  until  society 
catches  up  ...  as  did  Jessamyn  West, 


Death/41 


and  her  sister  Carmen  and  the 
anonymous  widow,  who  did  in  fact 
die  peacefully  at  home,  just  hours 
after  she  learned  that  her  parish  had 
resolved  to  support  her  position. 

Like  all  major  social  shifts,  our  at- 
titudes toward  death  are  changing, 
because  we  are  forced  to  reconsider 
beliefs  that  no  longer  fit  reality.  Each 
in  our  own  sphere  can  have  an  im- 
pact   on    the    direction    of    those 


changes.  As  a  feminist  and  a  human 
being,  I  join  Jack  London  in  saying, 
"The  proper  function  of  man  (AND 
WOMAN)  is  to  live,  not  to  exist.  I 
shall  not  waste  my  days  in  trying  to 
prolong  them.  I  shall  use  my  time." 


Tish  Somers  chairs  N.O.W.'s 
Older  Women's  Rights  Committee  in 
Oakland,  California 


(>-■■ 


S 


» 


^^^d^9r 


&**" 


42/Quest 


Sample  Living  Will 

TO  MY  FAMILY,  MY  PHYSICIAN,  MY  LAWYER,  MY  CLERGYMAN 
TO  ANY  MEDICAL  FACILITY  IN  WHOSE  CARE  I  HAPPEN  TO  BE 
TO  ANY  INDIVIDUAL  WHO  MAY  BECOME  RESPONSIBLE  FOR  MY 
HEALTH,  WELFARE  OR  AFFAIRS 

Deaths  is  as  much  a  reality  as  birth,  growth,  maturity  and  old  age  —  it  is  the 
one  certainty  of  life.  If  the  time  comes  when  I,  can 

no  longer  take  part  in  decisions  for  my  own  future,  let  this  statement  stand  as 
an  expression  of  my  wishes,  while  I  am  still  of  sound  mind. 

If  the  situation  should  arise  in  which  there  is  no  reasonable  expectation  of  my 
recovery  from  physical  or  mental  disability,  I  request  that  I  be  allowed  to  die 
and  not  be  kept  alive  by  artificial  means  or  "heroic  measures".  I  do  not  fear 
death  itself  as  much  as  the  indignities  of  deterioration,  dependence  and 
hopeless  pain.  I  therefore,  ask  that  medication  be  mercifully  administered  to 
me  to  alleviate  suffering  even  though  this  may  hasten  the  moment  of  death. 

This  request  is  made  after  careful  consideration.  I  hope  you  who  care  for  me 
will  feel  morally  bound  to  follow  its  mandate.  I  recognize  that  this  appears  to 
place  a  heavy  responsibility  upon  you,  but  it  is  with  the  intention  of  relieving 
you  of  such  responsibility  and  of  placing  it  upon  myself  in  accordance  with 
my  strong  convictions,  that  this  statement  is  made. 

Signed 
Date 
Witness 
Witness 


Copies  of  this  request  have  been  given  to 


Death/43 


Menstrual  Extraction 


graphics  by  Suzanne  Gage 


PROCEDURES 


By  LORRAINE  ROTHMAN 

Menstrual  Extraction  is  a 
procedure  developed  by  the  Los 
Angeles  Self  Help  Clinic  women  in 
1971  which  gently  removes  the  con- 
tents of  the  uterus  by  suction  on  or 
about  the  first  day  of  menstruation. 
It  is  not  a  medical  procedure  per- 
formed by  a  physician  as  a  service  to 
women  who  request  an  abortion,  and 
it  is  not  a  do-it-yourself  abortion 
technique.  Menstrual  extraction  is  a 
home  health  care  procedure 
developed  by  Self  Help  Clinic  women 
who  saw  its  potential  for  regaining 
control  over  our  reproductive  lives. 

Early  History 

The  development  of  menstrual 
extraction  resulted  from  our  par- 
ticipation as  feminists  in  the  national 
abortion  reform  movement.  We 
found  that  we  were  supporting  ac- 
tions that  did  not  help  women  as 
much  as  they  helped  particular  in- 
dividuals. We  promoted  an  illegal 
abortion  clinic  in  Los  Angeles  opened 


by  Dr.  John  Gwynn  in  1970.  After 
the  clinic  was  raided  in  1970,  we 
picketed  the  courthouse  for  the  two 
men  and  three  women  who  had  been 
arrested.  The  publicity  about  the 
clinic  focussed  on  the  charisma  and 
heroism  of  the  men,  rather  than  on 
the  issue  of  a  women's  right  to  abor- 
tion. 

Early  in  1971  our  group  decided  to 
learn  to  do  abortions  and  to  open  an 
underground,  woman-controlled 
abortion  clinic.  We  had  observed  less 
traumatic  methods  such  as  suction 
using  a  small  diameter  plastic  can- 
nula, and  we  saw  that  this  method 
was  not  only  more  gentle  and  safe, 
but  it  could  be  learned  by  laypersons. 

We  also  recognized  that  it  was  im- 
portant to  be  more  informed  about 
each  procedure  that  is  performed  on  a 
woman's  body  so  that  we  could  have 
a  better  basis  for  referring  women  to 
safe,  competent  health  care  facilities. 

We  abandoned  the  plan  for  an  un- 
derground abortion  clinic,  however, 
because  in  the  fall  of  1971,  hospitals 
in  Los  Angeles  were  expanding  their 
abortion    programs,    liberally    inter- 


44/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978  Copyright  Feminist  Women's  Health  Center  1978 


preting  the  1967  Therapeutic  Abor- 
tion Act. 

Menstrual  Extraction  Concept 

We  saw  the  possibilities  of  using 
the  non-traumatic  method  for 
reasons  other  than  early  abortion.  We 
had  practiced  on  one  another  during 
our  menstrual  periods  and  we  learned 
that  introducing  a  four  millimeter 
cannula  into  the  os  of  the  cervix 
caused  very  little  pain  so  that  it  was 
unnecessary  to  use  any  anesthetic. 
We  learned  that  simple  sterile 
techniques  were  sufficient,  since 
there  was  no  breaking  of  the  skin  or 
scraping  of  tissue.  We  also  learned 
that  it  was  possible  to  extract  the 
major  portion,  or  all,  of  the  typical 
menstrual  period.  This  usually 
brought  immediate  cessation  of  the 
cramps  and  other  uncomfortable 
menstrual  symptoms.  We  decided  to 
name  this  procedure  menstrual 
extraction. 

Materials  and  Methods 

It  was  evident  that  women  did  not 
have  equipment  to  do  menstrual 
extraction,  nor  any  way  to  get  and 
safely  use  what  was  available. 
Vacuum  aspirators  are  expensive, 
large  and  cumbersome,  and  produce 
much  more  vacuum  than  is 
necessary.  We  had  practiced  with  a 
portable  device  used  by  Harvey  Kar- 
man,  and  were  impressed  with  its 
simplicity  (the  plastic  cannula  at- 
tached directly  to  a  plastic  syringe). 
We  found  it  difficult  to  manipulate, 
however,  and  it  had  the  potential  to 
accidentally  reverse  the  suction,  thus 
allowing  menstrual  fluid  and  possibly 
air    into    the   uterus.    We   were   con- 


cerned about  potential  complications 
that  might  result  from  reversing  the 
suction.  As  a  member  of  the  Los 
Angeles  Self  Help  Clinic,  I  saw  that 
we  needed  a  simple  and  inexpensively- 
made  device,  which  had  built-in  safe- 
ty features.  I  invented  the  Del-Em  to 
suit  the  group's  needs.  Vacuum  is 
created  in  a  small  bottle  which  is  at- 
tached to  a  small  cannula  that  is  in- 
serted into  the  cervical  os.  An 
automatic  valve  attachment  controls 
the  direction  of  the  air  flow  and  locks 
in  the  pressure,  eliminating  any 
possibility  of  pushing  menstrual 
fluid  or  air  back  into  the  uterus. 

The  Del-Em's  safety  features  are 
particularly  important  because  of  the 
constraints  under  which  we  operate. 
Opportunities  to  learn  the  procedure 
are  dependent  on  a  member  of  the 
group  having  her  menstrual  period. 
In  spreading  the  technology  to  other 
communities,  we  are  limited  by  the 
short  time  in  which  we  can  visit 
others  or  in  which  other  women  can 
visit  us. 

Menstrual  extraction  occurs  either 
at  the  woman's  home  or  at  the 
group's  meeting  place.  A  woman  will 
usually  choose  to  have  an  extraction 
on  or  about  the  first  day  her  period  is 
expected.  However,  some  women 
have  extractions  as  much  as  two 
weeks  beyond  the  expected  date  of 
menstruation. 

Three  women  are  the  key  people 
involved  with  extractions:  the 
woman  who  is  to  have  the  extraction 
(she  sometimes  controls  the  vacuum 
pressure),  a  woman  who  observes  the 
equipment  for  proper  functioning, 
and  a  woman  who  inserts  and  moves 
the  cannula.  At  times,  other  group 
members  particpate  in  order  to  learn 
the  procedure. 


Menstrual  Extraction/45 


Del-Em:  Self-Help  Clinic  Menstrual  Extractor 
Patented  by  Lorraine  Rothman 


4mm  Flexible  Plastic 
Cannula 


After  the  woman  who  is  to  have 
the  extraction  places  herself  comfor- 
tably on  a  table  or  bed,  other  women 
in  the  group  perform  a  pelvic 
examination  to  determine  the  size, 
location,  and  characteristics  of  the 
woman's  pelvic  organs.  Certain  signs 
are  watched  for,  such  as  advanced 
pregnancy,  infection,  or  other 
problems.  Because  the  group  has 
frequent  opportunities  at  regular 
meetings  to  become  familiar  with  one 
another,  a  basis  for  comparison  has 
been  established  so  that  any  contra- 
indications  are  more  easily 
recognized. 

The  woman  inserts  her  own 
speculum,  examines  her  own  cervix 
and  talks  with  the  group;  has  others 
in  the  group  look  at  her  cervix;  and 


illustration  by  Suzanne  Gage 

then  decides  whether  or  not  she 
wants  to  have  the  extraction.  She 
talks  about  her  past  experiences  and 
purposes  for  extracting  her  period, 
such  as  relief  of  menstrual  pain.  If 
she  suspects  she  is  pregnant,  she  will 
discuss  her  subjective  signs  and  these 
signs  will  be  evaluated  in  light  of  her 
previous  experiences  with  pregnan- 
cies, amount  and  frequency  of 
exposure  to  sperm,  and  her  fertility  at 
the  time  of  exposure. 

The  Del-Em  consists  of  a  plastic 
50-cubic-centimeter  syringe  that  has 
a  valve  on  the  end.  The  valve 
prevents  air  from  being  injected  into 
the  uterus.  The  syringe  is  pumped 
until  it  becomes  difficult  to  pull  the 
plunger.  Air  is  removed  from  the  bot- 
tle in  this  way  creating  a  vacuum. 


16/ Quest 


The  cannula  is  carefully  inserted 
through  the  undilated  cervical  os. 
Often,  the  inner  cervical  muscle  can 
be  felt  against  the  cannula.  If  the 
slender  flexible  cannula  bends, 
forceps  can  be  attached  to  the  mid- 
dle of  the  cannula  giving  it  more 
stability.  Sometimes  a  stabilizer  is  at- 
tached to  the  cervix  so  that  the  uterus 
does  not  move  with  the  movement  of 
the  cannula. 

The  woman  who  is  having  the 
extraction  will  tell  the  other  women 
when  she  feels  the  cannula  touching 
the  back  wall  of  her  uterus.  She  will 
continue  to  relate  what  she  is 
experiencing  as  the  cannula  is  moved 
back  and  forth  making  sure, 
however,  that  it  remains  fully  in- 
serted. The  menstrual  material 
appears  within  the  cannula  after  a 
short  time. 

The  cannula  is  moved  within  the 
uterus  until  either  no  more  menstrual 
material  comes  out  or  the  woman 
having  the  extraction  says  she  wants 
to  stop.  The  tubing  attached  to  the 
cannula  is  clamped  off  to  avoid  any 
unnecessary  discomfort  of  suction  as 
the  cannula  is  removed  through  the 
cervical  canal. 

Results 

Most  women  who  do  menstrual 
extraction  do  not  experience 
excessive  discomfort.  Women  exper- 
ience different  degrees  of  cramp- 
ing during  the  extraction.  Some- 
times, women  can  feel  strong 
cramping  when  the  cannula  is  in- 
serted through  the  cervical  canal. 
Most  women  feel  strong  cramping  at 
the  end  of  the  extraction  as  the  uterus 
contracts.  Menstrual  extraction  dis- 
comfort or  pain  is  seldom  as  severe  or 


intense  as  the  discomfort  or  pain 
from  abortions  that  are  done  by  elec- 
trically powered  suction  machines. 

Daily  phone  contact  is  the  common 
follow-up  method  until  the  group 
meets  again.  Infections,  which  in  our 
experience  have  been  rare,  are 
recognized  by  a  rise  in  temperature  to 
100.5%  F.  or  more  for  8  or  more 
hours.  Pain  or  cramping  in  the  lower 
abdomen  may  be  felt  as  well.  It  is  im- 
portant that  if  an  infection  occurs, 
the  woman  receives  antibiotic  treat- 
ment. 

Sometimes  a  woman  may  have 
strong  cramping  in  the  couple  of 
days  following  the  extraction  and 
pass  clots  or  retained  tissue.  We  have 
found  that  passing  of  the  clots  or 
tissue  can  be  aided  by  gently 
massaging  or  pressing  the  lower  ab- 
domen and  uterus. 

If  the  woman  believes  she  may 
have  been  pregnant,  the  group  will 
pour  the  uterine  contents  into  a 
shallow  pan  looking  for  chorionic 
villi*.  They  are  yellowish  with 
branch-like  structures  and  are  quite 
different  from  menstrual  fluid.  If 
there  were  no  signs  of  a  pregnancy, 
the  extracted  material  will  be  studied 
in  order  to  better  understand  the 
composition  of  menstrual  fluid. 

We  are  often  asked  about  com- 
plications, such  as  uterine  per- 
forations, hemorrhage,  infection, 
retained  tissue,  cervical  in- 
competence, uterine  prolapse  and  air 
embolism.  These  questions  arise  out 
of  confusion  of  menstrual  extraction 

*Webster's  defines  these  as  "highly  vascular 
embryonic"  membranes  that  are  associated 
with  "the  formation  of  the  placen- 
ta. "(Webster's  Third  World  International  Dic- 
tionary, G.  and  C.  Merriam  Co.,  Springfield, 
Massachusetts,  1966.) 


Menstrual  Extraction/47 


with  abortion  techniques  performed 
by  physicians.  People  incorrectly 
assume  that  we  use  dilators,  large 
rigid  cannulas  and  curettes. 

Most  women  who  have  access  to 
legal,  reasonably  priced  abortions 
have  chosen  to  do  menstrual  extrac- 
tion only  if  they  were  part  of  an  on- 
going group  and  had  done  menstrual 
extraction  previously,  have  missed 
their  periods  by  a  few  days,  and, 
because  of  their  familiarity  and 
knowledge,  were  reasonably  sure  that 


no  contraindications  existed. 

Lorraine  Rothman,  an  activist  in 
the  women's  health  movement,  is 
currently  a  member  of  a  book- 
writing  team  at  the  Feminist 
Women's  Health  Center  in  Los 
Angeles  which  is  writing  a  self-help 
women's  health  book.  As  a  member 
of  the  first  self-help  clinic  organized 
by  Carol  Downer  in  1971,  she  in- 
vented and  patented  the  Del-Em 
menstrual  extraction  kit. 


POLITICS 


By  LAURA  PUNNETT 

That  the  medical  profession  is 
neither  aware  of,  nor  accountable  to, 
women's  needs  and  interests  as  we 
perceive  them  has  been  well 
demonstrated  by  feminists  in  recent 
years.  Mary  Daly  has  written: 
"Under  patriarchy,  'method'  has 
wiped  out  women's  questions  so 
totally  that  even  women  have  not 
been  able  to  hear  and  formulate  our 
own  questions  to  meet  our  own 
experiences."1  Frequently,  women's 
concerns  about  our  health  and  well- 
being  —  what  are  lesbians'  health 
needs;  what  is  the  difference  between 
menopause  and  normal  aging  of  the 
human  (female)  body  —  are 
"nonquestions"  in  the  medical 
system  of  knowledge.  Other 
problems,  such  as  menstrual  cramps 
and  irregular  periods,  are  either  dis- 
missed as  psychosomatic  or  used  as 
the  reason  for  experimentation  with 
various  drugs  and  procedures  on  us 
but  without  our  knowledge  or  consent. 


Feminists  are  recognizing  that 
physicians  cannot  or  will  not  correct 
these  faults  simply  in  response  to  our 
goodfaith  requests,  and  that  we  must 
struggle  for  active  control  over  the 
information  and  technology  that  per- 
tains to  our  ability  to  care  for  our 
bodies  in  the  way  we  feel  is  best.  The 
self  help  movement  is  one  way  in 
which  women  have  begun  to  take 
direct  and  immediate  control  over 
some  of  these  basic  skills. 

Through  this  type  of  work  we 
develop  our  abilities  in  two  direc- 
tions: we  increase  our  concrete 
"medical"  skills  and  information; 
and  we  gain  in  self-confidence  and 
ability  to  act  from  our  own  power. 
When  we  are  not  limited  by 
dependence  on  a  (male/professional) 
authority  from  an  external  source,  we 
are  able  to  better  use  our  resources 
and  to  use  them  in  more  creative 
ways.  In  contrast  to  patriarchal 
medicine,  self  help  is  a  positive 
experience  for  women,  affirming  our 
experiences,    our    bodies,    and    our 


48  /Quest 


ability  to  act  concretely  to  fulfill  our 
own  needs.  Self  help  creates  a  situa- 
tion in  which  women  can  thrive  by 
incorporating  values  of  self- 
determination  and  respect  for  all 
women. 

Menstrual  extraction  is  a  self  help 
technique  and  therefore  is  based  on 
and  develops  the  technical  and  psy- 
chological resources  of  the  women 
who  practice  it.  Menstrual  extraction 
is  most  commonly  done  to  eliminate 
the  general  nuisance  of  menstrual 
flow  and  to  relieve  menstrual 
pain,  including  such  symptoms 
as  cramps  and  lower  back  ache. 
It  can  also  be  used  to  reduce  the 
need  for  abortion.  As  a  form  of 
woman-controlled  medical  research, 
menstrual  extraction  is  a  means  of 
gaining  and  sharing  with  other 
women  information  about  our  bodies 
and  our  periods;  for  example,  it  can 
be  used  to  control  some  of  the  many 
variables  of  a  normal  menstrual  cycle 
in  order  to  test  certain  hypotheses 
concerning  the  cause(s)  of  cramps. 
The  experience  of  learning  and  prac- 
ticing the  menstrual  extraction 
procedure  also  helps  us  to  break 
down  the  mystique  of  medical  prac- 
tices. 

The  medical  profession's  predic- 
table response  to  self  help  ranges 
from  extreme  hostility  to  a  refusal  to 
acknowledge  self  help  at  all.  This  is 
consistent  with  the  patriarchal 
response  to  feminism  in  general. 
Menstrual  extraction  has  in  the  same 
way,  elicited  resistance,  cooptation, 
and  re-definition  to  deprive  it  of  its 
original,  feminist  meaning.  To  read 
editorials  in  medical  journals  would 
be  to  learn  that  menstrual  extraction 
is  performed  by  doctors  on  women  as 
a  paid  service,  when  in  fact  the  term 


correctly  refers  to  a  technique 
developed  seven  years  ago  in  which 
lay  women  in  small,  advanced  self 
help  groups  extract  each  other's  nor- 
mal (monthly)  menstrual  periods. 

Menstrual  extraction  is  not  done 
by  a  woman  on  herself,  which  would 
be  difficult  and  dangerous;  this  com- 
mon misconception  implies  an  in- 
dividualistic solution  which  entirely 
misses  the  importance  of  the  group  in 
the  self  help  movement  as  a  source  of 
information-sharing  and  support.  All 
the  women  in  a  menstrual  extraction 
group  have  done  self  help  together 
over  a  length  of  time  and  are  familiar 
with  their  bodies  and  the  normal 
health  status  of  each  woman.  Every 
woman  has  her  own  period  extracted 
and  learns  to  extract  other  women's 
periods;  there  is  no  distinction 
between  practitioner  and  patient, 
since  each  woman  takes  all  roles  in 
turn  and  literally  cares  for  her  sisters' 
bodies  as  she  does  for  her  own. 

The  fact  that  menstrual  extraction 
is  still  an  experimental  method  must 
be  clearly  understood.  This  is  true, 
not  so  much  because  of  the  known 
side  effects  which  are  negligible  so 
far,  but  because  of  those  as  yet  un- 
known which  might  occur  within  a 
large  group  of  women  over  a  long 
period  of  time.  Women  involved  in 
self  help  research  would  not  perform 
a  procedure  on  ourselves  that  we  did 
not  feel  to  be  safe.  On  the  other  hand, 
without  long-term  data  on  the  side- 
effects  of  menstrual  extraction,  it  is 
not  a  procedure  that  can  be 
recommended  unreservedly  to  every 
woman.*    Instead,    its    experimental 

*In  attempting  to  sponsor  such  a  study,  the 
self  help  movement  is  faced  with  major  con- 
straints. Menstrual  extraction  is  extralegal  (not 
against  the  law)  hut  it  has  been  subject  to  legal 


Menstrual  Extraction/49 


nature  requires  that  we  work  in 
skilled  groups  with  careful  obser- 
vations and  evaluations  of  our 
bodies'  functioning.  This  is  well  un- 
derstood by  all  participants,  and  each 
woman  can  formulate  her  own 
criteria  for  deciding  whether  she 
wishes  to  experiment  on  her  own 
body  in  this  manner.  However,  un- 
like the  population  control 
experiments  to  be  discussed  later, 
research  on  a  self  help  model  insures 
that  a  woman  at  risk  is  also  a  woman 
in  control  of  the  project,  and  that  any 
data  from  the  study  is  immediately 
available  to  her  should  she  wish  to 
reconsider  her  participation. 

Menstrual  Extraction  as 
Birth  Control 

Menstrual  extraction  used  as  a 
birth  control  method  is  not  the  same 
thing  as  endometrial  aspiration, 
pre-emptive  abortion,  menstrual  in- 
duction, minisuction,  or  early  uterine 
evacuation,  all  terms  for  a  very  early 
abortion-type  procedure.  This 
procedure  is  a  single  aspiration  to 
remove  a  possible  pregnancy,  per- 
formed by  a  physician  on  a  woman  in 
the  role  of  passive  patient.  Menstrual 
extraction  on  the  other  hand  is  done 
in  the  context  of  a  self  help  group 
where  the  "patient"  is  in  fact  the  ac- 
tive and  controlling  subject  of  the 
procedure.  The  extraction  is  also 
probably  one  extraction  in  a  series  of 
regular    monthly    extractions    and 

harassment  and  menstrual  extraction  groups 
are  forced  to  do  their  work  underground. 
Consequently,  not  only  are  security 
precautions  a  barrier  to  public  recognition,  but 
the  likelihood  of  a  self  help  group  ever  being 
funded  to  conduct  a  study  in  line  with  our 
priorities  and  without  a  physician  is  very  low. 


would  have  been  done  whether  or  not 
there  was  a  chance  of  pregnancy. 
Many  women  see  menstrual  extrac- 
tion as  an  ideal  contraceptive 
technique  or  back-up  method.  In 
contrast  to  other  birth  control 
methods,  it  does  not  interfere  with 
sexual  intercourse,  does  not  change 
the  body  chemistry  and  does  not 
require  the  continuous  use  of  a  device 
or  substance  which  can  cause  con- 
tinuous side  effects.  Moreover,  it  is 
easily  accessible  and  highly  effective, 
and  is  under  the  control  of  the 
woman  herself  who  is  not  dependent 
upon  a  physician  for  its  use. 

The  use  of  menstrual  extraction 
for  birth  control  is  important 
politically.  Many  women,  including 
some  who  are  not  in  need  of  birth 
control  themselves,  wish  to  develop 
their  skill  in  using  the  technique  in 
order  to  make  this  option  available 
for  more  women.  Given  the  always- 
tentative  legal  status  of  abortion  in 
this  country  and  others,  it  becomes 
preferable  to  develop  our  own 
technology  and  health  systems  as  an 
alternative  to  dependence  on  men 
(law-makers,  doctors,  priests,  etc.) 
for  access  to  abortion. 

The  cutoff  of  federal  funds  for 
abortion,  effectively  prohibiting  all 
poor  women  from  freely  choosing 
whether  or  not  to  bear  children, 
requires  that  we  respond  on  many 
levels  simultaneously.  Prior  to  the 
legalization  of  abortion  in  1973,  some 
feminists  were  establishing  un- 
derground, women-controlled  abor- 
tion systems  or  facilities  (such  as 
"Jane"**   in   Chicago.)   Rather  than 

**A  description  of  Jane  is  included  in  a  to-be 
published  work  by  Pauline  B.  Bart,  "Seizing 
the    Means    of    Reproduction:    An    Illegal 


50/Quest 


waiting  for  the  abortion  crisis  to 
reappear  in  full  force  before  we  act, 
the  interim  period  of  legal  access  to 
abortion  has  been  used  by  some 
women  as  a  time  of  greater  resources, 
to  develop  our  skills  in  preparation 
for  the  next  crunch.  Menstrual 
extraction  represents  one  possibility 
for  expansion  of  our  options  in  this 
direction. 

The  Medical  Backlash 
and  Cooptation 

There  is  actually  very  little  men- 
tion of  menstrual  extraction  in 
medical  or  gynecological  literature. 
This  is  not  because  physicians  are 
unaware  of,  or  uninterested  in, 
menstrual  extraction.  In  fact,  they  are 
quite  aware  of  its  growing  appeal  to 


Feminist  Abortion  Collective  —  How  And 
Why  It  Worked,"  (Abraham  Lincoln  School 
of  Medicine,  University  of  Illinois.) 


women,  and  their  resistance  grows  at 
a  similar  pace.  It  seems,  however, 
that  with  one  or  two  exceptions  they 
prefer  not  to  acknowledge  it  in  their 
own  journals,  while  their 
professional  disapproval  can  be 
found  referred  to  in  virtually 
every  article  on  the  subject  in  lay 
journals,  newspapers,  and  books. 
Medical  opposition  is  supposedly 
based  on  safety  concerns.  Frequently 
cited  objections  include:  the  use  of 
lay  women  and  "inadequate"  equip- 
ment to  perform  the  procedure;  a 
supposed  greater  danger  resulting 
from  this  practice,  especially  an  in- 
creased risk  of  infection,  perforation 
or  both;  the  hazards  of  frequently 
repeated  extractions;  and  the  risk  of 
using  aspiration  as  birth  control 
before  a  positive  test  confirms 
pregnancy. 

These  objections  rarely  proceed 
from  any  solid  evidence  or  clear  un- 
derstanding of  the  menstrual  extrac- 


Self -Examination  with  a  Plastic  Vaginal  Speculum 


1.  Insert  bills  of 
closed  speculum  into 
vagina 


^/  i  :       |       2.   Squeeze    handles 
!  3/  I       together 


and  you  can  see  the 
cervix 


Using  a  light  and  a  mirror  you  can  reflect  light 


from  the  mirror  into  your  vagina  and  see  your         ""\ 
cervix. 


xy 


Menstrual  Extraction/51 


tion  procedure.  In  fact,  the  very 
utilization  of  lay  women,  using  a 
method  that  is  slower  than  standard 
abortion  techniques,  is  largely 
responsible  for  the  much  greater 
safety  of  menstrual  extraction. 
Excluding  possible  long-term  effects 
which  have  not  yet  been  documented 
(the  indication  is  that  these  are 
minimal),  menstrual  extraction  is  an 
almost  inherently  safe  procedure. 
This  claim  can  be  backed  by  data 
compiled  by  self  help  groups  which 
have  performed  several  hundred 
menstrual  extractions  to  date  with  no 
major  or  minor  complications  other 
than  rare  infections.  Uterine  perfora- 
tion from  menstrual  extraction  is  vir- 
tually impossible.  Physicians  have 
wildly  exaggerated  the  possibility  of 
complications  and  have  used  this  as  a 
basis  for  arguments  against  the  prac- 
tice of  menstrual  extraction.  The 
motivation  for  this  becomes  clear 
when  we  examine  the  real  impact  of 
menstrual  extraction  on  women  and 
on  the  medical  profession.  Ellen 
Frankfort  admits  (despite  her  own 
misinformed  reservations)  that  doc- 
tors "were  more  upset  at  the  in- 
dependence that  period  extraction  in 
particular  and  self  help  in  general 
gave  women  rather  than  at  the 
dangers  of  either.  .  .  .they  say,  quite 
correctly,  that  period  extraction  was 
developed  precisely  to  give  women 
autonomy  over  their  own  bodies  and 
that  it  was  inseparable  from  the  con- 
cept of  self  help."  And  Margaret 
Mead  told  Frankfort  that  "innova- 
tion coming  from  unorthodox 
sources  is  likely  to  be  subjected  to 
premature  condemnation  by  some 
doctors  who  wish  to  preserve  their 
profession  as  a  closed  guild."2  This 
reaction  on  the  part  of  physicians  to 


defend  their  monoply  against  self 
help  is  very  similar  to  their  campaign 
against  midwives  at  the  turn  of  the 
century.***  Midwives  were  blamed 
for  high  rates  of  maternal  and  child 
deaths,  while  there  is  evidence  that 
generally  doctors  were  the  ones  more 
responsible  for  mothers'  com- 
plications and  infants'  deaths  than 
were  midwives. 

Obviously,  the  practice  of 
menstrual  extraction  by  lay  women 
only  is  the  key  issue  here.  Paramedical 
personnel  have  been  endorsed  by  a 
variety  of  sources,  when  they  are  cer- 
tified and  regulated  by  the  medical 
profession.  In  other  words,  the  reac- 
tion to  non-professional  health 
workers  depends  greatly  on  the  con- 
text and  the  amount  of  real  power  or 
autonomy  the  workers  have.  When 
they  are  strictly  controlled,  or 
working  to  further  the  interests  of 
the  male  medical/population  control 
establishment,  they  are  seen  to  pose 
little  threat.  However,  the  conceptual 
basis  of  the  independent  self  help 
movement  is  that  women  with  skills 
and  information  are  qualified  simply 
by  having  those  skills  to  use  them 
with  other  women;  formal  credentials 
then  become  irrelevant  to  controlling 
the    quality    of    primary    care 

***Midwives  had  been  the  target  of  male 
physicians'  attacks  in  other  countries  and  at 
earlier  times.  By  the  early  twentieth  century, 
medical  opposition  to  midwives,  especially  in 
the  large  cities  of  the  eastern  United  States, 
had  expanded  its  political  and  economic 
resources  enough  to  actually  force  midwives 
out  of  practice  in  most  states.  See  Frances  E. 
Korbin,  "The  American  Midwife  Controver- 
sy: A  Crisis  of  Professionalization,"  Bulletin 
of  the  History  of  Medicine,  July-August, 
1966,  pp.  350-363,  Barbara  Ehrenreich  and 
Deirdre  English,  Witches,  Midwives  and 
Nurses,  (New  York:  The  Feminist  Press, 
1973). 


52/Quest 


procedures  ranging  from  pelvic 
exams  and  Pap  smears  to  menstrual 
extraction.  (This  is  true  whether  or 
not  one  also  believes  that  there  is  a 
need  for  feminists  within  medicine, 
nursing  or  other  health-related 
fields).  The  1972  National  Self  Help 
Convention  agreed  that  the  move 
should  continue  to  develop  in- 
dependently of  academic  creden- 
tialing  to  enable  the  participation  of 
large  numbers  of  women  on  a  peer 
level,  and  to  maintain  independence 
from  the  male  profession's  monopoly 
of  power  and  oppression  of  women. 
To  understand  the  importance  of  a 
women's  self  help  movement  which 
remains  autonomous  of  the  medical 
profession,  it  is  helpful  to  remember 
that  an  attempt  to  convince  or  enlist 
the  sympathy  of  physicians  (as  with 
other  male  groups)  often  opens  the 
door  to  drastic  cooptation.  For  exam- 
ple, the  types  of  arguments  which 
doctors  raise  against  menstrual 
extraction  are  completely  reversed 
when  the  profession  transforms  the 
menstrual  extraction  concept  into 
menstrual  regulation. 

Menstrual  Regulation  and 
Population  Control 

"Menstrual  regulation"  is  a  term 
used  sometimes  to  refer  to  a  clinical 
endometrial  aspiration  or  similar 
procedure,  and  sometimes  for  a 
procedure  more  like  menstrual 
extraction  in  that  it  uses  a  syringe  or 
other  non-electric  vacuum  source. 
The  main  distinction  here  is  that 
these  menstrual  regulation 
procedures  are  being  exported  inter- 
nationally for  purposes  of  population 
control,  rather  than  to  increase  in- 
dividual women's  options  to  decide 


about  their  own  childbearing. 
Menstrual  regulation  will  be  used 
here  to  refer  to  this  assortment  of 
procedures  and  techniques  which 
have  in  common,  at  minimum,  that 
they  are  promoted  by  the  medical  es- 
tablishment rather  than  by  the 
women's  self  help  movement. 

Unlike  menstrual  extraction, 
menstrual  regulation  has  received  a 
steady  share  of  attention  in  medical 
publications,  both  as  an  early  abor- 
tion method  and  as  a  population  con- 
trol technique  (these  two  uses  are  not 
necessarily  easily  distinguished  from 
each  other.)  Where  it  is  discussed 
favorably,  its  backing  generally  com- 
es from  the  international  population 
control  establishment. 

Population  control  is  "a  large-scale 
social  policy  of  limiting  births 
throughout  a  whole  society  or  in  cer- 
tain social  groups  for  the  purpose  of 
changing  economic,  political  and/or 
ecological  conditions."3  The  es- 
tablishment referred  to  here  is  a 
group  consisting  of  men,  both 
medical  and  non-medical,  with 
various  interests  in  controlling  the 
size  and  growth  of  poor  and  Third 
World  populations  in  order  to  main- 
tain a  racist  and  imperialist  status 
quo.  In  this  scheme  women  are  mere- 
ly pawns,  our  individual  lives  used 
and  sacrificed  to  achieve  pre-planned 
goals,  whether  those  are  positive  ones 
such  as  reducing  the  consumption  of 
our  natural  resources  or  questionable 
ones  such  as  protecting  a  multi- 
national corporation's  profits. 

By  treating  women  as  expendable 
to  their  aims,  these  men  continue  in 
their  historical  tradition  of  colluding 
through  their  religious,  medical,  and 
legal  institutions  to  control  the 
accessibility    of    birth    control    and 


Menstrual  Extraction/53 


abortion  to  women.  "From  the 
persecution  of  the  socialist  nurse, 
Margaret  Sanger  in  the  second 
decade  of  this  century  for  her  agita- 
tion about  birth  control,  to  the  pushy 
endorsement  of  birth  control  by  an 
aggressive  United  States  government 
and  the  big  profits  in  the  world-wide 
sale  of  pills,  intrauterine  devices, 
foams,  gels,  and  what  have  you,  has 
been  fascinating  change.  The  women 
who  fought  valiantly  and  effectively 
for  birth  control  information  could 
not  have  imagined  the  control  that 
the  medical  and  pharmaceutical  con- 
cerns would  establish  over  their 
daughters,  granddaughters,  and 
above  all,  over  women  of  other 
cultures  that  they  in  their  respectable 
middle-class  worlds  did  not  take 
cognizance  of."4 

What  follows  now  is  exploitative 
birth  control  experimentation  and 
systematic  sterilization  abuse  in 
Puerto  Rico  and  other  economically 
colonialized  Third  World  countries, 
and  among  black,  Native  American, 
and  Latina  women  in  this  country.5 
This  is  accomplished  through  a  varie- 
ty of  means.  Sometimes  direct  coer- 
cion is  used,  as  when  women  are 
denied  abortions  unless  they 
"consent"  to  sterilization  at  the  same 
time,  or  are  forced  to  sign  consent 
forms  while  in  labor.  Many  women 
are  threatened  (illegally)  with  loss  of 
welfare  benefits  unless  they  undergo 
abortion,  sterilization  or  both.  Native 
American  women  are  beginning  to 
refuse,  en  masse,  to  give  birth  in 
hospitals,  because  once  under 
anesthesia  they  are  sterilized  and  not 
told  of  this  fact  before  or  after  the 
operation.  It  is  also  common  for 
women  to  be  only  partially  informed, 
or  completely  misinformed,  as  to  the 


nature  of  a  sterilization  operation. 
Spanish-speaking  women,  for  exam- 
ple, are  often  given  explanations  and 
consent  forms  only  in  English,  or  are 
told  that  the  procedure  is  easily 
reversible. 

In  Third  World  countries,  women 
are  especially  handicapped  by  a  lack 
of  information  regarding  procedures 
and  drugs  being  administered 
experimentally.  In  New  Zealand  in 
1973,  the  government  health  service 
was  systematically  distributing 
Copper-7  IUD's  and  Depo-Proverat 
injections  for  contraception.  Both  of 
these  products  were  still  experimental 
in  the  United  States  where  they  were 
originally  developed,  but  women  in 
New  Zealand  believed  that  since  the 
government  had  approved  distribu- 
tion these  methods  were  known  to  be 
safe.  Researchers  of  prostaglan- 
dins^ have  exploited  African 
women  in  similar  ways:  when 
prostaglandins  were  introduced  into 
contraceptive  use  in  Uganda,  many 
women  suffered  heart  attacks  (often 
fatal)  and  permanent  circulatory 
damage  as  well  as  severe  gastro- 
intestinal distress.  Not  until  these  in- 
itially  high   complication  rates  had 

tDepo-Provera:  a  progesterone  compound 
used  as  an  injection  once  every  three  months 
to  suppress  ovulation;  side  effects  range  from 
"nuisance  value"  (irregular  bleeding, 
decreased  sex  drive,  dizziness)  to  more  serious 
ones  (excessive  bleeding,  infertility,  and 
suspected  possible  links  with  breast  tumors 
and  cervical  cancer.) 

if  Prostaglandins:  a  group  of  hormone-like 
substances  produced  naturally  in  many  areas 
of  the  body,  including  the  uterine  lining.  Some 
prostaglandins  stimulate  uterine  contractions 
and  are  used  now  in  second-trimester  abor- 
tions instead  of,  or  in  combination  with,  the 
traditional  saline  solution  injection.  Side 
effects  include  circulatory  complications  and, 
more  commonly  nausea  and  diarrhea. 


54/ 'Quest 


been  drastically  reduced  through 
continued  experimentation  on  these 
women  several  years  later,  were 
prostaglandins  considered  acceptable 
for  experimental  use  in  the  United 
States.  Similar  exploitation  of  women 
has  marked  the  testing  of  birth  con- 
trol pills,  diethylstilbestrol,ttt  and 
Dalcon  Shield  IUD's  to  name  only  a 
few. 

Women  who  resist  this  type  of 
exploitation  in  an  attempt  to 
safeguard  our  physical  health  or  de- 
fend our  right  to  individual  free 
choice  are  viewed  hostilely,  as  shown 
by  the  term  "hard-core  resister"  in 
population  control  literature.  But 
women  have  valid  concerns  about  the 
safety  of  these  various  methods, 
which  we  share  often  despite  the  un- 
availability of  "scientific  infor- 
mation" or  access  to  public  media; 
the  self  help  network  in  the  U.S.  and 
Western  Europe  has  its  counterpart  in 
drum  messages  between  tribal 
villages  in  Eastern  Africa.  Of  course, 
these  concerns  are  threatening  to  the 
omnipotence  of  the  population  con- 
trollers, who  trivialize  the  worth  of 
"side-effects  rumors."  "Our  sub- 
terranean grapevine,  which  men,  like 
fools,  call  gossip,  has  always  been  ef- 
ficient."6 


tttDiethylstilbestrol  (DES):  a  powerful  es- 
trogen derivative,  which  was  prescribed  for 
pregnant  woman  in  the  1940's-1960's  to  pre- 
vent miscarriage  and  has  resulted  in  tissue  ab- 
normalities of  the  vagina  (including  cancer)  in 
the  daughters  of  those  women.  Now  most 
often  prescribed  as  the  "morning-after  pill,"  it 
is  suspected  of  causing  cancer  ten  to  twenty 
years  later  in  the  women  who  take  it 
themselves.  See  Kay  Weiss,  What  The  Rape 
Victim  (or  Anyone)  Should  Know  About  The 
Morning-After  Pill.  Advocates  for  Medical  In- 
formation, 450  El  Escarpato,  Stanford,  CA., 
1975. 


In  looking  at  plans  for  the  future 
of  fertility  control,  we  find  the  same 
conflict  between  patriarchal  values 
and  the  determination  of  women  to 
confront  them  and  regain  power  over 
our  lives.  Population  control  policies 
imply  a  certain  set  of  priorities,  in 
which  a  decrease  in  the  growth  of  a 
population  is  more  important  than  ad- 
vancing the  freedom,  life  options,  or 
responsibilities  of  individuals.  These 
other  considerations  called  "beyond 
family-planning  policies,"  are  given 
weight  by  the  population  controllers 
only  if  it  appears  that  they  will  aid  in 
achieving  the  goal  of  population 
reduction,  never  because  of  their  own 
moral  validity.  In  fact,  these  other 
concerns  are  considered  to  be  of 
dubious  value,  with  high  costs  and 
uncertain  effects  on  the  birthrate. 

Thus  women  and  our  concerns  are 
defined  as  dispensable,  while  our 
needs  are  used  to  manipulate  us.  For 
example,  population  researchers  use 
the  concept  of  "role  incompatibility" 
to  plan  their  policies: 

"According  to  this  theory,  female 
employment  would  reduce  fertility 
most  effectively  when  birth  planning 
is  widely  practiced  and  when  the 
roles  of  worker  and  mother  are  most 
incompatible,  that  is,  when  (a)  the 
place  of  work  is  away  from  the  home, 
which  may  pose  practical  problems 
relating  to  child  care;  (b)  the 
prevailing  belief  is  that  a  woman  with 
children  should  devote  all  her  time  to 
them,  in  which  case  the  woman  feels 
she  must  choose  between  work  and 
children;  and  (c)  a  woman's  employ- 
ment provides  her  with  significant 
social,  psychological,  or  economic 
rewards,  which  she  may  be  unwilling 
to  forego  in  order  to  have  another 
child."7 


; 


Menstrual  Extraction/55 


In  contrast,  feminists  are  con- 
cerned with  solving  problems  and 
contradictions  in  women's  lives  and 
with  broadening  our  options,  which 
would  include  making  the  roles  of 
worker  and  mother  more  compatible 
for  those  women  who  wish  to  bear 
children  and  also  work  outside  the 
home.  Those  working  to  control 
"fertility"  contradict  our  efforts, 
manipulating  the  social  and  economic 
factors  affecting  all  women's  ability 
to  thrive,  e.g.  making  child  care  less 
accessible,  increasing  the  social 
pressure  on  mothers  not  to  work  out- 
side the  home.  Our  oppression  is  to 
be  intensified  and  deepened  in  order 
to  better  achieve  the  male-defined 
goal  of  fewer  children.  Women's 
needs  will  be  considered  only  when  it 
is  expedient. 

Juliet  Mitchell  wrote  in  Women's 
Estate  that  women  must  act  for 
change  in  all  the  spheres  of  our  lives 
concurrently,  or  else  change  in  any 
one  alone,  such  as  reproduction,  can 
simply  maintain  our  oppression  in  a 
different  form.  This  is  especially  true 
when  the  changes  are  initiated  by 
men  in  power,  for  their  ends,  rather 
than  by  women.  So  the  transition 
from  one  lifestyle  to  another  can 
"expose  women  to  the  possibility  of 
greater  male  domination  or  domina- 
tion of  a  subtler  type,"  and  "the 
expanded  gainful  employment  of 
women  outside  the  home  .  .  .  often 
merely  add(s)  one  form  of  exploita- 
tion to  another."  From  a  feminist 
perspective  "the  provision  of  family 
planning  services  is  no  substitute  for 
radical  social,  economic  or  political 
reform;"8  from  the  viewpoint  of  the 
population  controllers  it  is  exactly 
that  —  a  substitute  —  intended  to 
coopt  our  demands  and  to  perpetuate 


the  oppression  of  women,  just  as 
withholding  birth  control  options  did 
previously. 

As  the  medical  profession  and  the 
population  control  establishment 
spend  enormous  amounts  of  money, 
time,  and  energy  to  find  and  develop 
a  single  "ideal"  technique  for  con- 
trolling births  through  controlling 
women,  menstrual  regulation  is  one 
procedure  which  has  been  offered  as 
a  potential  "solution."  One  pair  of 
researchers  wrote:  "Because  of  the 
great  increase  in  legal  abortion 
throughout  the  world  and  the  urgent 
need  to  slow  population  growth,  new 
techniques  of  pregnancy  termination 
are  currently  being  studied.  There  is 
considerable  interest  in  very  early 
abortion  (i.e.,  menstrual  regulation) 
because  of  its  greater  acceptability 
from  an  emotional  and  philosophical 
viewpoint,  and  its  potential  simplici- 
ty. The  safety,  efficacy,  and  economy 
of  very  early  aspiration  abortion  can 
serve  as  standards  against  which 
prostaglandins  and  other  new 
chemical,  steroidal,  and  physical 
abortifacients  can  be  compared."9 

In  December,  1973,  an  Inter- 
national Menstrual  Regulation 
Conference  was  held  in  Honolulu, 
Hawaii,  organized  by  the  Battelle 
Population  Study  Center,  with 
assistance  from  the  International 
Planned  Parenthood  Foundation,  the 
Agency  for  International  Develop- 
ment, the  Population  Council,  and 
the  Rockefeller  Foundation.  The  pur- 
pose of  the  conference  was  ostensibly 
to  assess  the  state  of  the  art,  although 
women  from  the  Feminist  Women's 
Health  Centers  of  California,  who 
had  developed  the  menstrual  extrac- 
tion technique,  were  specifically 
denied    admission.    The    organizers 


56/Quest 


used  the  opportunity  to  enlist  native 
doctors,  many  of  them  women,  from 
Third  World  countries  (India, 
Pakistan,  Taiwan,  Indonesia,  Korea, 
Fiji)  in  plans  to  use  menstrual  regula- 
tion to  limit  poulation  growth. 

All  the  advantages  for  which 
feminists  advocate  menstrual  extrac- 
tion, such  as  safety,  lack  of  discom- 
fort, economy,  simplicity,  and 
accessibility  to  lay  women,  were  used 
to  promote  schemes  as  one  which 
would  require  a  woman  to  "turn  in" 
her  monthly  menstrual  period  in 
order  to  pick  up  her  monthly  welfare 
check!  In  addition,  physicians  were 


encouraged  to  think  of  this  as  a 
procedure  which  could  be  handled 
adequately  by  "midwives"  (not  birth 
attendants,  but  rather  women 
paramedics  similar  to  China's 
barefoot  doctors).  This  was  seen  as  a 
preferable  route  because  midwives 
have  greater  trust  and  credibility  with 
local  women,  who  often  (and  rightly) 
fear  male  doctors  and  gynecological 
procedures. 

In  summarizing  the  Hawaii  con- 
ference, a  report  from  the  Population 
Information  Program,  supported  by 
AID,  explained  that  the  procedure 
could    be    used    in    different    ways 


Menstrual  Extraction/57 


depending  on  the  geographical  area. 
In  Asia  the  technique  would  be  an 
early  abortion  method  "as  a  back-up 
for  contraceptive  failures;"  in  Latin 
America,  where  abortion  is  illegal  in 
many  countries,  it  was  suggested  in- 
stead that  the  procedure  be  used  to 
handle  the  incomplete  and  septic 
abortions  that  result  from  those  rigid 
laws.  In  either  case,  participants  were 
encouraged  to  consider  means  for  in- 
troducing menstrual  regulation  into 
their  own  countries  so  as  to  give  it  an 
image  of  respectability  and  safety 
that  did  not  "generate  rumors"  or 
"embarrass  politicians."10 

In  most  instances,  the  economic 
domination  of  imperialism  is 
furthered  by  the  use  of  complex 
technology,  so  that  a  dependency  on 
the  more  industrialized  nation  is 
maintained,  even  at  the  expense  of 
economy  or  accessibility  for  the 
colonized  people.  Population  con- 
trollers' concern  for  facilitating  the 
use  of  this  simple  technology  in  the 
Third  World  would  therefore  seem 
contradictory  to  the  usual  corporate 
imperialist  practice.  This  can  be 
resolved  by  understanding  that  it  is 
more  directly  to  the  interest  of  this 
establishment  to  increase  access  to 
abortion  technology  than  it  is  to 
create  technological  dependence  in 
this  particular  sphere.  In  other 
words,  controlling  the  size  and 
growth  of  Third  World  populations 
is  crucial  to  the  maintenance  of 
economic  domination  in  any  other 
form. 

The  idea  of  lay  women  performing 
abortion-type  procedures'  in  this 
country  is  whole-heartedly  opposed 
because  (at  least  at  the  moment)  it 
would  be  an  indication  of  and  a 
furthering    of    women's    self- 


determination  and  autonomy  from 
patriarchy.  However,  in  the  Third 
World  at  the  present  time  menstrual 
regulation  could  be  a  means  to 
achieve  greater  control  and 
manipulation  of  women's  options,  to 
further  the  goals  dictated  by  male 
supremacy,  and  so  this  usage  of 
women  against  other  women  is  just 
as  wholeheartedly  endorsed. 

Where  Do  We  Go  From  Here? 

It  is  important  to  publicize  and  to 
stop  individual  instances  of  exploita- 
tion of  women  through  population 
control  experimentation,  of  which 
menstrual  regulation  is  only  one 
example.  However,  even  if  that  were 
entirely  possible  it  still  would  not  be  a 
complete  solution  in  itself;  longer 
range  goals  are  required. 

The  self  help  movement  has 
offered  some  suggestions  for 
challenging  the  professional 
monopoly  on  "health  care." 
Feminists  are  redefining  "health"  to 
mean  the  status  of  our  total  func- 
tioning: physical,  psychological, 
social,  economic,  spiritual;  and 
taking  into  account  the  hostility  to 
women  of  the  world  in  which  we  live. 
But  we  do  not  subscribe  to  the  idea 
that  all  our  health  concerns  must  be 
dealt  with  by  a  doctor;  in  fact,  the 
extension  of  the  medical  profession's 
authority  over  those  areas  of  our 
lives,  "cooptive  control,"11  has  many 
negative  consequences  for  us.  It  is  es- 
sential that  we  ourselves  maintain 
power  over  all  aspects  of  our  being  in 
the  world.  Self  help  can  serve  as  a 
framework  in  which  women  can  heal 
ourselves  while  affirming  a  positive  i 
self-image.  Through  self  help  women 
can  conduct  medical  research  based 


58/Quest 


in  the  philosophy  of  women's  choice 
and  women's  control.  Menstrual 
extraction  is  an  alternative  to  abor- 
tion. While  not  free  from  legal  con- 
straints imposed  by  the  patriarchy,  it 
offers  us  an  alternative  to  negotiating 
for  favors  and  is  a  way  to  involve  lay 
women  in  political  work  around 
health  care  and  the  control  of  women 
by  the  medical  system.  "As  we  assert 
control  over  ourselves,  we  confront 
the  society  that  has  determined  many 
,of  (the  objective  conditions  of  our 
lives)  ....  As  we  struggle  for  such 
societal  change,  that  very  struggle 
alters  how  we  see  ourselves,  thus 
creating  a  continuous  process  of 
change  and  growth."12 

As  feminists  we  must  also 
recognize  that  imperialism  is  an 
enemy  of  people's  self-determination 
and  thus  of  women's  struggles. 
Because  of  economic  dependence  in 
imperialized  countries,  American 
money  through  AID  or  other 
channels  can  be  used  to  directly  or  in- 
directly pressure  those  nations  to  set 
up  population  control  programs. 
Donor  nations  also  have  the  power  to 
substitute  population  aid  for  other 
types  of  development  assistance  and 
to  support  specific  policies  of  racism, 
such  as  Rhodesian  family  planning 
programs  for  blacks  only.  And,  as  I 
have  already  pointed  out,  population 
:ontrol  almost  always  uses  women  as 
its  pawns,  such  as  in  Puerto  Rico, 
where  one-third  of  all  women  of 
:hild-bearing  age  have  been 
sterilized.13  The  United  States 
Government's  Office  of  Population 
Control  has  set  as  its  goal  the  "volun- 
tary" sterilization  of  one  fourth  of 
:he  women  of  the  world,  listing  as 
3ne  of  its  reasons  the  protection  of 
Jnited  States  international  economic 


interests.  Local  or  national  autonomy 
is  not  sufficient  as  a  solution  for 
women;  we  still  must  struggle  within 
each  ethnic  or  political  grouping,  un- 
der each  government,  for  our  rights 
and  for  our  political  power. 

Feminist  organizing  against  pop- 
ulation control  must  take  various 
forms.  Women  in  self  help  groups 
learn  to  rely  on  our  own  skills  and 
each  other  for  primary  health  care  in- 
stead of  on  male  providers,  and  to  in- 
crease all  women's  access  to  complete 
information  on  health-related  matters 
ranging  from  birth  control 
techniques  to  artificial  insemination. 
Feminist  health  centers  provide 
access  to  medical  services  for  women 
which  are  supportive  and  em- 
powering rather  than  exploitative, 
and  work  to  protect  women's  right  to 
safe,  inexpensive  abortions  as  an  op- 
tion which  population  controllers 
would  deny  us.  Groups  such  as 
CESA  (the  Committee  to  End 
Sterilization  Abuse)  publicize  this 
widespread  form  of  population  con- 
trol and  genocide.  They  fight  for 
passage  and  enforcement  of  laws  and 
regulations  that  would  make  in- 
stitutional sterilization  abuse  more 
difficult  and  pursue  precedent- 
setting  court  cases. 

We  must  continue  all  these 
struggles  and  more  with  specific 
relevance  to  the  quality  of  health  care 
available  to  us.  At  the  same  time  we 
recognize  that  population  control  is 
only  one  aspect  of  the  intersection  of 
patriarchy  and  imperialism.  Without 
political  power,  women  in  the  Third 
World  or  in  the  United  States  have 
little  long-term  defense  against 
medical  exploitation  and  denial  of 
self-determination.  Feminism 
requires   that  we  organize   to  build 


Menstrual  Extraction/59 


that  power  as  well  as  to  confront  the 
individual  institutions  that  oppress 
us. 

Footnotes 


1.  Mary  Daly,  Beyond  God  the  Father: 
Toward  a  Philosophy  of  Women's  Liberation 
(Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1973),  pp.  11-12. 

2.  Ellen  Frankfort,  Vaginal  Politics  (New 
York:  Bantam  Books,  1973),  pp.  203,  197. 

3.  Linda  Gordon,  "The  Politics  of 
Population:  Birth  Control  and  the  Eugenics 
Movement,"  Radical  America  VIII: 4,  p.  62. 
See  also:  Bonnie  Mass,  Population  Target: 
The  Political  Economy  of  Population  Control 
in  Latin  America,  (Brampton,  Ontario:  Char- 
tres  Publishing  Co.,  1976). 

4.  Helen  Rodriguez-Trias,  "A  Young 
Woman's  Death:  Would  Health  Rights  Have 
Prevented  It?"  APHA  102nd  Annual  Meeting, 
Oct.  20-24,  1974,  New  Orleans. 

5.  Barbara  Caress  with  Nikki  Heideprien, 
"Sterilization:  Women  Fit  To  Be  Tied", 
Health-PAC  Bulletin  #62,  Jan/Feb  1975,  p.  1- 

6.  10-13.  See  also:  Maritza  Arrastia,  "New 
Regulations  for  Sterilization,"  Seven  Days 
11:2,  2/24/78,  p.  13-14. 

5.  Robin  Morgan,  Monster  (New  York: 
Random  House,  1972),  p.  61. 

7.  Ruth  B.  Dixon,  "Women's  Rights  and 
Fertility,"  Reports  on  Population/Family 
Planning  #17,  The  Population  Council,  New 
York,  January  1975,  p.  12. 

8.  Dixon,  p.  18. 

9.  Alan  J.  Margolis  et.  al.,  "Early  Abortion 
Without  Cervical  Dilation:  Pump  or  Syringe 


Aspiration,"  Journal  of  Reproductive 
Medicine,  IX: (Nov.  1972),  p.  240. 

10.  Theresa  van  der  Vlugt  et.  al.,  "Menstrual 
Regulation  Update,"  Population  Report, 
Series  #4,  Population  Information  O  Program, 
George  Washington  University  Medical 
Center,  Washington,  DC,  May  1974. 

11.  Barbara  and  John  Ehrenreich,  "Health 
Care  and  Social  Control,"  Social  Policy,  May- 
June  1974,  pp.  29-30. 

12.  Charlotte  Bunch,  "Self  Definition  and 
Political  Survival,"  Quest:  a  feminist  quarter- 
ly 1:3,  pp.  2-3. 

13.  Harriet  Presser,  Sterilization  and  Fertility 
Decline  in  Puerto  Rico,  Population 
Monograph  Series,  Berkeley,  California, 
California  Institute  of  International  Studies, 
Series  13,  1973. 


Laura  Punnett  has  worked  in  the 
women's  health  movement  in 
California  and  Massachusetts  since 
1973,  and  is  currently  working  on  a 
book  about  the  New  England 
Hospital  for  Women  and  Children 
(1862-1969)  in  Boston.  For  the  last 
year  and  a  half  she  has  participated  in 
a  study  group  seeking  to  integrate  a 
lesbian  feminist  analysis  with  issues 
of  capitalism,  racism  and  im- 
perialism. 


Errata: 

Quest  apologizes  to  Saegusa  Kyoko,  artist 
for  "Japanese  Women  Speak  Out"  in  "Inter- 
national Feminism,"  (Vol.  IV,  No.  2),  for 
reversing  the  order  of  her  name.  The 
traditional,  Asian  way  is  written  in  the  order 
of  the  surname  and  then  the  first  name.  In 
Quest,  her  name  was  written  in  the  European 
or  American  way. 


60  /Quest 


M 

FKMIMST 
STL  DIES 

6  l"lll%  'H^  W  '"*w 

*  ^SH^g 

**  2*amii' 

9    *r]FFp- 

mm>,   Jk  JL  1k.     * 

Volume  4    Number  1                     February  1978 

VOLUME  4,  NUMBER  1:  CONTENTS 
Kristin  Booth  Glen,  Abortion  in  the  Courts:  A 
Laywoman's  Guide  to  the  Disaster  Area.  Judith 
Lowder  Newton,  Pride  and  Prejudice:  Power, 
Fantasy,  and  Subversion  in  Jane  Austen.  Wini 
Breines,  Margaret  Cerulla,  and  Judith  Stacey, 
Social  Biology,  Family  Studies,  and  Anti- 
Feminist  Backlash.  Jane  Marcus,  Art  and 
Anger.  Berenice  Carroll, "To  Crush  Him  in  Our 
Own  Country":  The  Political  Thought  of 
Virginia  Woolf.  Nancy  Choderow,  Mothering, 
Object-Relations,  and  the  Female  Oedipal 
Configuration.  Annis  Pratt,  Aunt  Jennifer's 
Tigers:  Notes  Towards  a  Preliterary  History  of 
Women's  Archetypes.  Mary  Elizabeth  Perry, 
"Lost  Women"  in  Early  Modern  Seville:  The 
Politics  of  Prostitution.  POETRY  by  Frances 
Jaffer,  Alexandre  Grilikhes.  ART  by  Judy 
Chicago. 


Subscriptions 

Three  issues  annually 
Individuals— $10 
Libraries  and  institutions— $16 
(includes  U.S.  postage) 

Additional  postage  for  delivery 
outside  the  United  States: 
Canada    and     Mexico— $1.50 
Airmail    overseas— $7 


Mail  orders  to: 

Managing  Editor, 
FEMINIST  STUDIES 
Women's  Studies  Program 
University    of     Maryland 
College  Park.  MD    20742 


VOLUME  4,  NUMBER  2: 

SPECIAL     ISSUE:     Towards     a     Feminist 
Theory  of  Motherhood 

IN  FORTHCOMING  ISSUES 

Anarchist  Feminism  •  Conversations  with 
Feminist  Activists*  Retrospects  and  Prospects 
of  the  Contemporary  Women's  Movement  • 
Feminism  in  the  Working  Class 
Also — "Women  and  Power":  Papers  from  the 
International  Conference  in  Women's  History 


For    information    about    submitting    manuscripts    or 
artwork  for  publication,  write  to  the  managing  editor 


etters 


Dear  Friends, 

It's  late  and  I  don't 
need  any  more  work  but 
I  felt  compelled  to  write 
after  reading  "Kaleido- 
scope Two".  I  noticed  in 
the  early  issues  the  great 
uneveness  in  the  quality 
of  the  articles  but,  unlike 
the  woman  who  cancel- 
led her  subscription,  I 
also  noticed  an  occas- 
ional article  of  more  than 
usual  interest.  I  also  kept 
up  my  subscription  to 
help  struggling  femin- 
ists .... 

Barbara  Deming's 
"Remembering  Who  We 
Are"  —  This  article  is  in- 
spirational and  truly 
outstanding.  I'm  terribly 
proud  of  you.  I  haven't 
finished  reading  the 
magazine.  I  don't  need  to 
tell  you  that  you  have 
produced  a  first  rate 
issue  this  time. 

What  Barbara  Dem- 
ing  has  seen  is  that  mer- 
cy and  compassion  must 
underlie  everything  we 
do.  This  mercy  must  in- 
clude all  living  things. 
Barbara  has  recognized 
all  the  ugliness  of  what 


has  been  done  to  women 
and  still  has  come  up 
with  the  basic  truth  that 
love  is  more  conquering 
than  hate  or  violence. 
This  is  a  great  and  eter- 
nal truth  and  a  hard  one 
to  guide  our  lives  by  in 
the  face  of  what  we  have 
to  contend  with.  I  am 
one  of  your  older 
readers,  age  54,  and  I've 
been  a  feminist  since  the 
movement  started  and 
have  been  through  many 
phases  of  thinking.  I 
came  to  Barbara's  out- 
look independently.  It  is 
the  only  way  we  can 
really  win. 
Isabel  Kimble 
Reno,  Nevada 

Dear  Editors, 

I'm  writing  to  send 
you  my  responses  to  the 
"Kaleidoscope  Two" 
issue  (Vol.  IV  #1).  When 
I  started  to  read  it,  it  re- 
minded me  of  reading 
SOUTHERN  AFRICA 
magazine,  and  that 
wasn't  meant  as  a  com- 
pliment. Unfortunately  I 
guess  it  is  really  a  ques- 
tion of  who  is  the  maga- 


zine for.  SA  always  has 
that  problem  —  it 
assumes  that  the  read- 
ers know  a  great  deal 
about  southern  Africa  — 
it  is  very  hard  for  it  not 
to  be  for  an  in-group  — 
for  an  educated  in- 
group.  People  who 
already  understand  why 
the  issues  are  impor- 
tant, people  who  agree 
with  the  politics  and 
don't  have  to  be  con- 
vinced, etc.  I  had  the 
same  reaction  as  I  read 
the  "Report  to  Readers." 
The  magazine  assumes 
that  the  readership  is 
committed  to  the  maga- 
zine. It  is  written  for  the 
already  convinced  .  .  . 
that  means  that  the  rea- 
dership will  always  be 
small. 

Another  way  to  sayi 
this  is  to  say  that  I  feel 
like  I'm  coming  in  on  the 
middle  of  a  conversa-: 
tion.  I  felt  this  espec- 
ially in  Barbara 
Deming's  letter  to  Susan 
Saxe  ("Remembering 
Who  We  Are").  At  the 
beginning  of  the  article  Ii 
got    annoyed.    I    know 


62/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


who  Susan  Saxe  is,  but  I 
don't  remember  where 
she  is  now,  and  I  certain- 
ly don't  know  very 
much  about  her,  and  I 
suspect  I  know  more 
than  most  women.  (I  am, 
obviously,  not  your 
typical  reader  —  too  old, 
too  educated,  etc.)  But 
the  article  would  have 
been  much  easier  for  me 
to  get  into  if  there  had 
been  an  introductory 
paragraph  giving  a  brief 
i  history  of  her  case,  and 
of  the  positions  she's  ad- 
vocated that  the  letter  is 
a  response  to.  As  I  read, 
\  however,  I  was  very  im- 
pressed and  provoked 
and  moved  by  the  arti- 
cle. I  was  very  glad  I 
read  it. 

Thus  I  found  it  ironic 
to  read  Alesia  Kunz's  ar- 
ticle ("From  Self-Con- 
tainment to  Insidious- 
ness"),  because  I  felt 
that  what  it  was  saying 
about  style  applied  to 
Quest,  and  that  Quest 
was  trying  very  hard  to 
deal  with  that.  I  finish 
having  a  great  deal  of 
'respect  for  what  you're 
attempting,  think  it  is 
very  important  but  very, 
jvery  hard.  I  am  re- 
minded of  a  discussion 
about  Southern  Africa 
Magazine  —  facing  that 
maybe  they  can't  make  it 
and   it   would   be   more 


responsible  for  the 
writers  to  do  free  lance 
articles  in  other  publi- 
cations. I  think  the  same 
questions  apply  to  Quest 
—  can  you  make  it  as 
that  specialized  a  jour- 
nal? Can  you  find  people 
who  want  to  do  serious 
analysis,  who  are  les- 
bians or  at  least  not  put 
off  by  lesbians,  who 
have  the  time  and  in- 
terest to  write,  con- 
tribute, and  sustain  the 
journal?  I  suspect  I'm 
only  saying  what  has 
been  said  before,  but  I 
hope  that  it's  helpful. 
Gail  Morlan 
Brooklyn,  N.Y. 

Dear  Quest, 

I  read  with  interest  the 
two  articles  on  feminist 
credit  unions  in  the  "Or- 
ganizer's Dialogue"  of 
"Kaleidoscope  Two", 
since  I  have  been  in- 
volved with  the  Color- 
ado Feminist  Federal 
Credit  Union  (which 
opened  August,  1976) 
since  the  spring  of  1976. 
On  one  level  I  agree  with 
Beverly  Stone  that  the 
conflict  is  between 
feminist  politics  and 
sound  business  prac- 
tices, but  the  issues  are 
more  complicated. 
Before  the  CFFCU 
opened  we  had  a  lot  of 
theoretical  debates  about 


how  to  implement 
feminist  politics  through 
a  credit  union.  Most  of 
that  turned  out  to  be 
irrelevant  to  the 
struggles  we  later  faced, 
except  as  a  reminder  that 
theory  without  practice 
doesn't  cut  it. 

On  the  surface  the 
major  problems  we  have 
faced  have  been  1)  fi- 
nancial support  for  the 
staff  (the  burnout  and 
exploitation  of  volun- 
teer labor  became  clear). 
This  has  been  tem- 
porarily "solved" 
through  a  grant  for  sal- 
aries. 2)  Bad  decisions  on 
loans  leading  to  a  high 
delinquency  rate  which 
was  "solved"  through 
experience.  3)  Trouble 
with  the  feds,  being  a 
"problem"  credit  union 
and  having  to  put  up 
with  visits  from 
NACUA  every  three 
months. 

However,  I  think  the 
underlying  problems  are 
different  and  the  issues 


LOST  GODDESSES 
OF  EARLY  GREECE 

A  Collection  of  Pre-Hellenic  Mythology 

by  Charlene  Spretnak 
Illustrated  by  Edidt  Ceever 

"...  raises    new    and    important 

questions  about  the  power  of  myth" 

— Merlin  Stone 

MOON  BOOKS 

Available  at  bookstores, 

or  order  directly  from  WIND 

P.O.  Box  8858  —  Washington,  DC. 

for  $4.95  plus  15%  for  postage 

and  handling  (overseas,  30% ) 


Letters/63 


mentioned  above  only  a 
symptom.  Other  symp- 
toms have  included 
extremely  negative 
energy  at  much  too  long 
board  meetings, 
straight  /  lesbian  antag- 
onism at  board  meet- 
ings and  difficulty  in 
getting  any  new  people 
to  last  through  more 
than  a  couple  of  meet- 
ings. I  see  all  of  these 
problems  as  arising  from 
the  nature  of  capitalist 
society  today  (requiring 
bigness  for  survival)  so 
that  we  have  to  generate 
a  loan  volume  of  $1  mil- 
lion to  be  a  totally  self- 
supportive  enterprise 
which  pays  dividends. 
This  realization  is  de- 
pressing, leading  to  a  lot 
of  negative  vibrations. 
The  requirements  for 
survival  have  prevented 
us  from  spending 
enough  time  on  feminist 
politics  (this  time  inte- 
grating theory  and  prac- 
tice), but  we  have 
learned  a  lot,  and  I  hope 
to  write  about  it  at  some 
point. 
Sincerely, 
Jana  Everett 
Denver 


yesl  i  want  10  subscribe  to 

new  woroerfe  times 

name; 

address  • 


-state/.. 


city: 

Mv^  wom<o'S  tir^$  » hdv&  sn- 
ivel rv\©r\r©e  ***<.  aae&l 

n^cv>*^4c^,nc)  i^ir  -ford  sub- 


64/Quest 


FEMINIST:  JAPAN,  a  journal  on  women's  independence  compiled 
by  Japanese  women,  invites  you  to  share  its  first  International  Issue. 
Asian  women  confront  themselves  and  assess  their  situations  in  the 
feminist  struggle:  important  documentation  available  for  the  first  time 
to  English  readers. 


Contents  include  articles  on 


Japanese  Women  —  Still  Shackled 
by  Confucianism? 

Woman  and  Her  Power  in  the 
Japanese  Emperor  System 

Motherhood  in  Japan: 
Myth  and  Reality 

Language,  Women  and  Mass  Media 
in  Japan 


Feminism  in  Asia: 

Korea,  Burma,  The  Philippines, 

Indonesia,  Thailand,  Malaysia 

Japanese  Women  in  the  Arts 
and  Media 

Round-Table  Discussion: 
Change  in  Japan — What  Are  We 
Up  Against 


FEMINIST:  JAPAN  has  been  published  bi-monthly  by  Boku-shin-sha,  Tokyo,  in 
Japanese  since  September  1977. 

Editorial  Office  Executive  Editors  of  the 

FEMINIST:  JAPAN  International  Issue: 

6-5-8  Todoroki,  Setagaya-ku  Diane  L.  Simpson 

Tokyo,  Japan  158  Ikuko  Atsumi 


Order  Information: 

FEMINIST:  JAPAN  No.  4  is  available  by  order  from  the  New  York  and  Los  Angeles 
Offices  for  $2.50.  Please  make  your  check  payable  to  Feminist  Japan.  Allow  six  to  eight 
weeks  for  delivery. 


New  York  Office 

Diane  L.  Simpson 

555  Main  St.,  Apt.  S1802 

Roosevelt  Island 

New  York,  NY  10044 

Phone:  (212)  751-6164 


Los  Angeles  Office 

Noriko  Mizuta  Lippit 
1992  Prince  Albert  Drive 
Riverside,  CA  92507 


65 


Who  Gets  Sick 

ami 

Why? 


By  ELLEN  HALL 

graphics  by  Morgan  Gwenwald 

Feminist  health  —  for  individuals 
and  as  a  system  —  can  go  far  beyond 
current  issues  of  the  self-help  move- 
ment. Women  seeking  control  over 
reproductive-sexual  health  have  con- 
tributed both  to  our  increasing  in- 
dividual confidence  and  to  decreasing 
the  medical  mystification  of  normal 
physiological  functions  and  the 
medical  procedures  resulting  from 
that  mystification.  But,  control  of 
reproduction  still  is  not  control  of  the 
society,  nor  of  what  makes  us  ill,  nor 
does  it  necessarily  involve  additional 
changes  towards  health  and  disease. 
Feminists    must   re-examine   all    the 


Ellen  Hall  warmly  acknowledges  the 
assistance  and  moral  support  provided  by  the 
Body  Politic  Development  Committee.  Angela 
Wilson  is  thanked  for  her  help  in  the  early 
struggle  for  form  and  theory  and  also 
acknowledged  for  her  very  useful  work  on 
minority  women.  Charlotte  Bunch  also  is 
acknowledged  for  the  judicious  use  of  her  #2 
pencil. 


issues  of  health  beginning  with  who 
gets  sick  and  why. 

Chronic  Disease 

The  major  health  problem  in  this 
country  for  women  and  men  are 
chronic  diseases  such  as  cancer  and 
heart  attacks.  Diseases  caused  by 
poor  hygiene  —  typhoid,  tuber- 
culosis and  cholera  —  are  increasingly 
rare  due  to  public  health  measures. 
The  control  of  communicable  dis- 
eases, which  largely  killed  children 
and  people  in  weakened  conditions, 
has  resulted  in  the  much-touted  in- 
creased life  expectancy  for 
Americans.  The  young  usually  live  to 
middle  age,  but  the  diseases  of  middle 
age,  cancer  and  heart  attacks,  which 
only  accounted  for  12%  of  deaths  in 
1900,  now  account  for  over  half!1 

Most  chronic  diseases  are  the 
result  of  post  World  War  II  con- 
ditions in  developed  countries.  After 
the  war,  there  was  a  tremendous 
proliferation  of  chemicals  and  new 
technologies,  especially  in  the 
manufacturing     and     use     of 


66/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


petrochemical  products.  Use  of 
motor  vehicles,  changes  in  popula- 
tion distribution  and  density  and  the 
introduction  of  new  pharmaceuticals 
were  among  the  more  salient  features 
of  the  1940  to  1970  period.  These 
contributed  directly  to  the  develop- 
ment of  diseases  in  the  work  place, 
and  indirectly  (as  with  pollution)  to 
the  high  level  of  chronic  disease 
among  urban  dwellers.*  For  example, 
in  underdeveloped  Thailand,  the 
cancer  rate  per  100,000  is  24.61  for 
males  and  16.58  for  females.  In  the 
U.S.,  the  cancer  rate  per  100,000  is 
156.07  for  males  and  106.58  for 
females.3  And  within  the  U.S.,  in 
areas  where  petrochemical  products 
are  fabricated,  the  cancer  rates  are 
extraordinarily  high.  New  Jersey  and 
the  environs  of  New  York  City  are 
called  "cancer  corridor"  by  many  en- 
vironmental health  workers.  It  is  in- 
teresting to  note  that  this  is  much  less 
true  in  rural  areas.  For  example, 
residents  of  cities  are  20  to  30%  more 
likely  to  develop  lung  cancer,  and  ur- 
ban non-smokers  are  three  to  four 
times  more  likely  to  develop  lung 
cancer  than  rural  equivalents.4  This 
appears  to  be  true  with  reference  to 

*"There  are  today  more  than  30,000  chemicals 
in  actual  commercial  production;  every  year, 
this  list  grows  by  some  1,000  new  compounds. 
Of  more  than  2  million  known  chemicals,  only 
a  few  thousand  have  been  tested  for  car- 
cinogenicity and  aside  from  those  used  in  food 
additives,  drugs  and  pest  control,  only  a  few 
hundred  have  been  adequately  tested.  We 
know,  in  fact,  very  little  about  the  health 
effects  even  of  the  30,000  chemicals  already  in 
commercial  production.  We  have  no  way  of 
systematically  screening  the  chemicals  that  do 
go  into  production;  we  have  no  way  of 
knowing  precisely  which  chemicals  go  into 
production  every  year.  .  .  .  In  other  words  .  .  . 
WE  DON'T  KNOW  WHAT'S  GOING  ON 
OUT  THERE,  (emphasis  added)."2 


heart  disease,  as  well  as  to  cancer.  Air 
pollution  levels  have  been  associated 
with  increasing  lung  and  heart  con- 
ditions, as  has  stress  and  crowding.5 
The  incidence  of  chronic  disease  is 
subject  to  many  variables  with 
reference  to  the  rural-urban 
dichotomy:  levels  of  manufacturing, 
smoking  patterns,  diet  pollution 
levels,  stress,  salt  intake,  sex, 
employment,  and  "victimization". 
More  about  this  later. 

The  diseases  of  middle  age  are  the 
dark  side  of  modernization.  Unlike 
the  old  "germ  caused"  health 
problems,  we  cannot  look  to  a  single 
"pathogenic  agent"  to  explain  why 
one  out  of  every  four  Americans  will 
get  cancer.  While  there  are  "single 
agents"  which  can  produce  cancer, 
70  to  90%  result  from  exposure  to  a 
multitude  of  environmental  agents  — 
air  pollution,  asbestos  in  the  drinking 
water,  stress,  nicotine,  nitrosomines, 
medical  x-rays,  and  carcinogens  in 
the  workplace.6  Furthermore,  while 
the  frequency  of  respiratory  disease, 
heart  disease  and  cancer  increases  as 
air  pollution  increases,  there  is  no 
level  of  pollution  that  we  know  of 
which  will  not  effect  anyone.  And 
toxins,  even  in  very  small  quantities, 
appear  to  affect  people,  especially 
those  who  are  already  "weakened" 
from  other  exposures,  age,  and/or 
genetic  problems. 

Thus,  the  old  paradigm  of 
"cleanliness,  a  yearly  physical,  and 
plenty  of  rest  and  good  food"  does 
not  apply  to  preventing  most  cases  of 
chronic  disease.  The  information  that 
our  mothers  learned  in  the  preven- 
tion of  communicable  diseases  — 
cleanliness,  segregation  of  the  sick, 
and  "good  living"  is  not  particularly 
relevant  today.  Most  of  our  learned 


Who  Gets  Sick  and  Why?/67 


health  attitudes  and  practices  are  tied 
to  the  old  "germ  model,"  which 
associates  disease  with  dirt  and  often 
fecal  matter.  Many  people  feel  that 
cancer,  heart  disease  and  just  about 
anything  requiring  a  doctor's  atten- 
tion is  dirty,  contagious  and  subject 
to  voluntary  control  through  proper 
hygiene.  Thus,  many  of  our  attitudes 
about  disease  are  like  old  Victorian 
ideas  about  sex:  it's  dirty,  it's  a 
punishment  for  lack  of  cleanliness, 
and  it's  up  to  women  to  keep  things 
clean. 

Based  on  these  old  attitudes,  the 
things  which  give  people  pleasure  — 
sex,  drinking,  smoking  and  food  are 
most  subject  to  value  judgments  with 
respect  to  health.  Other  issues,  such 
as  air  pollution,  on-the-job  toxins, 
and  stress  are  generally  seen  as  issues 
of  environmental  quality,  not  health. 
While  people  are  willing  to  consider 
that  "negative  emotion"  can  give  you 
cancer,  not  many  are  willing  to  con- 
sider that  conditions  which  cause 
most  cancer  are,  in  effect,  social 
murder.  Since  disease  is  personalized, 
bad  health  often  is  seen  as  punish- 
ment for  bad  habits,  (making  the  vic- 
tim feel  guilty)  and  the  victims  of  en- 
vironmentally induced  disease  are 
then  blamed  for  their  fate. 

Victim  Blaming 

Victim  blaming  both  causes  in- 
dividuals to  feel  guilty  about  their 
health  problems  and  obscures  the 
class,  race,  and  sex-related  aspects  of 
health.  The  people  who  suffer  most 
from  chronic  diseases  are  urban 
residents,  those  who  are  under  stress, 
workers  exposed  to  dangerous  toxic 
substances,  and  the  poor.  These 
groups    often    are    blamed    for    the 


rising  cost  of  medical  services.  Rather 
than  looking  at  measures  to  prevent 
chronic  diseases,  insurance  com- 
panies are  urging  that  they  be 
excluded  from  coverage  because  they 
are  inflationary,  and  public  health 
facilities  which  used  to  serve  the  pop- 
ulations are  rapidly  being  closed.  The 
implicit  message  is  that  only  those 
who  can  afford  to  avoid  industrial- 
environmental  contamination  or  pay 
for  private  medical  attention  deserve 
to  live.  And  when  one  examines  in- 
fant mortality  rates  and  levels  of 
chronic  disease  by  social  class  it  is 
clear  that  the  poor  die  more. 

Research  in  the  area  of  who  gets 
medical  attention  indicates  that 
medical  visits  of  all  kinds  occur  in 
relationship  to:  the  income  and 
education  level  of  the  family,  the  time 
and  money  available,  the  location  of 
medical  services,  the  confidence 
expressed  by  the  patient  and  his/her 
friends  and  family  in  medicine  and  in 
doctors,  self  definition  of  illness, 
familiarity  with  diseases,  the  attitude 
of  the  medical  profession  toward  the 
race,  class  and  sex  of  the  patient,  and 
the  level  of  alienation  in  society 
generally.  In  all  such  research,  it  is 
clear  that  those  who  are  most  in  need 
of  medical  care  are  the  least  likely  to 
receive  it.  Often  medical  care  is  not 
available  to  poor  and  working  class 
people,  and  even  when  available,  it  is 
rarely  used,  unless  there  is  support 
for  such  from  the  mother  or  surroun- 
ding community.  And  as  the  level  of 
alienation  increases,  cynicism  about 
the  usefulness  of  medical  attention 
also  increases.7 

The  situation  often  leads  to 
blaming  the  poor  and  working  class 
on  the  one  hand  for  taking  risks  and 
on  the  other  for  resisting  treatment. 


68/Quest 


Nothing  could  be  further  from  the 
truth.  The  risks  of  hypertension,  en- 
vironmental cancer,  and  occupational 
disease  are  essentially  involuntary. 
No  one  chooses  to  live  under  cons- 
tant   stress,    surrounded    by    petro- 


chemical fumes  and  high  lead  levels. 
No  one  chooses  to  have  neither  the 
time  nor  money  nor  the  trust  to  see  a 
doctor.  These  are  the  work  and 
health  conditions  of  our  society 
which  must  be  altered  through  struc- 


Who  Gets  5ick?/69 


tural  change  rather  than  by  blaming 
the  individual  victim's  attitudes.  As 
one  black  woman  poignantly  stated: 

I've  been  hurting  all  my  life,  and  I 
don't  ever  expect  to  stop  hurting.  All 
day  long  there's  one  thing  or  another 
to  put  up  with.  When  I  was  a  little 
girl  I  asked  my  mother  once  if  she 
couldn't  do  something  that  would 
stop  my  pains,  and  she  didn't  ask  me 
where  they  were  or  how  bad  they 
were;  no  sir,  she  said,  there  wasn't 
anything  that  could  be  done  .  .  .  A 
doctor,  what  can  a  doctor  do  to 
change  our  lives,  even  if  he  would 
come  here,  right  here  to  our  building 
and  give  us  the  medicines  he  had? 
Could  he  help  us  with  our  children, 
so  they  could  find  jobs  and  earn  the 
money  they  need?6 

People  in  racial  minority  groups 
which  are  a  disproportionate  share  of 
the  poor,  suffer  from  both  the  class 
and  race  biases  of  medical  care  and 
health  research.  Minorities,  92%  of 
whom  are  black,  die  younger  than 
their  white  counterparts,  and  their 
chances  of  dying  before  reaching  25 
are  four  times  the  national  average.9  10 
They  suffer  twice  as  much  dis- 
ability from  accidents  as  whites;  the 
TB,  pneumonia,  vascular  lesions  of 
the  central  nervous  system,  liver  and 
stomach  disease  rates  are  twice  those 
of  whites;  and  the  emphysema  rate  is 
four  times  as  great.  Furthermore, 
medical  literature,  research,  and  con- 
sumer information  in  areas  that  es- 
pecially affect  minorities,  such  as 
sickle  cell  disease  or  sulfa  drug  reac- 
tions, is  inadequate.  To  complete  the 
cycle  of  victim  blaming  and  guilt, 
women  of  all  races  are  not  only  held 
responsible  for  our  own  health  but 
also  are  held  accountable  for  the 
health  of  our  families.  This  leads  to 


feelings  of  failure  when  diseases  do 
occur,  to  guilt  and  resentment  for 
having  to  be  hand-maidens  to  the 
sick,  and  to  anger  for  having  so  little 
control  over  what  concerns  us  so 
directly.  Our  friends  bemoan  their 
inability  to  provide  a  healthy  home 
environment,  whether  it's  mercury  in 
the  tunafish,  or  asbestos  in  talcum 
powder,  or  PCB's  in  breast  milk,  we 
are  the  first  to  feel  somehow  respon- 
sible for  "not  taking  proper  care." 
Geritol  ads  are  an  excellent  example: 
in  them,  a  woman  is  ingesting  a  sub- 
stance, which  is  about  12%  alcohol, 
so  she  can  better  meet  everyone's 
demands,  rather  than  saying,  "Yeah, 
it's  a  drag  being  wife  and  mother  and 
I  should  be  the  only  one  responsible 
for  family  welfare."  The  worst  case  I 
have  seen  of  blaming  women  for 
their  health  fate  was  in  a  recent  edi- 
tion of  Parade  magazine  where 
Professor  Claus  Bahnson,  a 
Philadelphia  psychiatrist,  suggests 
that  "women  who  live  in  conflict 
with  their  mothers,  who  resent  sex, 
who  reluctantly  accept  their  roles  as 
females  seem  particularity  liable  to 
breast  cancer!"11 

Protective  Legislation 

Women  are  held  responsible  for 
the  future  health  and  well-being  of 
men,  women  and  children.  We  inter- 
nalize this  attitude  through  guilt,  but 
it  is  also  externally  reinforced  and 
demanded  by  society.  An  obvious 
area  of  such  control  is  the  attack  on 
women's  right  to  abortion.  A  more 
subtle  form  is  the  attack  on  women's 
right  to  work,  under  the  guise  of 
health  protection. 

Since  the  early  1960s  the  number 
of  women  in  the  workforce  has  in- 


70/ 'Quest 


creased  dramatically  although  the 
vast  majority  of  women  are  still  in 
"female  job  ghettos."  At  the  same 
time  opposition  to  women  working 
has  continued,  couched  in  well-worn 
arguments  like  women  take  jobs  from 
men,  women  aren't  strong  enough, 
the  children  need  their  mothers,  etc. 
Another  argument  that  is  being  used 
most  frequently  today  is  that  women 
who  work  are  going  to  produce 
physiologically  and  genetically 
damaged  children.  Thus,  blaming  is 
used  as  a  rationale  for  excluding 
women  from  the  workplace  as  well  as 
for  creating  guilt  in  women  about 
working  and  about  our  generalized 
"failures"  as  wife  and  mother. 

The  argument  goes  like  this:  No 
woman  of  child-bearing  age  can  safe- 
ly say  that  she  is  not  bringing  a 
fetus  into  the  workplace.  Therefore,  in 
order  to  prevent  damage  to  unborn 
children,  women  of  child-bearing  age 
will  have  to  stay  out  of  occupations 
where  the  fetus  might  be  exposed  to  a 
toxic  substance.  Since  toxic  sub- 
stances are  just  about  everywhere  in 
our  society,  (estimates  are  that  about 
12  million  women  are  exposed  to 
known  toxic  substances),  this 
becomes  a  new  way  of  using 
legislation  to  control  where  women 
will  work. 

This  issue  of  "protective 
legislation"  is  particularly  important, 
because  it  combines  class  and  gender 
struggle.  In  "pink  collar"  or  oc- 
cupational ghettos  for  women  (nur- 
sing, clerical,  textile  work),  there  has 
not  been  any  real  effort  to  exclude 
women  in  spite  of  hazardous  con- 
ditions, because  the  economy 
depends  on  this  workforce.  For 
example,  if  nurses  were  protected 
from   the   numerous   chemicals   and 


physical  agents  that  might  affect  a 
fetus,  the  hospitals  would  be  shut 
down.  However,  in  non-female  job 
areas  where  women  are  just  starting 
to  have  both  seniority  and  salaries 
equivalent  to  male  workers,  the  ef- 
forts to  exclude  women  have  been 
strong.  The  areas  where  major  battles 
over  women's  exclusion  are  presently 
taking  place  are  in  occupations 
related  to  petro-chemical  and  heavy 
metal  manufacturing  and  in 
laboratory  work.  Decisions  that  are 
made  about  women  in  these  groups 
will  set  a  precedent  affecting  women 
in  all  jobs.  Further,  as  Ann 
Trebilcock,  a  lawyer  for  the  United 
Auto  Workers,  has  pointed  out,  as 
soon  as  women  are  excluded  we  also 
see  a  rationale  for  excluding  blacks, 
people  with  impaired  health,  the  han- 
dicapped  and  the  aged.  This 
happened  when  women  were 
fighting  for  the  right  to  work  in  lead 
industries  last  year;  the  government 
gave  serious  consideration  to 
excluding  blacks  who  had  an  enzyme 
deficiency  and/or  sickle  cell  anemia 
as  well.  Some  women  had  to  have 
themselves  sterilized  in  order  to  keep 
working;  others  have  been  subject  to 
privacy  invasions  vis-a-vis  their  fer- 
tility status.  For  example,  women  in 
one  plant  were  required  to  inform 
their  foreman  if  they  missed  a  period. 
Failure  to  report  this  was  grounds  for 
firing.  In  other  plants  management 
has  simply  posted  an  announcement 
that  they  believe  the  work  to  pose  a 
serious  danger  to  "the  unborn"  and 
consequently  all  women  will  have  to 
leave,  no  matter  what  their  economic 
or  physical  condition.  (This  has  oc- 
curred in  various  chemical  plants 
through  the  country).  This  reveals 
deep  prejudice  and  desire  to  exclude 


Who  Gets  Sick?/71 


women  from  involvement  in  the 
decision-making  process.  Their  most 
basic  operating  principles: 

Women  always  have  the  potential 
of  getting  pregnant.  They  need  to  be 
"protected"  and  monitored  by  men; 
women's  health  is  only  important  as 
it  relates  to  childbearing;  women 
don't  need  to  work,  therefore  it's 
acceptable  to  protect  them  out  of 
employment,  and  women  are  solely 
responsible  for  the  genetic, 
physiological  and  psychological  fate 
of  their  offspring. 

These  assumptions  are  medically 
inaccurate,  as  well  as  being  illegal  and 
sexist.  Briefly: 

Most  women  throughout  the 
twentieth  century  have  had  two  or 
fewer  children  and  have  completed 
their  childbearing  by  their  early  30s. 
This  indicates  that  childbearing  in- 
volves a  discrete  time  period  and  that 
women  are  fully  capable  of  deter- 
mining the  numbers  they  birth  and 
time  lag  between  children.  The 
protective  monitoring  by  men  has  had 
little  impact  on  either  the  outcome  of 
pregnancies,  or  on  the  health  of 
women  workers.  Women's  health  is 
endangered  by  the  presence  of 
chemicals  in  the  workplace.  These 
dangers  range  from  contact  dermitis 
(rashes)  to  cancer.  The  reproductive 
system  is  only  one  of  many  bodily 
functions  which  are  endangered 
when  any  organism  is  exposed  to 
toxic  substances.  As  most  people 
realize,  women  work  because  they 
have  to  and  not  for  "pin  money."  In 
many  of  the  occupations  where 
women  have  been  excluded  a  major 
problem  has  been  that  there  are  not 
many  jobs  available  which  can  ab- 
sorb those  who  have  been  dislocated. 
Finally,    the    medical    literature    in- 


dicates that  sperm  abnormalities  are 
associated  with  exposure  to  many 
toxic  substances.  One  cannot  assume 
that  the  damage  associated  with  these 
substances  is  uterine  selective  in  its 
impact.  Further,  the  literature  on 
congential  malformation  indicates 
that  environmental  hazards  are  a 
major  factor  in  the  high  number  of 
birth  defects  in  this  country. 
Therefore,  the  workplace  is  only  one 
of  many  possible  environments 
which  cause  this  tragic  situation. 

In  all  of  the  recent  debate  over 
"women  and  the  workplace,"  there 
has  yet  to  be  a  serious  discussion 
about  excluding  men  because  they 
are  biologically  ill-equipped  to  han- 
dle certain  jobs.  The  literature  on  the 
"ulcer  ridden  executive"  or  the  ad- 
ministrator with  "type  A"  behavior 
who  is  therefore  prone  to  heart  at- 
tacks, is  enormous.  Why  not  exclude 
men  from  these  occupations,  since 
they  can't  handle  it,  and  are  therefore 
in  need  of  protection?  There  is  strong 
evidence  suggesting  that  even  in  the 
"delicate  area"  of  reproduction,  that 
the  male  organ  is  "susceptible" 
because  it  is  external,  and  because 
sperm  is  subject  to  abnormalities 
from  various  physical  agents  and 
chemicals.  The  usual  reason  other 
than  "Well,  it's  the  women's  respon- 
sibility" is  that  men  don't  like  to  have 
their  privacy  invaded  by  giving 
sperm  or  having  questions  asked 
about  their  sexual  activity.  It's  as 
though  women  were  the  only  ones  so 
committed  to  the  welfare  of  their 
offspring  that  any  sort  of  "feelings" 
about  very  private  matters  are  not 
taken  seriously. 

The  upshot  of  this  debate  is  to  be 
caught  between  a  rock  and  a  hard 
place.   No  one  is  comfortable  with 


72/Quest 


tonaidu  zaA  zoccupcutio  naldtA  zoa  zoccupcutio  naldu  zoa  zoccupa 

sLbmtoxlnAaJtcohoJ^mtoXsLnAaZcohol^ 

toiydtA  zoa  znoApinatotiycLu  zoa  zwa  plnatoKydiA  zoa  znzA  pvuito 


mabnzatdu  zoa  zwphyA  wabstzaA 

6^oodaddu(U.vz6aAbzAtoA^oodad 

ng  dti  zoa  zbn.ou)nhing  dU>  zaAzbtuM 

Z(in£attackcanc&ih^^ 

lo  naldiA  zoa^ 

stimtoxl 

ton.ydti>^x 

damage,/  \\ 

ngdtif     )) 

*6ood    y 

zojvU 

tonou 

lantc 

ton.  yd 

6£oodau 

damagzgzn 

ng  da>  zoa  zbnowYiZuvici 

zojtfattackcancznk 

lo  natdiA  zoa  zo  ccup 

4  mto  xinAalco  WotiAmX 

toiyduzaAznzbp- 

mabKzaAtcancznmphyAzrf 

6loodadditiv<teaAb<u<^Jz 

damagzgznztA,cdamagz^L  * 

ngduzaA  zbiownlungds* 

uMtattack^nczihexL, 

to  na&diAzaA  zoccupa/ f  ) 

iAmtoxlviAoJicohoUJrfi^^ 


zmabn.zaAtdiAza 

fioodaddvtiveA 

ownZungdiAzaA 

kcanczsihzaAta 

\diAzaA  zoccupa 

who&umtoxin 

_.AtezkzApVia£jo 

\gznz£lcdama 

mtungdiAzaA 

odadditivzA 

ancznhzajvta 

zoccupa 

9AJ>mtox£n 

%ApAJiato 

'LtivZA 

-f  cdama 

f  ^^f^Pt^diszaA 

J         nczsihzoJdta 

$A  zoccupa 


mtoxJiv\A 
ku>plnato 


^tcanczn 

IdditivtA 

jnoAlcdama 


siownJbungdU  zoa  zbn.ouMJLungdlz>2Aa 
kcmcznhojahtattackwncznhQjanto 
zoa  zo  ccupcutlo  naldiA  zoa  zo  ccupo 
'alcohol^mtoxtnAoXcoholiAmtoxlv 
AAmtox^viAaJLcokoJUAmtox^nAaZcohoZiAm 
totiydiA  zoa  zn.zApiAaton.ydiA  zola  zn.2Aplnaton.ydiA  zola  znoApvwitc 
mabtizatdiA  zola  zemphyA  emabn.zatda>  zoa  zomphyA  zmabizaAtdti  zoa 
A{oodjOLddiXAu<zAOLAb<LAtoA{oodaddAJJjvte 
zant^ittackcancznhzcintattackcanc 


having  to  fight  to  keep  women  in 
jobs  where  their  health  is  truly  en- 
dangered. Just  as  in  the  fight  for 
abortion,  no  one  has  ever  stated  that 
the  choices  are  pleasant  or  easy,  or 


that  there  are  not  serious  emotional 
and  physical  problems. 

Abortion  decisions  are  rarely  easy 
or  straightforward.  This  is  also  true 
of  women's  job  safety.  No  one  wants 


Who  Gets  Sick?/73 


women  to  work  in  dangerous  and 
alienating  jobs. 

This  current  debate  has,  however, 
provided  an  opportuity  for 
rethinking  the  larger  question  —  why 
should  any  job  involve  losing  several 
years  from  your  life?  If  we  are 
working  in  jobs  that  damage  the 
fetus,  then  women,  men,  all  of  us,  are 
endangered.  The  only  people  that 
benefit  from  this  situation  are  com- 
pany doctors  and  management.  The 
real  issue  becomes  necessity,  not 
desire.  Women  work  because  they 
have  to.  And  to  take  away  the  most 
basic  rights  of  women  —  the  right  to 
work  and  the  right  to  protect  our 
bodies  from  poisons  —  is  to  deny  our 
right  to  live. 

Resource  Books 

Until  quite  recently  feminists  who  were  in- 
terested in  the  issues  of  health  and  working 
were  hard  pressed  to  find  even  a  basic  discus- 
sion of  the  issue.  For  those  interested,  the 
following  texts  are  quite  helpful:  Dr.  Vilma 
Hunt's  "Occupational  Problems  of  Pregnant 
Women"  provides  useful  information  on  the 
physiology  of  pregnancy,  and  the  possible  im- 
pact of  various  chemicals  and  agents  on  the 
women  and  her  fetus.  She  outlines  the  role  of 
government  agencies  on  this  issue.  While  the 
tone  is  fairly  technical,  her  information  is 
valuable.  Dr.  Hunt's  book  can  be  obtained, 
free,  from  the  National  Institute  for  Oc- 
cupational Safety  and  Health,  Office  of 
Technical  Publications,  4676  Columbian 
Parkway,  Cincinnati,  Ohio  45226.  Dr.  Jeanne 
Stellman's  most  recent  book,  Women's  Work, 
Women's  Health,  is  an  excellent  source  of  in- 
formation on  biological  aspects  of  working, 
stress,  fertility,  and  this  information  is  com- 
bined with  an  excellent  political  critique  of 
strategies  to  keep  women  powerless  and 
hypertensive.  Unlike  most  medical  authorities, 
Stellman  assumes  and  proves  the  biological 
superiority  of  jobs.  The  hardback  edition  can 
be  obtained  through  most  bookstores,  and  it 
costs  $12.95.  The  paperback  is  due  for 
publication  this  March,  and  should  be  con- 


siderably less  expensive.  Women's  Work, 
Women's  Health  is  published  by  Pantheon. 
Andrea  Hricho  and  Melanie  Brunt's  Working 
for  Your  Life:  A  Woman's  Guide  to  Job 
Health  Hazards  is  the  first  book  on  hazards 
associated  with  traditionally  female  trade, 
(clerical,  laundries,  electronics,  etc.)  This  book 
contains  suggestions  on  hazard  recognition 
and  how  to  make  changes  in  the  workplace 
through  organizing  strategies.  This  book  can 
be  obtained  by  sending  $5.00  and  writing:  An- 
drea Hricho,  Labor  Occupational  Health 
Project  (LOHP)  University  of  California,  2521 
Channing  Way,  Berkeley,  California  94720. 


Footnotes 

1.  Council  on  Environmental  Quality,  The 
Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the  Council  on  En- 
vironmental Quality  (Washington,  D.C.: 
Government  Printing  Office,  1975)  pp.  1-39. 

2.  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency, 
Unpublished  Speech  on  Toxic  Substances. 
Russell  Train,  Administrator  (1976). 

3.  J.J.  Dunham  and  J.C.  Bailar,  "World  Map 
of  Cancer  Mortality  Rates  and  Frequency 
Ratios,"  Journal  of  the  National  Cancer 
Institute,  41:  1  (1968),  pp.  43-64. 

4.  Erik  P.  Eckholm,  The  Picture  of  Health 
Environmental  Sources  of  Disease  (New 
York:  W.  W.  Norton  &  Company,  1977),  p. 
144.  Also  see  the  following  general  dis- 
cussions: Science  for  the  People,  "Epidemic! 
Cancer  Producing  Society,"  VII:  4  (July, 
1976),  pp.  4-12.  Harper's,  "The  Anti-Social 
Cell,"  252:1513  (June,  1976),  pp.  43-64. 

5.  Lester  Lave  and  Eugene  Seksin,  Air  Pollu- 
tion and  Human  Health  (Baltimore,  Md:  The 
Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  1977), 
passim.  Dorothy  Newman  and  Dawn  Day, 
The  American  Energy  Consumer  (Cambridge, 
Mass:  Ballinger  Publishing  Company,  1975) 
pp.  125-188. 

6.  Ernst  Wynder,  M.D.  and  Gio  Gori,  Ph.D., 
"Contribution  of  the  Environment  to  Cancer 
Incidence:  An  Epidemiologic  Exercise,"  Jour- 
nal of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  85:4 
(April,  1977),  pp.  825-832. 

7.  S.S.  Kegels,  "Behavioral  Science  Data  and 
Approaches  Relevant  to  Development  of 
Educational  Programs  in  Cancer,"  Health 
Education  Monographs,  36:3  (1973),  pp.  18- 
36.  John  Kose  and  Irving  K.  Zola,  Poverty  and 
Health?  A  Sociological  Analysis  (Cambridge, 
Mass.:    Harvard    University   Press,    1976), 


74/Quest 


Who  Gets  Sick  7/75 


passim.  W.M.  Susser  and  W.  Watsom, 
Sociology  of  Medicine  (London:  Oxford 
University  Press,  1962),  passim. 

8.  Robert  Coles,  "The  Doctor  and  New- 
comers to  the  Ghetto,"  The  American  Scholar, 
40  (Winter,  1970-1971),  pp.  72-73. 

9.  Angela  Wilson,  Personal  discussion 
(Winter,  1977-78). 

10.  Richard  Williams,  M.D.,  ed.,  Textbook  of 
Black  Related  Diseases  (New  York:  McGraw 
Hill,  1975),  passim. 

11.  Quoted  from  Lloyd  Shearer,  "Intelligence 
Report,"  Parade  Magazine,  (Feb.  5,  1978),  p. 
19. 

12.  See  Andrea  Hricho's  Working  for  Your 
Life.  The  literature  demonstrates  that  women 
working  in  beauty  shops  are  subject  to 
chemicals  that  cause  brain  tumors;  there  are 
also  indications  that  hair  sprays  contribute  to 
or  cause  lung  disease.  Vinyl  chloride,  which 
was  used  as  a  propellant  until  1974,  has  been 


banned  because  of  a  high  incidence  of  liver 
cancer  among  V.C.  workers.  Dry  cleaners  — 
many  of  whom  are  women  —  are  also  sub- 
jected to  solvents  and  other  substances  that  are 
highly  toxic  —  benezene,  for  example.  Textile 
workers  (467,000)  have  a  high  incidence  of 
brown  lung  disease  from  cotton  dust  inhala- 
tion. This  condition  is  just  as  disabling  as 
coalminers'  black  lung.  Unlike  their  brothers 
in  the  mines,  textile  workers  are  not  eligible 
for  compensation,  nor  do  they  have  the  strong 
protection  provided  by  Coal  Mine  Health  and 
Safety  Act. 


Ellen  M.  Hall  is  the  health  director 
for  the  Urban  Environmental  Foun- 
dation, where  she  is  currently  writing 
a  book  on  environmental  health  in 
the  inner  city. 


Women  and  Class  Struggle 

a  special  double  issue 

Latin  American  Perspectives 

(Issue  #12  &  13,  Winter/Spring,  1977) 

Eleven  original  articles  in  3  sections  with  introductory  articles  to  each  section. 
Theoretical,  empirical  analyses  covering  various  historical  epochs.  Ideal  for  class 
use,  research,  study  groups.  Pertinent  to  women  in  all  countries. 


Ill 


Ord( 


Women  in  Class  Society:  Theoretical  and  Methodological  Questions. 
Articles  by  Eleanor  Leacock,  Elinor  Burkett,  Heleieth  Saffioti 

Women  in  Changing  Modes  of  Production:  Articles  by  Carmen  Diana 
Deere,  Ma.  Linda  Apodaca,  Margaret  Towner,  Marjorie  King 

Imperialism,  the  State,  and  Political  Implications  for  the  Liberation 
of  Women:  Articles  by  Mary  Kay  Vaughan,  Marianne  Schmink, 
Ma.  Amalia  Idas  de  Rivera  &  Irma  V.  Alfaro  de  Carpio 

Edition  and  Introductions  by  Terry  Fee  and  Rosalinda  Gonzalez 

$5.00  double  issue  (20%  off  on  10  or  more), 
from  : 


CMS.,  P.O.  Box  792,  Riverside,  CA  92502 


76/Quest 


Rape  Research 


One  Woman's  Drama 


By  PAULA  WEBSTER 

graphics  by  Jean  Weber 

The  following  are  entries  from  the 
work  journal  I  kept  while  doing 
research,  attending  symposia, 
speaking  about  rape  to  other  women 
and  reflecting  on  the  meaning  of  it 
all.  I  hope  that  other  women  will 
publish  similar  pieces  about  the  pain- 
ful but  exhilarating  process  of  our 
work. 

October  22,  1974 

Today,  on  the  subway  ride  home,  I 
studied  the  men.  There  they  were: 
the  men  of  our  fantasies  and  the  men 
of  our  memories.  I  saw  many 
different  versions  of  my  best  friend's 
father  Max,  who  sold  foot  pads  for 
Scholl's,  and  at  least  two  of  the 
fathers  I  had  wanted  as  a  child. 
Amorphous  and  unrelated,  they  were 
the  men  that  women  share  first  as 
fathers,  brothers  and  sons  and  later 
as  husbands,  ex-husbands  and  what 
my  grandmother  called  "sweet- 
hearts." There  they  sat,  weary 
after  a  long  day  in  the  office,  in  the 
factory  or  "in  the  field."  These  were 
the  heroes  I  had  been  taught  to 
respect  as  a  child,  the  good  providers, 
the  salt  of  the  earth;  these  same  men 


who  unselfconsciously  held  the 
hopes  of  the  Left  in  their  pockets.  I 
tried  to  see  the  glint  of  revolutionary 
energy  but  all  I  could  see  was  exhaus- 
tion. I  reminded  myself  that  this  ap- 
parently benign  assortment  of  males 
was  the  patriarchy  —  a  recognition 
that  never  fails  to  make  me  uneasy.  I 
decided  to  return  to  reading  but  felt 
that  old  subway  paranoia. 

I  sat  with  Against  Our  Will 
positioned  firmly  against  my  thighs, 
forming  a  genital  barricade.  I 
wondered  what  they  would  think  if 
they  knew  what  Susan  Brownmiller 
was  saying  about  men.  Men,  not 
capitalism,  not  modernity,  but  MEN 
are  responsible  for  terrorism  and  tor- 
ture of  women.  If  they  knew,  they 
would  be  very,  very  angry  and 
perhaps  .  .  .  would  strike  out.  In- 
dividual men  began  to  look 
suspicious  to  me,  and  men  grouped 
together  seemed  positively  ominous. 

The  man  in  the  brown  wool  suit 
might  suddenly  raise  his  newspaper 
to  reveal  his  penis,  lying  limp  and  in- 
nocent upon  his  trouser  leg.  The  man 
in  jeans  and  flower  print  shirt  might 
lock  his  eyes  defiantly  with  the 
woman  across  the  aisle  while  running 
his  tongue  across  his  mouth.  And  the 
boys  from  Aviation  High  School 
might  magically  meld  into  a  primal 


Rape  Research:  One  Woman's  Drama/77 


horde  and  select  a  ritual  rape  victim 
from  the  mothers  and  daughters 
dutifully  travelling  home  to  prepare 
dinner. 

My  rational  self  said  that  this  was 
silly.  Our  male  protectors,  our  men, 
fathers,  brothers,  husbands  and 
boyfriends  have  always  said  that 
their  women  could  not  be  treated  like 
that.  They  wouldn't  tolerate  it.  But,  I 
didn't  belong  to  any  of  the  men. 

I  managed  to  return  to  Brown- 
miller's  chapter.  Her  insistant 
recounting  of  male  brutality  stretches 
far  beyond  my  mother's  ad- 
monitions. Keep  your  skirt  down, 
don't  talk  to  strangers,  be  a  good  girl. 
At  the  time  I  thought  my  mother 
exaggerated  the  danger.  Now  I  realize 
that  she  knew  something  about  being 
a  woman  that  I  didn't  understand.  I 
want  to  wail  and  scream  for  the 
thousands  of  years  of  humiliation 
and  violation  ....  But,  I  am  on  the 
subway  with  the  men. 
October  24,  1974 

It  seems  so  natural  for  me  to  be 
writing  a  lecture  on  the  origins  of 
female  subordination  sitting  at  my 
kitchen  table.  I  don't  mean  natural  as 
in  "biological"  or  "inevitable,"  just 
.  .  .  right.  Leaving  the  typewriter  to 
wash  last  night's  dishes  or  to  check 
the  pot  on  the  stove  is  a  fine  counter- 
point to  contemplating  the  contours 
of  the  past.  Today  I  feel  a  bond  with 
all  women  who  have  nourished 
others  while  silently  feeding  on  the 
bitterness  of  their  history.  Standing 
by  the  cooking  pot,  I  imagine  that 
one  old  woman  dares  to  tell  her 
daughters  the  way  it  was  for  women: 
men  have  always  had  power  over 
women.  Our  mothers,  and  their 
mothers  before  them,  remained  loyal 
to   men's   definitions   and   respected 


the  boundaries  that  men  created.  Our 
mothers  betrayed  us;  they  told  us  not 
to  be  angry;  to  leave  our  fate  in  the 
hands  of  men.  Because  they  could  not 
defend  themselves,  our  mothers 
could  not  protect  their  daughters. 
Forgive  us."  Standing  by  my  stove,  I 
want  to  reject  this  endless  saga  of 
women's  bru  talization  and 
vulnerability.  It's  too  humiliating.  I 
want  to  hear  about  their  strength,  the 
times  that  they  refused  to  submit,  the 
ways  they  retaliated  and  endured.  I 
do  not  want  to  be  soothed  with  sad 
fables  of  matriarchies,  where  mothers 
ruled  and  all  was  well.  Such  gran- 
diose visions  are  seductive,  but  being 
born  in  men's  imaginations,  they 
leave  us  hungry  for  sustenance.  More 
than  ever,  I  want  to  hear  the  history 
of  my  people,  uncontaminated  by 
male  mythology.  If  women  will  speak 
the  truth,  then  I  will  listen  to  old 
wive's  tales. 
October  25,  1974 

My  students  always  want  to  know 
if  the  sex  of  the  anthropologist  makes 
a  difference  in  describing  a  culture. 
They  seem  convinced  that  men  write 
about  things  more  scientifically  while 
women  ethnographers  are 
dangerously  biased,  interested  only 
in  childrearing  and  other  aspects  of 
women's  lives.  A  few  years  ago,  one 
of  my  students  asked  if  the  author  of 
an  African  ethnography  was  really 
black.  Yes,  I  told  him.  "But  that's  im- 
possible," he  responded,  "he  writes 
like  a  white  man;  you  can't  tell  what 
people  were  feeling."  Everyone  in  the 
class  agreed.  If  a  real  African  was 
describing  his  culture,  he  would  talk 
about  what  people  were  feeling.  They 
didn't  understand  that  male 
anthropologists,  black  or  white,  had 
more  important  things  to  do,   they 


78/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


Rape  Research/79 


had  to  describe  Culture.  Feelings,  I 
was  persuaded  in  graduate  school, 
are  either  unimportant  or  inaccessi- 
ble. People  in  other  cultures  were  the 
transmitters  of  cultural  rules  and 
regulations,  they  experienced  no  con- 
flict or  contradiction;  no  ambivalence 
or  resentment.  Not  only  was  the  com- 
plexity of  the  human  personality  lost 
in  this  distillation  of  behavior,  but 
anthropology's  promise  to  illuminate 
the  human  condition  appeared  unat- 
tainable. I  hadn't  yet  understood  that 
Culture  was  about  men,  a  tale  told  to 
men  by  other  men. 

All  these  thoughts  race  through 
my  head  as  I  contemplate  the  dif- 
ficulty of  studying  rape  cross- 
culturally.  In  deciding  to  find  out 
where  rape  occurs,  its  frequency  and 
significance,  I  hope  to  discover  if,  as 
Brownmiller  claims,  rape  has  always 
been  used  to  keep  women  in  their 
place.  The  data  are  scattered, 
fragmentary  and  biased.  No  male 
ethnographer  had  systematically 
recorded  or  analyzed  rape,  yet  many 
felt  no  discomfort  at  using  such  data 
as  anecdotal  filler.  "And,  by  the  way, 
another  interesting  custom  of  these 
people  is  that  they  punish  their 
women  by  gang  rape."  Of  course,  we 
don't  know  what  women  felt  about 
such  a  savage  form  of  social  control 
because  nobody  cared  to  ask  them. 
WHAT  DID  THEY  FEEL? 

Today,  after  class,  a  woman  stu- 
dent brought  me  a  book  where  I  saw 
an  answer  printed  for  the  first  time. 
An  unnamed  woman,  from  an 
Amazonian  village,  said,  "Rape  is 
cruel,  arbitrary  and  oppressive,  a 
threat  to  each  of  us  as  it  is  meant  to 
be."  This  information  was  elicited  by 
a  woman,  the  co-author  of  the  book. 
She  remembered  to  ask  the  women. 


November  20,  1974 

The  grant  proposal  to  study  the 
politics  of  rape  in  primitive  society  is 
finished.  Now  I  have  to  wait  and  see 
if  the  men  with  the  money  will  judge 
this  a  serious  piece  of  work.  The 
threat  and  reality  of  rape,  which  con- 
dition the  lives  of  women  in  so  many 
socieites  and  keep  them  in  their  place, 
can  no  longer  be  ignored. 

Furious  at  the  collaboration  of 
anthropologists  in  maintaining  the 
silence  about  women's  oppression,  I 
worked  hard  to  excise  that  outrage  in 
the  writing.  The  words  are  calm, 
academic  and  collegial.  "If 
anthropologists  assess  the  role  of 
rape  in  defining  the  relationship 
between  the  sexes,  they  must  revise 
their  theories  about  the  nature  of  ear- 
ly pre-class  society,  the  universality 
or  specificity  of  women's  subordinate 
status,  and  explore  for  the  first  time, 
the  role  of  physical  force  in  the  crea- 
tion and  maintenance  of  male 
dominance  and  women's  subor- 
dination." 
February  1,  1975 

With  an  exciting  mixture  of  fear 
and  anticipation,  I  set  off  to  speak  at 
a  meeting  of  radical  anthropologists. 
My  critique  of  "pre-class 
egalitarianism"  had  led  to  conflict 
with  Marxist  women  anthro- 
pologists. The  cowardly  lion  in 
me  hoped  that  the  cold  weather 
would  keep  them  home.  Another, 
newer,  part  of  me,  nutured  by  the 
support  of  my  women  friends,  in- 
sisted that  I  push  beyond  the  fear  of 
attack  and  present  my  ideas,  like  an 
"amazon  warrior."  After  all,  they 
counseled,  the  meeting  is  called 
"New  Directions  in  Feminist 
Anthropology,"  and  your  research  is 
certainly  a  new  direction. 


80/Quest 


Separated  by  a  sloshy  floor  of 
snow  and  mud,  the  presenters  faced 
the  presentees.  The  first  woman 
began  to  speak  about  the  need  to 
revise  our  biased  models  of  primitive 
society  because  they  were  enthnocen- 
tric,  i.e.,  colored  by  our  own  western 
concepts  of  male/female  hierarchy. 
She  encouraged  us  to  consider  that 
men  and  women  could  have  different 
roles  to  play  in  the  division  of  labor, 
but  that  this  didn't  imply  inequality. 
She  offered  the  conceptual  tool  of 
"separate  but  equal."  Not  again,  I 
thought:  How  many  times  do  I  have 
to  listen  to  this  ritualized  and,  by 
now,  boring  defense  of  Engels?  I 
watched  the  audience  beam  with  ap- 
proval. At  last,  and  from  the  most 
unlikely  source,  we  have  a  model  for 
sexual  equality.  "Women  make  many 
important  decisions."  (But  can  they 
initiate  sex,  choose  or  refuse  to  have 
it,  decide  when  they  want  children?) 
The  Bushmen  of  the  Kalahari  desert 
are  invoked  as  if  the  lessons  we 
learned  about  sexual  harmony  could 
be  transferred  to  New  York  City.  She 
doesn't  mention  that  the  major  cause 
of  homocide  among  the  "gentle"  peo- 
ple is  fights  over  women.  My  mind 
drifted  to  the  Kalahari  ...  I  wish  a 
Bushwoman  were  here  tonight. 

They  were  still  applauding  when  I 
realized  that  it  was  my  turn  to  speak. 
After  that  appealing  lyricism,  I  knew 
they  would  not  like  what  I  was  going 
to  say. 

My  voice  was  steady  as  I  recounted 

I  the  data,  drawn  from  societies 
enshrined  as  separate  but  equal, 
egalitarian  if  not  matriarchal.  In  the 
Amazon,  New  Guinea,  Africa  and 
Polynesia,  and  the  New  World, 
women  have  been  raped  for  refusing 
to  work,  for  commiting  adultery,  for 


flaunting  male  authority,  for  leaving 
the  village  without  an  escort,  for 
learning  men's  secrets,  for  going  out 
at  night.  They  have  been  raped  by 
groups  of  men  or  by  individual  men, 
in  warfare,  seduction,  ritual  initia- 
tion. This  data  raised  question  about 
who  makes  the  rules  of  culture,  the 
relationship  between  heterosexuality 
and  forced  sexuality,  and  the  need  to 
do  further  research. 

It  was  clear,  unambiguous.  The 
work  was  important  and  urgent. 
However,  the  women  in  the  room 
looked  uncomfortable.  For  some  peo- 
ple in  this  room,  I  had  committed  too 
many  cardinal  sins:  I  had  challenged 
Engels;  made  primitive  men  look 
bad;  and  held  the  concept  of  the  No- 
ble Savage  responsible  to  20th  Cen- 
tury women.  In  short,  I  had  spit  on 
the  Golden  Age. 

A  Marxist  anthropologist,  in  the 
back  row,  shot  me  a  perfunctory 
smile,  which  signalled  the  attack.  The 
great  father  thinkers  would  not  be 
undefended.  The  blame  would  be 
placed  where  it  belonged,  not  with 
men  or  Patriarchy,  but  with  the  con- 
cept of  private  property  that  accom- 
panied the  State  and  the  creation  of 
Classes.  Such  radical  feminism  would 
not  be  tolerated  in  a  serious  academic 
forum. 

"Surely,"  she  began,  you  are  not 
trying  to  say  that  all  women  in  pri- 
mitive society  are  threatened  with 
rape  and  other  forms  of  physical  a- 
buse?"  (Surely,  I  couldn't  mean 
that  .  .  .  such  a  ludricrous  no- 
tion could  only  be  the  paranoid 
fantasy  of  an  ahistorical  femin- 
ist dyke  manhater  who  had  not  been 
in  a  Capital  study  group.)  I  as- 
sured her  that  I  was  not  prepared  to 
make    such    a    generalization,    but 


Rape  Research/81 


wanted  to  explore  the  possibility  by 
looking  at  the  data.  We  both  knew 
that  no  system  of  oppression  can  rest 
on  force  alone.  "You  know,  of 
course/'  she  continued,  "the  gang 
rape  you  described  for  the  Cheyenne 
(where  a  woman  can  be  raped  by  the 
forty  men  in  her  husband's  military 
society  if  he  believes  that  she  has 
been  adulterous)  was  reported  after 
European  contact!"  She  was  in- 
dicating that  gang  rape  was  not  a 
traditional  Cheyenne  custom,  but  an 
innovation  generated  by  the  disrup- 
tion and  displacement  of  European 
contact. 

As  soon  as  this  traditional  Left 
explanation/justification  of  women's 
oppression  is  dragged  out  I  want  to 
scream.  First  we  are  made  to  bow 
down  to  history  (which  was  written 
by  men),  then  the  Native  is 
exonerated  and  the  European  blamed, 
and  finally,  we  are  supposed  to 
accept  the  absurd  notion  that  rape  is 
a  reflex  response  to  cultural  disrup- 
tion. Am  I  to  assume  that  the  mis- 
ogynist colonizers  forced  men  to  rape 
their  women,  against  their  will?  Did 
the  Noble  Warrior  of  the  Plains  have 
no  individual  choice?  Could  the 
previous  state  of  sexual  respect  and 
harmony  so  quickly  be  dissolved,  if 
the  seeds  of  its  destruction  were  not 
already  present?  These  questions  are 
never  asked  (or  answered)  and  the 
issue  of  women's  oppression  is 
buried  under  a  diatribe  against  class 
society  and  sympathy  foir  the  poor 
men  who  were  driven  to  such  terrible 
acts.  I  am  sick  of  this  defense  of  men 
(Patriarchy)  in  far  away  lands,  across 
time  and  space.  If  women  Marxist 
academics  don't  like  to  hear  about  the 
victimization  of  their  sex,  let  them  at 
least    not    discourage    others    who 


remember  that  the  control  over  one's 
body  and  the  right  to  resist  its  viola- 
tion is  fundamental  to  personal  in- 
tegrity and  political  freedom. 
February  5,  1975 

What  a  relief  to  be  at  the  Women's 
Center,  where  I  feel  women  are  not 
hostile  to  the  suggestion  that  rape 
needs  to  be  studied  cross-culturally.  I 
spoke  here  as  part  of  the  Tribunal  on 
Crimes  Against  Women,  and  was 
received  enthusiastically,  with  many 
excited  suggestions  from  women  in 
the  audience  of  books,  articles  and 
people  to  find.  I  am  sure  that  some  of 
these  women  are  academics  and  some 
might  even  be  Marxists,  but  the  fact 
that  they  have  been  able  to  admit  that 
violence  and  its  threat  affects  all 
women's  lives  means  that  my 
research  will  have  utility. 
June  1975 

I  got  the  grant!  I  can't  believe  it! 
They  slashed  the  money  to  $2000, 
but  I  don't  care. 
November  20,  1976 

The  symposium  papers  were 
grouped  under  the  heading  Social 
Status  and  Inequality.  Most  papers 
were  calmly  delivered  and  calmly 
received.  But  then  another  angry 
woman  read  her  paper,  describing  the 
institution  of  Purdah  in  India  as  a 
master-slave  relationship.  The  Fathers 
were  silent.  A  Mother  (or  a  Wife), 
obviously  agitated,  demanded,  in 
that  by-now-familiar  tone,  how  it 
could  be  claimed  that  Indian  men  op- 
press women  when  they  themselves 
were  oppressed  by  their  relations  to 
Capital.  There  was  no  need  for  the 
Fathers  to  protest,  their  work  was 
being  done  for  them. 

After  the  usual  question  about 
whether  women  rape  men,  a  young 
woman  rose  and  asked  if  she  might 


si/Quest 


Atrrti&OPOLOtf 


rCt  n*  ( ( y 


^fr^ 


'lA&0R-__^/!S/6KJ 


relate  something  very  personal. 
While  doing  field  work  in  Mexico, 
she  said,  she  had  been  raped.  At  first, 
she  was  afraid  to  tell  anybody,  but 
finally  she  shared  this  information 
with  one  of  the  women  in  the  village. 
With  this  disclosure,  she  was  ushered 
into  the  secret  world  of  raped  women 
and  girls  that  lived  in  this  village. 
"This  is  the  reason,"  she  concluded, 
"that  we  don't  have  any  data. 
Women  don't  want  to  talk  about 
rape.  They  are  ashamed." 

There  was  nothing  left  to  say,  no 
more  questions.  People  (men)  rose  to 
leave  the  and  the  women  gathered  in 
a  corner  to  talk.  I  was  delighted.  I 
would  not  be  isolated  in  my  work. 

One  of  those  women  was  Margaret 
Mead.  I  was  introduced  to  her  by  an 
old  friend  who  worked  with  her.  I 
told  her  that  I  wanted  to  discuss  my 


work  with  her  and  she  said  that  she 
would  be  glad  to  see  me  in  New  York. 
December  15,  1976 

"Rape  has  nothing  to  do  with 
women's  oppression.  .  .  .  Men  get 
killed  and  women  get  raped 
She  must  have  repeated  that  100 
times.  It  was  that  simple  (I  can't 
believe  this  is  happening).  She 
explained  that  women  in  other 
cultures  know  that  they  should  not 
provoke  men,  shake  their  hips,  etc.; 
they  should  take  a  child  with  them 
into  the  fields,  keep  their  eyes  averted 
and  generally  keep  a  low  sexual 
profile.  She  was  convinced  that  only 
if  women  didn't  follow  the  rules  of 
their  culture  would  they  get  raped. 
But  Dr.  Mead,  who  made  the  rules? 
This  woman,  whom  I  had  so  admired 
as  a  student,  was  telling  me  that 
women  provoked  rape.   Is  she  now 


Rape  Research/83 


saying  that  some  women  like  violent 
sex?  For  Margaret  Mead,  as  she  has 
previously  said,  rape  has  nothing  to 
do  with  politics.  So  she  hadn't  un- 
derstood my  paper  at  all.  Does  she 
think  that  women  are  equal  to  men  in 
relation  to  power?  Does  she  think 
about  this  stuff  at  all  ...  .? 

This  may  sound  ridiculous,  but  I 
felt  betrayed.  And  sad,  and,  of 
course,  angry.  We  have  so  few 
heroines,  that  when  one  has  to  be 
given  up  there  is  a  wrenching. 
February  19,  1977 

It's  snowing,  the  kitchen  is  warm, 
and  I  feel  like  an  old  woman  waiting 
for  the  spring.  I  have  not  been 
working  on  the  rape  project  because  I 
got  a  job  doing  research  on  battered 
women.  I  have  had  all  sorts  of 
wonderful  ideas  for  ways  in  which 
academic  women  could  help  women  in 
this  movement,  ideas  about  a 
research  group  made  up  of  feminists, 
that  could  provide  services  to  com- 
munity women's  groups  ....  But 
when  I  talk  to  my  friends  in  the  un- 
iversity, I  realize  that  they  are  too 
busy  with  their  own  work,  classes, 
etc.  Also  they  imply  that  they  are  not 
too  comfortable  outside  the  universi- 
ty- 

I  am  still  getting  letters  from 
women  who  have  read  the  rape  paper 
and  want  to  comment.  The  strange 
but  compelling  fact  is  that  the  most 
interest  has  come  from  women  out- 
side my  field  and  from  men  inside  the 
field.  No,  that's  not  exactly  true.  All 
of  my  friends  who  are  feminists  and 
anthropologists  have  encouraged  the 
work.  It's  only  that  Mafia  of  Marxist 
feminists  that  keeps  writing  about 
how  we  should  not  be  ahistorical  and 
ethnocentric.  Sally  told  me  (actually 
she  whispered),  "They  are  very  upset 


that  you  are  doing  this  research." 
April  6,  1977 

I  reread  the  rape  paper  today  and 
found  it  to  be  very  good  (not  at  all 
crazy).  Reflecting  on  these  past  few 
years  of  debates,  and  counting  all  the 
times  I  retreated  in  my  head  to  yell  at 
the  GOOD  GIRLS  who  yelled  at  me, 
I  must  conclude  that  there  is  nothing 
like  your  own  work  to  make  you 
strong  and  to  help  you  believe  in 
your  ideas.  I  don't  think  that  my 
critics  will  have  the  opportunity  to 
put  me  on  the  defensive  anymore, 
because  I  will  no  longer  give  them 
that  power.  Part  of  this  struggle  to 
say  what  I  believe  has  been  a  struggle 
with  the  MOTHER,  who  talks  as  a 
representative  of  the  GOOD  MEN 
(the  men  of  the  Left),  the  men  who 
would  save  us.  Perhaps  there  can  can 
be  a  synthesis  between  Marxism  and 
Feminism  (I'm  sure  that  not  all 
Marxists  are  so  rabidly  attached  to  a 
literal  interpretation  of  Engels)  but  I 
know  now  that  that  battle  is  not 
where  I  want  to  put  my  energies.  I 
want  to  continue  to  develop  a 
feminist  analysis  that  is  sensitive  to 
class  but  does't  forget  that  classes  are 
made  up  of  men  and  women  who 
have  unequal  power.  I  want  to  work 
with  women  to  eliminate  violence 
against  women.  I  want  to  continue 
my  rape  work.  I  want  to  get  on  with 
the  work  at  hand. 

Paula  Webster  is  an  anthropologist 
presently  working  on  a  book  about 
sexuality,  gender,  and  power. 


84/Quest 


The  Threat  of  Sociobiology 


By  ARLEEN  ROGAN 

graphics  by  Susan  Kahan 

In  recent  years,  a  new  theory  of 
human  behavior  called 
"sociobiology"  has  received 
widespread  attention.  Its  major 
proponents  in  the  United  States  are 
E.O.  Wilson,  Robert  Trivers  (Har- 
vard biologists)  and  Irven  Devore 
(Harvard  anthropologist).  It  is  a 
biological  determinist  theory  of 
human  behavior  which  reduces  every 
act  and  motivation  to  a  question  of 
reproductive  fitness.  As  a  feminist,  I 
object  to  the  theory  on  three 
grounds:  first,  the  perspective  can 
lead  to  neglect  of  the  interaction 
between  an  individual  and  her  en- 
vironment, and  consequently,  to  a 
dismissal  of  action  for  social  change; 
second,  this  view  dismisses  the 
philosophical  questions  such  as 
whether  individuals  exercise  choice, 
or  have  "free  will";  and  third,  it 
opens  the  door  to  justifying  the  op- 
pression of  one  group  by  another  on 


the  basis  of  biological  inferiority.  I 
think  it  is  essential  to  take  a  more 
ecological  view  of  our  existence  and 
assess  how  the  interaction  between 
an  individual  and  her  environment 
influences  both  the  person  and  the 
society  and  culture  which  emerge 
from  that  relationship. 

In  his  book,  Sociobiology:  A  New 
Synthesis,  Wilson  attempts  to 
provide  what  he  thinks  account  for 
human  behavior:  our  genes.  If  we  are 
feminist  revolutionaries,  we  must 
have  a  gene  for  that  trait.  For  Wilson, 
the  only  values  that  count  are  those 
which  make  an  individual  "more  fit" 
to  reproduce. 

Wilson's  idea  that  biology  is 
destiny  is  not  new,  but  his  version  is 
more  ambitious  than  its  predecessor 
—  Darwinism  —  in  its  attempt  to  take 
into  account  behavior  Darwinism 
would  seem  to  exclude.  Wilson  even 
attempts  to  include  the  social  sciences 
and  humanities  as  subtopics  under 
the  heading,  "evolutionary  biology." 
Related  to  theories  of  biological 
determinism  are  recent  developments 


Threat  of  Sociobiology /&5 


in  genetic  engineering.  I  choose  to 
bring  this  topic  into  the  discussion 
because  I  think  it  is  vital  that  we  un- 
derstand that  this  technology  was  not 
created  in  a  vacuum,  that  it 
represents  the  current  political  forces 
and  trends,  and  that  the  theories  of 
sociobiology  and  the  techniques  of 
genetic  engineering  are  mutually 
reinforcing. 

Wilson's  Theory 

Wilson  is  an  entomologist,  and  his 
theories  are  based  largely  on  his 
study  of  insect  populations.  But  after 
500  pages  filled  with  mathematical 
equations  and  endless  data  on  the 
multiplicity  of  animal  life,  Wilson 
concludes  his  book  with  a  chapter  on 
"man." 

Wilson's  method  is  first  to  es- 
tablish a  group  of  social  and 
behavioral  traits  which  are 
characteristic  and  universal  in  the 
human  species,  and  to  show  that 
these  traits  have  developed  through 
the  process  of  natural  selection.  He 
asserts  that  these  traits  are,  to  varying 
degrees,  genetically  programmed 
and,  further,  that  they  are  "adap- 
tive." He  defines  this  as  "pertaining 
to  any  trait,  physiological  or 
behavioral,  that  has  arisen  by  the 
evolutionary  process  of  adaptation."1 
This  "adaptation"  tends  to  make  an 
individual  "more  fit  to  survive  and  to 
reproduce  in  comparison  with  other 
members  of  the  same  species."2 

Wilson  views  sex  as  an  antisocial 
force  in  evolution  (in  human  beings 
as  well  as  insects),  and  claims  that 
bonds  are  established  between  in- 
dividuals in  spite  of  sex.  He  argues 
that  the  basic  conflict  between  the 
sexes    is    genetic    in    origin.    He 


describes  the  dynamic  as  follows: 
"The  male  will  profit  more  if  he  can 
inseminate  additional  females  .  .  . 
(conversely),  the  female  will  profit  if 
she  can  retain  the  full-time  aid  of  the 
male,  regardless  of  the  genetic  cost 
imposed  on  him  by  denying  him 
extra  mates.3"  His  conclusion  says 
more  about  the  psychological 
perspective  of  the  writer  and  the 
cultural  values  of  his  society  than 
about  the  so-called  genetic 
cost/benefit  ratio  of  sexual 
relationships.  It  is  a  conclusion 
designed  to  perpetuate  the  myth  that 
only  males  desire  multiple 
relationships.  It  is,  of  course,  the  laws 
and  customs  of  patriarchal  societies 
which  limit  female  sexuality,  not 
female  desire. 

Wilson  also  takes  up  homosexuali- 
ty, which  he  sees  as  a  genetic  trait.  He 
claims  that  homosexuality  means,  by 
definition,  that  the  individual 
possessing  the  trait  is  genetically  un- 
fit. The  trait's  adaptive  quality  lies  in 
the  fact  that  homosexuals  function  as 
"helpers"  for  those  who  are 
genetically  fit  (i.e.,  will  reproduce).4 
He  never  really  defines  this  helper 
role,  and  his  discussion  centers  on 
male  homosexuality  (never  men- 
tioning lesbianism).  He  completely 
dismisses  the  fact  that  many 
homosexuals  do,  in  fact,  reproduce. 

It  is  the  clumsiness  of  Wilson's 
sexism,  rather  than  the  novelty  of  his 
views,  that  surprises  me.  He  asserts 
that  male  dominance  over  females  is  a 
universal  and  therefore  natural 
phenomenon,  that  this  dominance 
can  be  traced  to  aggression  (a  trait 
peculiar  to  males),  and  that  aggres- 
sion is  a  genetically  adaptive  trait.5 
And  yet  what  does  aggression 
amount  to?  For  Wilson,  the  answer  is 


8>6/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  3,  summer,  1978 


war,  rape,  capitalism,  and  the  in- 
evitable patriarchy.  Men  have  main- 
tained for  centuries  that  the 
patriarchy  is  inevitable,  and  they 
have  made  use  of  a  variety  of  theories 
to  maintain  that  it  is  "natural"  (god 
made  men  superior  to  women; 
biology  is  destiny,  and  our  genes 
determine  our  actions).  Women  who 
don't  accept  the  role  have  been 
labeled  sick,  heretical,  or  (worst  of 
all)  genetic  aberrations. 

Wilson  is  convinced  that  biology 
will  eventually  provide  all  the 
answers  about  humanity  that 
philosophers,  historians,  economists, 
sociologists,  psychologists, 
anthropologists,  novelists,  and 
political  theorists  have  sought. 
Moreover,  biology  can  be  reduced  to 
genetic  inheritance.  Although  Wilson 
points  to  the  inadequacy  of  the 
theories  of  such  male  supremacists  as 
Konrad  Lorenz  and  Lionel  Tiger,  he 
basically  accepts  their  perspective  of 
man  as  hunter,  woman  as  nurturer. 
He  alludes  on  several  occasions  to 
women's  attempts  at  equality,  but 
dooms  these  attempts  to  failure 
because  of  our  genetic  makeup. 

While  he  may  understand  the 
social  organization  of  ants  and  the 
sexual  behavior  of  termites,  it  is  clear 
that  Wilson's  version  of  human 
beings  is  simplistic  to  the  point  of  ab- 
surdity. He  claims,  for  instance,  that 
the  building  block  of  all  human 
societies  is  the  nuclear  family.6  He 
asserts  further  that  it  is,  and  was,  un- 
iversal that  women  and  children  re- 
main in  the  home  compound  while 
males  hunt  and  forage  during  the 
day.7  And,  according  to  Wilson,  the 
major  advantage  of  kinship  (male 
ownership  of  women  and  children)  is 
that  it  provides  a  bartering  system 


whereby    some    males    can    achieve 
dominance  over  other  males.8 

The  Link  to  Genetic  Engineering 

Midway  through  his  book,  Wilson 
proposes  a  "perfect"  society,  a  socie- 
ty without  conflict  in  which  coordin- 
ation (defined  as  interaction  "among 
individuals  or  subgroups  such  that 
the  overall  effort  of  the  group  is 
divided  among  these  units  without 
leadership  being  assumed  by  any  of 
them")9  are  altruism  ("self- 
destructive  behavior  performed  for 
the  benefit  of  others")10  are  possessed 
by  individuals  to  the  highest  degree.11 
Since  these  traits  are  genetically 
programmed,  Wilson  feels  that  this 
would  be  most  likely  to  occur  if  all 
individuals  were  genetically  identical. 
This  could  only  occur  through 
asexual  reproduction  such  as  cloning. 
Thus,  Wilson  closes  the  door  to 
political  solutions  by  defining  the 
problems  of  humanity  as  essentially 
biological.  At  the  same  time,  he  opens 
the  door  to  a  brother  science  — 
genetic  engineering. 

As  the  patriarchy  developed  a 
genetic  theory  of  human  behavior,  it 
also  developed  tools  to  put  that 
theory  into  practice.  Just  as  the  in- 
quisition was  developed  by  the 
church  patriarchs  to  control  "heresy" 
and  the  couch  was  provided  by  the 
psychoanalytic  fathers  to  cure 
"neurosis,"  the  scientific  experts 
have  invented  genetic  engineering  to 
control  and  purify  our  genes  to  pre- 
vent "disease."  In  a  recent  article  in 
the  Progressive,12  Jeremy  Rifkin  and 
Ted  Howard  provide  ample 
documentation  to  support  the  con- 
tention that  some  scientists  are 
attempting    to    assert    control    over 


Threat  of  Sociobiology/87 


reproduction.  Scientists  have  a  varie- 
ty of  techniques  which  manipulate 
reproduction:  artificial  insemination 
(there  are  over  1,000,000  people  alive 
in  the  United  States  alone  who  were 
conceived  by  this  method13); 
transplantation  of  ovum  from  one 
womb  to  another  and  subsequent  ar- 
tificial insemination  (animal 
experiments);  cloning  (asexual 
reproduction  whereby  one  cell  is 
reproduced  identically  many  times 
over).  In  the  future  they  expect  to  be 
able  to  perfect  a  laboratory  process 
by  which  they  can  fertilize  an  egg  in  a 
test  tube  and  then  implant  it  in  a 
woman;  gestate  fetuses  in  a  test  tube; 
join  together  two  fetuses  to  make  one 
individual  for  genetic  aberrations. 
With  a  procedure  called  am- 
niocentesis, they  can  screen  a  fetus; 
they  can  also  determine  the  genetic 
makeup  of  an  infant;  and  they  can 
screen  adults  for  possible  genetic 
problems  capable  of  being  passed  on 
to  offspring.  Each  of  these 
procedures  could  prevent  some 
human  misery,  but  the  possibility  for 
mistakes  is  great.  For  example,  when 
some  thought  that  the  XYY 
chromosome  configuration  led  to 
criminal  behavior  (an  hypothesis  ul- 
timately proved  inaccurate),  many 
babies  were  aborted  for  that  reason.14 

The  most  recently  developed 
technique  of  genetic  engineering  in- 
volves recombinant  DNA.  This 
technique  offers  scientists  the  capaci- 
ty to  splice  together  pieces  of  DNA, 
thus  creating  new  life.  The  controver- 
sy sparked  by  this  research  led  the 
National  Institutes  of  Health  to 
develop  guidelines  for  those 
receiving  government  funds. 

The  controversy,  however, 
remains  unresolved,  and  the  debate 


has  moved  to  Congress,  The  concern 
here  is  with  safety  issues,  and  the 
ethical  side  of  the  controversy  has 
been  suspended  as  far  as  Congress  is 
concerned.  They,  instead,  are  trying 
to  decide  whether  to  make  the  NIH 
guidelines  a  law  covering  all  research, 
or  whether  legislation  currently  on 
the  books  is  sufficient.  The  bill  is 
currently  bogged  down  in  committee, 
and  is  not  expected  to  be  voted  on 
until  mid-1978.  Other  branches  of 
the  government  have  also  been  ac- 
tive. The  Patent  Appeals  Court 
recently  ruled  that  life  forms 
developed  by  drug  companies  may  be 
patented.15 

In  the  context  of  the  United 
States'  interest  in  and  past  im- 
plementation of  selective  breeding 
policies,  the  danger  of  these  new 
tools  is  apparent.  The  possible  mis- 
use of  genetic  theories  and  research  is 
apparent  in  the  statement  of  a  sup- 
porter of  a  bill  requiring  genetic 
screening  of  all  applicants  for 
marriage  licenses.  He  argued  that  the 
underlying  objective  of  the  bill  was  to 
"reduce  the  number  of  non- 
productive members  of  our 
society."16 

An  Historical  Note: 
The  Eugenics  Movement 


Some  have  wondered  why 
Wilson's  reformulation  of  the 
"biology  is  destiny"  argument  has 
surfaced  and  received  attention 
today.  They  have  noted  that  his  book 
was  published  on  the  heels  of  the 
social  upheaval  of  the  'sixties  and 
early  'seventies.17  It  is  akin  to  the 
eugenics  movement,  which  emerged 
in  the  United  States  in  the  early  part 
of  this  century.  We  should  remember 


88/Quest 


both  that  science  can  influence 
political  policy  and  that  scientific 
theories  can  be  influenced  by  a 
political  climate. 

Eugenics  states  that  some  people 
are  more  desirable  than  others, 
and  that  an  individual's  superiority 
or  inferiority  can  be  discovered  from 
her/his  genetic  background.  In  order 
to  maintain  the  superiority  of  a 
culture,  those  who  are  inferior  should 
be  selected  out  —  either  through 
systematic  elimination  of  those 
deemed  unfit,  or  through  increased 
breeding  among  those  judged 
biologically  superior.  The  movement 


in  the  United  States  focussed  on  the 
second  alternative,  although  there 
were  adherents  of  the  first  who  ad- 
vocated a  "gentle  and  painless  death 
for  the  unfit."18 

In  their  book,  Who  Should  Play 
God?*  Rifkin  and  Howard  cite  three 
social  factors  which  preceded  the 
popularity  of  eugenics:  a  huge  influx 
of  southern  European  immigrants 
into  the  United  States;  an  upsurge  in 

*The  discussion  of  the  eugenics  move- 
ment was  extracted  from  "Eugenics:  The 
Ideology  Behind  Genetic  Research,"  Who 
Should  Play  God?  by  Jeremy  Rifkin  and  Ted 
Howard. 


Threat  of  Sociobiology/89 


militant  union  organizing;  and  the 
growth  of  city  slums.19  They  argue 
that  these  social  forces  created  social 
unrest  which  led  those  who  wanted 
to  maintain  the  status  quo  to  search 
for  a  resolution  to  the  problem. 
Geneticists  offered  the  gene  as  the 
key  to  the  problem  of  deciding  who  is 
unfit.  In  the  first  decade  of  the  cen- 
tury, many  geneticists  openly  ad- 
vocated the  concept  of  selective 
breeding  based  on  their  reserach. 
And,  although  the  research  on  which 
their  theories  were  based  was  later 
proved  fraudulent,  they  were 
believed  to  have  conducted  research 
which  proved  that  most  traits  are 
determined  by  a  single  gene  and  that 
environmentally  acquired  traits  could 
not  be  inherited  by  offspring. 

Following  the  lead  of  geneticists, 
after  1910,  eugenics  societies  sprang 
up  all  over  the  country;  publications 
such  as  the  New  York  Times,  the  Na- 
tion, and  the  New  Republic,  sup- 
ported eugenics  policies  in  their 
editorials.20  In  an  effort  to  implement 
selective  breeding,  in  1907,  Indiana 
enacted  a  mandatory  sterilization  law 
for  "criminals,  idiots,  imbeciles  and 
others  in  state  institutions."21  By 
1931,  29  other  states  had  followed 
suit.  Family  trees  were  published  to 
illustrate  how  inferior  traits  were 
passed  on,  and  the  Binet  intelligence 
test  was  introduced  to  flush  out  those 
who  were  intellectually  inferior.  By 
1928,  the  concept  was  so  popular  that 
three  quarters  of  the  colleges  in  the 
country  offered  courses  in  eugenics. 
Even  President  Theodore  Roosevelt 
stated  that  the  "emphasis  should  be 
laid  on  getting  desirable  people  to 
breed,"25  and,  as  late  as  1924,  an  im- 
migration law  was  enacted  based  on 
eugenic  theories. 


E.O.  Wilson  does  not  make  the 
leap  into  eugenics.  Still,  it  is  of  in- 
terest that  in  1972  (prior  to  the 
publication  of  his  book),  the 
American  Eugenics  Society  renamed 
itself  the  Society  for  the  Study  of 
Sociobiology.23  Moreover,  there  is 
evidence  of  a  resurging  interest  in 
genetics  as  a  form  of  social  control; 
LEAA  currently  funds  research  to 
discover  the  genetic  basis  for 
criminality,  and  today's  geneticists 
are  conducting  research  which  takes 
genetic  engineering  out  of  the  realm 
of  science  fiction  and  places  it  on  the 
near  horizon. 

An  Alternative 


Marge  Piercy,  in  Woman  on  the 
Edge  of  Time,24  demonstrates  that 
Wilson's  cut-throat  vision  of  the 
world  is  not  the  only  possible  view. 
She  describes  a  world  whose  basic 
perspective  is  feminist.  Although 
Piercy  doesn't  deny  that  human 
behavior  has  a  genetic  component, 
she  stresses  genetic  variety  and 
focuses  instead  on  the  ability  of 
humans  to  choose  the  kind  of  world 
they  inhabit.  She  offers  us  two 
visions  of  the  future:  one  which  has 
opted  for  technological  prowess,  and 
another  which  carefully  selects  "ap- 
propriate" technologies  and 
emphasizes  that  human  beings  have  a 
variety  of  needs,  not  all  of  which  can 
be  met  by  the  introduction  of  new 
appliances. 

As  for  questions  which  are  con- 
troversial, Piercy  shows  that  the  key 
is  political  debate  in  which  in- 
habitants of  all  the  communities 
weigh  advantages  and  disadvantages, 
and    consider   who   is   affected;    ul- 


90 /Quest 


timately,  all  decisions  are  made  in  this 
egalitarian  fashion. 

A  third  world  is  depicted  in  Pier- 
cy's  book,  our  own  society.  It  is  clear 
from  the  structure  of  the  story  that 
both  futures  have  seeds  in  the  pre- 
sent and  that  we  will  choose  which 
seeds  are  sown.  It  seems  clear  from 
this  and  the  kind  of  society  which  she 
constructs  in  Mattapoisett  that  Piercy 
places  high  value  on  knowledge, 
awareness  and  on  the  ability  to 
choose  which  arises  from  those  two 
qualities. 

We  all  must  participate  in  the 
evaluation  and  choice  of  which  lines 
our  society  is  to  pursue,  to  postpone 
and  to  abandon.  Because  informed 
public  debate  is  essential,  I  reviewed 
some  of  the  popular  literature  on 
sociobiology  to  determine  what  in- 
formation the  public  has  received. 
Early  reviews  of  Wilson's  book 
hailed  his  work  and  emphasized  the 
specific  scientific  statements  he  made 
about  the  connection  between  genes 
and  behavior  in  insects.  One  early 
reviewer  dismissed  his  last  chapter  on 
humans  because  of  Wilson's  obvious 
ignorance.25  By  1977,  however,  media 
attention  focussed  on  the 
extrapolations  to  humans  which  have 
sparked  so  much  debate  within  the 
scientific  community.  For  example, 
in  a  cover  story  entitled  "Why  You 
Do  What  You  Do;  Sociobiology:  a 
new  theory  of  behavior,"26  Time 
magazine  focussed  on  the  sexist  im- 
plications of  sociobiology.  The  article 
is  a  collage  of  quotes  from  Wilson, 
Trivers  and  Devore  on  the  pro  side,  a 
smattering  of  comments  from  critics, 
and  is  suffused  with  the  author's 
own  rather  silly  understanding  of  the 
material.  The  accompanying  graphics 
belie  any  intent  of  objectivity  in  the 


text.  The  cover  picture  depicts  a  man 
and  woman  strung  up  like 
marionettes,  implying  that  behavior 
is  completely  out  of  an  individual's 
control.  A  series  of  cartoons  called 
the  "Sociobiological  Funnies"27 
depicts  a  woman  selecting  a  macho 
man  for  his  superior  genes.  Of 
course,  such  selection  is  made  for  her 
by  her  genes.  A  short  inset  piece  en- 
titled "Sociobiology  and  Sex"  begins 
with  the  statement  that  "Machismo  is 
biologically  based  and  says  in  effect: 
T  have  good  genes,  let  me  mate.'  "28 
The  import  of  this  piece  is  that 
women  are  responsible  for  the 
patriarchy  because  our  genes  select 
their  genes!  Irven  Devore  is  quoted  to 
have  responded  to  the  question, 
"when  will  men  give  up  machismo," 
with,  "when  women  like  you  stop 
selecting  high-success,  strutting  men 
like  me."29 

The  piece  ends  with  a  threat  from 
Robert  Trivers.  He  says,  "It  has  been 
argued  that  the  rise  of  feminism 
could  be  a  genetic  adaptation," 
however,  "if  more  feminists  take  jobs 
and  have  fewer  children,  more  child- 
bearing  may  be  left  to  nonfeminists. 
In  evolutionary  terms,  this  would 
mean  that  feminism  is  being  selected 
against  and  will  either  die  out  entirely 
or  start  from  scratch  in  every 
generation."30 

Despite  vocal  criticism  from 
various  quarters,  Time  claims  that 
sociobiology  has  "won  the  first 
round  with  its  critics  —  largely 
because  their  accusations  were 
overblown  and  based  on  emotional 
response  rather  than  hard 
evidence."31  However,  a  group 
critical  of  Wilson's  work,  The 
Science  for  the  People  Sociobiology 
Study  Group,  spent  several  years  in- 


Threat  of  Sociobiology/91 


vestigating  its  racist  and  sexist  im- 
plications. 

The  Study  Group's  basic  criticism 
focusses  on  two  points:  (1)  that 
sociobiology  is  bad  science;  and  (2), 
that  sexism  is  the  basis  of  the 
theory.32  As  far  as  scientific  evidence 
for  Wilson's  theory  is  concerned, 
they  argue  that  there  is  no  direct 
evidence  and  that  Wilson  offers  none. 
He  offers,  they  maintain,  only  his 
hypothesis.  He  uses  such  non- 
experimentally  based  terms  without 
experimental  basis,  such  terms  as  the 
"multiplier  effect,"  "genetic  adap- 
tiveness,"  "reciprocal  altruism"  and 
the  suspect  gene  for  "flexibility"  to 
encompass  all  those  behaviors  which 
do  not  fit  neatly  into  his  original 
hypothesis.  The  Study  Group 
observes  that  he  has  a  failure  of  vi- 
sion common  to  all  determinists  — 
biological,  social,  or  psychological  — 
in  that  he  refuses  to  see  that  in- 
dividual behavior  cannot  be  un- 
derstood apart  from  social 
organization.33  While  Wilson  himself 
admits  that  perhaps  only  10  to  15 
percent  of  human  behavior  can  be  at- 
tributed to  genes,34  this  does  not  pre- 
vent him  from  attempting  to  explain 
all  behavior  in  terms  of  genes. 

What  Can  We  Do? 

The  "Body  Politic"  issue  is  dedi- 
cated to  our  assertion  that  we  must 
take  control  of  our  bodies  and  our 
futures.  But  those  with  power  and 
those  with  the  tools  to  enforce  the 
decisions  often  hold  deeply  anti- 
feminist  and  anti-human  values. 
Unless  we  know  what  is  going  on  and 
assert  control  over  the  discoveries 
and  theoretical  justifications  for  the 


application  of  those  discovereies,  we 
have  much  to  lose. 

I  deplore  deterministic  theories  of 
human  behavior,  whether  they  be 
psychological  (as  with  Skinner  and 
Freud)  or  biological,  as  with  Wilson. 
As  feminists,  it  is  in  our  interest  to  do 
more  than  analyze  and  refute  such 
theories  as  they  emerge.  We  must 
develop  our  own  concept  of  the 
elements  which  mold  our  behavior, 
and  our  own  model  describing  how 
those  elements  interact.  I  believe  in 
the  concept  of  free  will  and  think  that 
any  theory  which  purports  to 
provide  a  predictive  model  for 
behavior  must  accommodate  that 
concept. 

I  am,  further,  concerned  about  the 
developments  of  genetic  engineering 
which  could  one  day  provide  us  with 
the  capability  of  molding  individuals 
to  suit  specific  requirements.  While 
some  feel  such  a  possibility  remains 
yet  in  the  realm  of  science  fiction,  I 
don't  think  it  is  too  early  for  us  to 
think  about  whether  or  not  such  in- 
tervention should  occur,  and  if  so, 
what  the  limits  of  that  intervention 
should  be.  The  answer  to  these  last 
questions  will  depend  very  much  on 
our  view  of  human  nature  and 
human  behavior. 

To  make  feminism  an  ideology 
which  has  relevance  for  everyone,  we 
must  tackle  the  philosophical  issue  of 
what  being  human  means,  as  well  as 
understand  and  cope  with  the 
dangers  presented  by  our  society's 
overwhelming  reliance  on 
technological  answers  to  social  and 
political  dilemmas.  We  need  to  ex- 
pand our  theoretical  framework  to 
take  into  consideration  biological 
knowledge  such  as  the  ways  genes 


92/Quest 


influence  our  behavior,  so  that  we 
can  present  an  adequate  response  to 
the  sociobiologists  and  those  who 
offer  to  tamper  with  the  genetic 
makeup  of  future  generations.  We 
cannot  separate  the  theories  of 
sociobiology  from  the  techniques  of 
genetic  engineering,  and  we  must 
consider  both  in  terms  of  the  political 
climate  in  which  they  flourish.  We 
need  to  combat  single-minded 
theories  which  ultimately  blame  the 
poor,  the  minorities  and  women  for 
their  social  inferiority,  theories 
whose  only  purpose  is  to  support 
those  who  have  power  and  money  in 
this  society. 

Author's  Note:  I  would  like  to  thank  Freda 
Salzman  of  Science  for  the  People,  for  all  the 
help  she  gave  me  in  the  initial  stages  of 
researching  this  article. 


Footnotes 

1.     E.O.    Wilson,    Sociobiology:    The    New 
Synthesis  (Boston:  Harvard  University  Press, 
1975),  p.  577. 
2 

3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 


Ibid.,  p.  577. 
Ibid.,  p.  314 
Ibid.,  p.  555. 
Ibid.,  passim. 
Ibid.,  pp.  553-554. 
Ibid.,  pp.  553-554. 
Ibid.,  pp.  553-554. 
Ibid.,  p.  587. 

10.  Ibid.,  p.  578. 

11.  Ibid.,  p.  314. 

12.  Jeremy  Rifkin  and  Ted  Howard,  "Who 
Should  Play  God?"  The  Progressive 
(December,  1977),  pp.  16-22. 

13.  Ibid.,  p.  17. 

14.  John  Beckwith,  "Recombinant  DNA: 
Does  the  Fault  Lie  Within  our  Genes?"  (un- 
published paper),  p.  4. 

15.  "Life  Forms  Can  Be  Patented/'  The 
Washington  Post  (October,  1977),  p.  6. 

16.  Jeremy  Rifkin  and  Ted  Howard,  Who 
Should  Play  God?  (New  York:  Dell 
Publishing  Co.,  Inc.,  1977),  pp.  45-82. 


17.  George  Salzman,  "The  Use  of  Sexism  in 
Sociobiology."  Adapted  from  a  draft  version 
with  the  same  title  prepared  by  Freda  Salzman 
for  the  Sociobiology  Study  Group  of  Science 
for  the  People  (January  18,  1977),  p.  2. 

18.  Rifkin  and  Howard,  p.  60. 

19.  Rifkin  and  Howard,  p.  48. 

20.  Rifkin  and  Howard,  p.  56. 

21.  Rifkin  and  Howard,  p.  61. 

22.  Rifkin  and  Howard,  p.  47. 

23.  Rifkin  and  Howard,  p.  75. 

24.  Marge  Piercy,   Woman  on   The  Edge  of 
Time   (New   York:    Alfred   A.    Knopf,    Inc. 
1976). 

25.  Lewis  Thomas,  "Survival  by  Self- 
Sacrifice, "  Harper's  (November,  1975),  p.  104. 

26.  "Why  You  Do  What  You  Do; 
Sociobiology:  A  New  Theory  of  Behavior," 
Time  (August  1,  1977),  pp.  54-63. 

27.  Time,  p.  54. 

28.  Time,  p.  63. 

29.  Time,  p.  63. 

30.  Time,  p.  63. 

31.  Time,  p.  58. 

32.  Salzman,  p.  2. 

33.  Sociobiology  Study  Group,  "Sociobiology 
—  A  New  Biological  Determinism."  Pamphlet 
prepared  by  Science  for  the  People,  897  Main 
Street,  Cambridge,  MA  02139  (April,  1976), 
p.  31. 

34.  Time,  p.  58. 

Arleen  Rogan   is  a  member  of 
the  Quest  staff. 


Threat  of  Sociobiology/93 


We  would  like 

to 

thank  all  the  people  listed  below  who  con- 

tributed  to  Quest,  from  January  1,  1978  through  May  31,  1978: 

Adams,  Janet  A. 

Havice,  H.  Katherine 

Raulerson,  Clare 

Albin,  Rochelle  S. 

Heidelberg,  Lynn 

Rhenisch,  Madelyn  B. 

Balen,  Mabel 

Hixson,  M.E. 

Sergi,  Janet 

Bilanin,  Jeanne  E. 

Hosford,  Beatrice  Ray 

Simmons,  Beverley 

Boyles,  Marcia  V. 

Hriljac,  Nancy  Rose 

Swenson,  Ann  M. 

Brandon,  Lynne  S. 

Innes,  Amy 

Teasley,  Regi  L. 

Browne,  Audrey  A. 

Kollias,  Karen 

Thomas,  Susan  J. 

Coleman,  Ann  Marie 

Lewis,  Jill 

Trussell,  Lenora  E. 

Coleman,  Mary 

Lichtman,  Judith  L. 

United  Methodist  Church 

Downie,  Susanna 

MacKinney,  Prudence 

Women's  Division 

DuMond,  Margery  A. 

McKenney,  Mary 

United  Methodist  Church 

Freeman,  Nancy 

McQueen,  Katherine  L. 

International  Division 

George  Washington  University 

NOW  Lesbianism  Conference 

Weiss,  Lonnie  S. 

Women's  Studies 

Odenath,  Ann  C. 

Young,  Helen 

Harries,  Joan 

Plaut,  Johanna  M. 

Zeek,  Barbara  Lynn 

Hart,  Christine  H. 

Polikoff,  Nancy 

HERESIES: 

A  FEMINIST  PUBLICATION 
ON  ART  AND  POLITICS 

A  collectively  edited,  idea-oriented  journal  devoted  to  the  examination  of  art 
and  politics  from  a  feminist  perspective — includes  research,  theoretical  articles, 
analysis,  fiction,  poetry,  visual  art. 

Issue  No.  4  Traditional  Women  s  Arts — The  Politics  of  Aesthetics 

Issue  No.  5  The  Great  Goddess — Women 's  Spirituality 

Issue  No.  6  Women  and  Violence 

Issue  No.  7  Working  Together— True  Confessions 


SUBSCRIBE  NOW 
-year  subscription/4  issues  $11. 


Heresies  -  Box  766  -  Canal  Street  Station  -  New  York,  N.Y.  10013 


94/Qws/ 


An  alternative  journal  supplying 
bibliographies  and  articles  on  issues 
rarely  covered  in  other  journals,  such  as 
Women  in  Prison  and  immigrants. 
Emergency  Librarian  features  a  column 
called  "Books  for  Liberated  Children"  and 
reviews  of  small  Canadian  presses. 

6  issues,  $7.00,  U.S.  $9.00 
(institutions,  $10.00; 
students  $3.00) 

Subscriptions  •  Sherrill  Cheda  •  46  Gormley 
Avenue  •  Toronto  •  Ontario  •  M4V  1Z1 


Director  of 

Women's  Studies 

Program 

The  University  of  Connecticut  is 
seeking  a  Director  of  Women's  Studies  to 
direct  &  further  develop  (asisted  by  a 
faculty  staff  student  committee)  its 
Women's  Studies  Program.  Candidates 
should  have  a  Ph.D.  degree  or  its 
equivalent,  prior  involvement  in  activities 
related  to  Women's  Studies  (e.g., 
teaching,  publications,  administrative 
experience,  leadership  in  public  or 
professional  associations,  participation  in 
feminist  groups),  and  qualifications 
suited  for  a  tenure  track  appointment 
within  an  academic  department  at  the 
University.  Position  available  September 
1,  1979.  Applicants  should  submit  a 
curriculum  vitae,  and  the  names  and  ad- 
dresses of  at  least  three  references  to: 
Women's  Studies  Search  Committee, 
Box  U-86,  University  of  Connecticut, 
Storrs,  CT  06268.  An  Equal  Opportunity 
Employer. 


If  you  would  like  to  subscribe  or 
make  a  contribution  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  please  fill  out  the 
coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money 
order  to: 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
P.O.  Box  8843 
Washington,  D.C.  20003 

D  $9.00/year  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

□  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor 

□  $10.00/year    for    Canada    and 
Mexico 

□  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

D  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur- 
face 
O  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air 

□  $3.35/single  issues 

□  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 
Name 


Address 


Zip 


If  you  would  like  to  subscribe  or 
make  a  contribution  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  please  fill  out  the 
coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money 
order  to: 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
P.O.  Box  8843 
Washington,  D.C.  20003 

□  $9.00/year  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

□  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor 

□  $10.00/year    for    Canada    and 
Mexico 

□  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

□  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur- 
face 

□  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air 

□  $3.35/single  issues 

D  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 
Name 


Address 


Zip 


Quest/95 


A  limited  offer 
of  feminist  classics. 


Volumes  I  and  II  of  Quest:  a  feminist  quarter- 
ly, in  convenient,  attractive,  durable  box  bind- 
ers for  efficient  research,  easy  reference,  safe- 
keeping. 

Quest  articulates  and  explores  feminist  issues, 
in  original  essays  and  articles  by  leading  theor- 
ists and  activists,  including: 

Charlotte  Bunch  Mary  Daly 


Rita  Mae  Brown 

Z  Budapest 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Joanna  Russ 

Karen  Kollias 

Bertha  Harris 

Alice  Quinn 

Cynthia  Washington 

Lucia  Valeska 

Linda  Phelps 

Sandra  Flowers 

Jackie  St.  Joan 

Sally  Gearhart 

Joan  Landes 

Volume  I,  1974-75:  Processes  of  Change;* 
Money,  Fame  &  Power;  Selfhood  of  Women;  Wo- 
men &  Spirituality. 

Volume  II,  1975-76:  Future  Visions  &  Fanta- 
sies; Theories  of  Revolution;*  Organizations  & 
Strategies;  Leadership. 


To  order,  fill  in  coupon  and  send  check  to:  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C. 
20003. 

□  Please  send  Vol.  I  at  $25.00 

□  Please  send  Vol.  II  at  $25.00 

D  Please  send  Vol.  I  &  II  at  $45.00 

Name 

Address    

Zip    


•These  issues  available  only  in  complete  sets. 


Notes  For  Prospective  Contributors 

About  one  year  before  an  issue  comes  off  the  presses,  a  theme 
development  committee,  composed  of  some  Quest  staff  members  and 
other  interested  women  prepares  a  list  of  questions  and  ideas  which  we 
hope  that  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  The  list  is  available  to  anyone 
who  is  interested  in  submitting  manuscripts,  outlines  for  potential  ar- 
ticles, poetry,  graphics,  etc.  (Please  let  us  know  if  you  want  to  receive 
these  lists  routinely  or  only  for  one  theme  in  particular,  and  if  the  latter, 
indicate  which  theme.)  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out 
writers  and  artists  known  to  have  worked  on  issues  related  to  our 
themes. 

All  material  submitted  to  Quest  is  reviewed  by  a  theme  development 
committee  or  by  at  least  two  staff  members.  If  it  is  not  appropriate  for 
Quest  purposes,  the  manuscript  or  graphic  is  returned,  provided  it  was 
sent  with  a  stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  If  a  manuscript  is 
accepted  for  publication,  it  is  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor,  who  is 
responsible  for  working  with  the  author  through  any  processes  of 
rewriting  or  editing  required.  Editing  and  rewriting  decisions  include 
gathering  comments  and  suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and 
development  committee  members.  Our  goal  in  editing  is  clarity; 
whatever  the  author  is  saying,  we  work  to  make  it  as  clear  and  concise  as 
possible.  Authors  always  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review  and 
approval  before  publication. 

In  each  issue,  we  try  to  provide  a  balance  of  different  styles  of  writing, 
but  often  we  do  not  receive  enough  variety  in  the  manuscripts  submitted 
to  us.  It  is  important  to  exchange  our  stories,  our  growth,  our  changes, 
and  our  understanding.  But  often  such  exchanges  take  place  in  verbal 
dialogue  and  analysis  that  never  gets  on  paper.  While  writing  is  not  easy 
for  most  women,  our  challenge  is  to  find  ways  to  express  our 
experiences  and  our  analysis  so  that  they  aid  us  more  in  changing  socie- 
ty. We  encourage  you,  our  readers,  to  submit  a  variety  of  types  of  writing 

—  essays,  journalistic  approaches,  interviews,  tapes  of  discussions,  etc. 

—  so  that  all  of  us  can  learn  more  from  each  other  as  individuals  and  as  a 
movement. 


Articles  should  be  double  spaced  and  submitted  in  duplicate  (original 
plus  one  copy).  Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10 
typewritten  pages)  for  reviews,  responses,  and  short  articles,  to,  at  most, 
7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where  appropriate, 
bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  typed  at  the  end  of  the  article.  All 
manuscripts,  poems,  and  graphics  should  be  original,  unpublished 
material  and  must  be  accompanied  by  a  stamped,  self-addressed 
envelope.  Write  to  us  for  copy  deadlines. 


Future  Issues 

WOMEN  IN  THEIR  COMMUNITIES 

Vol.  IV,  No.  4 

A  critical  aspect  of  community  is  affinity  or  identification.  A  com- 
munity is  a  group  of  people  who  share  something.  Some  of  the  things 
shared  are  common  place,  common  work,  and/or  common  perception. 
This  issue  will  explore  how  we  define  our  communities;  how  they 
develop  and  interact;  how  well  they  serve  women  working  on  common 
goals,  and  how  we  relate  as  individual  women  within  them. 

KALEIDOSCOPE  THREE 

Vol.  V,  No.  1 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  responses  to  our  first  four  years  of  publication 
and  for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics 
and  ideas  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous  articles. 

THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  REVOLUTION 

Vol.  V,  No.  2 

What  is  a  feminist  revolutionary?  How  do  we  make  choices  about  life, 
work,  and  politics?  Where  does  our  sustenance  for  revolutionary  work 
come  from?  How  do  we  relate  individual  values  to  revolutionary  values? 
Each  of  us  makes  choices  and  decisions  which  reflect  our  basic  values 
about  our  roles  as  individuals  in  making  a  feminist  revolution.  The  pur- 
pose of  this  issue  is  to  make  explicit  these  unspoken  underpinnings  of 
our  lives. 

STRUCTURES  FOR  LIVING 

Vol.  V,  No.  3 

The  family:  its  health,  possibilities  and  limitations  —  has  become  an 
issue  of  intense  political  dispute.  The  right  blames  feminism  for  the 
"decline"  of  the  family;  Marxists  blame  Capitalism.  Some  suggest  a 
"national  family  policy";  others  that  the  "helping  professions"  should 
leave  the  family  alone.  The  family  is  seen  as  a  haven  from  a  heartless 
world,  as  a  suffocating  neurosis-inducing  cage;  or  as  the  basis  for 
women's  oppression  and  the  root  of  patriarchy.  This  issue  of  Quest  will 
focus  on  the  family  and  the  disputes  surrounding  it. 


