QUEST 

a  feminist  quarterly 


$2. 75       v     " 


Rape,  Racism  &  Reality 


Wives  MAyi  How 

Mothers         J  ^         Lesbian 

Prostitutes  ^"  Mothers 


in  Ancient     A      LAj  Fight 

Greece  Back 


Waitresses:  Sandwiched  Between 
the  Capitalist  and  the  Patriarch 

KALEIDOSCOPE  THREE 


Quest  Communique 


As  all  of  you  know,  Quest  has  not  published  since  "Women  in  Their 
Communities"  (Vol.  4,  No.  4).  Quest  has  faced  an  ever  increasing  finan- 
cial deficit  and  we  are  not  alone  in  this  predicament.  While  there  is  small 
solace  in  knowing  that  our  difficulties  are  not  unique,  we  are  saddened 
that  feminist  press  publications  are  in  jeopardy.  We  encourage  all  our 
readers  to  consider  subscribing  to  publications  you  now  pick  up  in  local 
bookstores.  While  bookstore  distribution  is  an  essential  facet  of  reaching 
out  to  new  readers,  subscription  income  is  the  mainstay  of  our  viability. 

But  financial  insecurity  was  not  our  only  problem  —  we  also  experienc- 
ed the  internal  turmoil  of  staff  changes.  Many  staffers  who  had  been  with 
Quest  since  its  founding  have  moved  on  to  other  arenas.  The  names  of 
both  old  and  new  staff  appear  on  this  issue's  masthead  because  each  of  us 
had  a  role  in  shaping  "Kaleidoscope  III."  "Structures  for  Living"  will 
reflect  the  staff  changes  (including  a  new  category  of  "Contributing  Edi- 
tors"). This  has  been  a  painful  yet  exhilarating  process  for  us  all:  for 
those  who  left,  there  is  sadness  in  leaving  old  ties  and  the  excitement  of 
new  challenges;  for  those  of  us  who  have  worked  with  the  original  staff, 
there  is  personal  loss  but  also  the  excitement  of  reshaping  the  journal. 
New  staff  brings  energy,  ideas,  skills  and  enthusiasm. 

We  have  developed  some  new  ideas  and  structures.  It  took  us  time  to 
complete  the  process  of  reforming  a  cohesive  group.  We  are,  after  all,  a 
feminist  political  theory  project,  and,  after  we  worked  through  questions 
of  format  and  organizational  structure  and  administration,  we  needed  to 
articulate  our  common  political  goals  and  priorities.  We  feel  good  about 
the  decisions  we  have  made,  and  hope  you  will  agree. 

Since  last  October,  we  have  discussed  ways  to  alter  Quest's  format, 
content  and  copy  solicitation  process  to  further  our  goals,  to  reflect  the 
changing  political  climate,  and  to  continue  satisfying  our  political  needs 
and  those  of  our  readership.  We  wanted  to  ensure  that  we  reflected  in  our 
content  the  recognition  that  change  is  a  process.  And,  while  we  have  always 
been  committed  to  reaching  feminists  in  other  movements  as  well  as  in  the 
autonomous  feminist  movement,  the  reality  is  that  our  readers  are  primari- 
ly women  from  the  autonomous  feminist  movement.  We  recognized  a 
need  to  experiment  with  different  forms  of  outreach.  We  are  moving  away 
from  a  predominantly  theme  orientation  and  are  introducing  several  new 
departments  as  a  way  to  vary  our  article  style  and  broaden  content.  Some 
of  the  new  departments  you  will  see  in  future  issues  are:  "Coalition  Build- 
ing," "Quest  Guest,"  "Media  and  Culture,"  and  "Quest  Reviews."  In 
addition,  we  will  continue  departments  introduced  in  past  issues:  "Organ- 
izers' Dialogue,"  "Critique  and  Commentary,"  and  "Letters." 

(continued  inside  back  cover) 


QUEST 

a  feimiiiist 


Vol.  V,  No.  1 
Summer,  1979 


KALEIDOSCOPE    THREE 

Contents 


INTRODUCTION 

Sidney  Oliver 

FEMINISM  AND  EDUCATION 

Charlotte  Bunch,  Jane  Flax,  Jo  Freeman 

LETTERS 

RAPE,  RACISM  &  REALITY 

Deb  Friedman 

ORGANIZERS  DIALOGUE:  Lesbian 
Mothers  Fight  Back 

Nan  Hunter  &  Nancy  Po/ikoff; 
Ellen  Agger  &  Francie  Wyland; 
Geraldine  Cole,  Pam  Keeley, 
&  Joan  Pitell;  Julia  Fitz-Randolph 

MERCENARY  PROSTITUTION  in  ANCIENT 
GREECE 

Wendy  Wells 


8 

38 
40 

54 


WAITRESSING 
OUR  WORK 

Susan  Woods 


TAKING  CONTROL  of 


76 


82 


©Copyright  1979  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly ,  Inc.  All 
rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly 
prohibited.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four 
times  a  year  in  January,  April,  July  and  October  by  Quest: 
a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  2000  P  St.  N.W.,  Washington, 
D.C.,  20036,  U.S.A.  Second  class  postage  paid  at  Washing- 
ton, D.C.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  is  a  tax  exempt, 
non-profit  organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington, 
D.C.  20003. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individu- 
als; $10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  over- 
seas surface,  $14.50/year  overseas  air;  $25.00/year  to  insti- 
tutions, $3.35/all  single  issues.  Advertising  rates,  dead- 
lines and  bookstore  ordering  information  available  upon 
request. 
ISSN  0098-955  X 


TENURE 


DENIED. 


Staff 

Associates 

Managing  Editor 

Sarah  Begus 

Arleen  Rogan 

Carla  Brewington 
Denise  Davis 

Design  Editors 

Jane  Dolkart 

Alexa  Freeman 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Sara  Shepard 

Marilyn  Lerch 
Isabelle  Thabault 

Editors 

Tracy  Thiele 

Dorothy  Allison 

Cynthia  Washington 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Helen  Young 

Jackie  MacMillan 

Beverly  Manick 

Mary-Helen  Mautner 

Sidney  Oliver 

Gerri  Traina 

Assistants 

Jane  Flax 

Lynn 

Gorchov 

Jayne 

Loader 

Karen  Swanson 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  political  analy- 
sis and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading 
to  new  directions  for  the  women's  movement,  possibly  including  such  concrete 
forms  as  regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization,  or  a  political 
party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the  movement  several  years 
and  have  reached  a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have 
been  through  various  ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle  brought  us? 
Closer  to  the  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence  against  women?  Closer  to  self- 
determination  for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect 
that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of 
seeking. 


iirX^ 


Xr^ 


o.*k    &<*  v^-e  -Ft-nJ 


r 


graphic  by  Sara  Shepard 


tIW 


ODUC 


By  SIDNEY  OLIVER 

This  third  "Kaleidoscope"  is  some- 
what unusual.  Though  it  retains  the 
non-theme  approach  which  distin- 
guishes "Kaleidoscope"  issues  of  past 
years,  it  seems  to  us  that  its  articles  are 
related,  since  in  some  way  each  re- 
veals the  importance  of  theory  in  rela- 
tion to  action,  and  the  role  of  action 
in  generating  theory.  While  it  is  true 
that  every  article  we  publish  is  selected 
because  it  does  reflect  some  degree  of 
conscious  grappling  with  the  mutual 
influence  of  theory  and  direct  experi- 
ence, not  since  Volume  II  (on  visions, 
theories  and  organizations  for  radical 
change),  has  this  concept  so  clearly 
emerged. 

When  the  frenzy  of  reading,  weigh- 
ing and  choosing  manuscripts  subsided 
and  we  were  able  to  evaluate  our  selec- 
tions, the  theory /action  motif  surfac- 
ed. We  are  enthusiastic  about  that, 
and  want  to  share  our  enthusiasm  with 
you.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  make  the 
interplay  of  theory  and  action  an  ex- 
plicit item  for  analysis— one  very  im- 
portant thing.  It  is  another  to  find 
that  interrelationship  woven  through 
dialogue  on  many  different  subjects. 
This  is  evidence  that,  whatever  our  fo- 
cus, our  lives  and  our  ideas  are  being 
synthesized.  We  think  this  recognition 
can  sustain  and  motivate  us  when  the 


relevance  of  feminism  is  questioned 
and  the  results  of  years  of  effort  are 
difficult  to  see. 

Two  articles  in  this  issue  provide 
orientation.  Charlotte  Bunch  concen- 
trates on  specific  methods  of  teaching 
feminists  how  to  theorize.  One  of  her 
main  points  is  that  while  it  is  not  easy 
to  produce  or  express  theory,  often 
our  own  myths  about  theorizing  are 
responsible  for  our  difficulties  with  it. 
Bunch  takes  on  two  unpopular  reali- 
ties: that  many  of  us  are  as  frankly 
afraid  of  theory  and  unsure  of  its  rele- 
vance (or  meaning)  as  we  are  doubtful 
of  our  ability  to  do  it;  and  that  skill  in 
reading  and  writing  is  essential  if  our 
belief  in  a  politics  of  experience,  per- 
colated upward  and  outward,  is  to  be 
realized.  Such  communication  is  the 
means  we  have  not  only  of  sharing  our 
insights,  but  also  of  testing  which  of 
them  has  universal  meaning.  Along 
with  experience,  skilled  communica- 
tion is  the  key  to  generating  conscious 
theory.  In  showing  theory  to  be 
teachable  and  not  mystical,  and  in 
providing  a  model  for  developing 
theory,  Bunch's  article  acts  out  the 
conviction  that  power— to  think,  act, 
refine,  communicate  and  effect  the 
spiral  of  change— is  not  a  limited 
commodity.  Instead,  this  potential  is 
inherent  in  each  of  us. 

Jane  Flax's  article  is  a  helpful  com- 


AlQuest,  vol.  V.  no.  1 ,  summer,  1 979 


plement  to  Bunch's  because  it  offers  a 
specific  theory.  Prior  questions  lie  be- 
hind the  assumptions  Flax  suggests  are 
basic  to  radical  feminist  theory,  ques- 
tions that  come  from  observing  and 
then  describing  real  relations  between 
women  and  men.  This  set  of  questions 
Flax  uses  to  develop  her  analysis  is  al- 
so an  alternative  model  for  how  to 
generate  theory.  In  other  words,  Flax 
provides  one  outcome,  in  rough  out- 
lines, of  analysis  applied  to  women 
through  history  and  arrives  at  one  ver- 
sion of  the  "initial  tenets"  characteriz- 
ing theory.  Taken  together,  Bunch 
and  Flax  give  some  indication  of  how 
the  questions  we  ask  help  shape  the 
answers  we  find. 

In  many  ways,  this  formative  rela- 
tion between  questions  and  their  an- 
swers is  clearest  in  the  articles  by  Jo 
Freeman  and  Susan  Woods.  As  Free- 
man notes,  "how  you  stand  depends 
on  where  you  sit."  Where  you  sit 
shapes  the  problems  you  see,  the  prior- 
ities you  select,  the  frame  of  reference 
you  work  within,  and  the  array  of 
strategies  from  which  you  choose. 

Freeman's  focus  on  the  university, 
and  her  implicit  assumption  that  its 
present  form  is  a  given,  direct  her 
squarely  toward  one  group  of  feminist 
scholars  (among  several)  and  also  to 
the  conclusion  that  feminist  scholars 
in  the  academy  have  only  two  options 
in  relation  to  the  university.  Free- 
man's experience  and  her  assumptions 
about  change  thus  shape  her  theoreti- 
cal framework. 

Because  Freeman  observes  the  uni- 
versity for  herself,  dismissing  conven- 
tional notions  about  it  as  unproved, 
she  is  able  to  pierce  the  university's 
mantle  of  glory  and  show  that  it  is  a 
prestige  factory  rather  than  midwife  to 
powerful  ideas.    She  notes  (along  with 


Bunch  and  Flax)  that  theory  is  not  a 
value-free  pursuit,  thus  freeing  us  from 
an  impossible  as  well  as  needless  bur- 
den. The  idea  that  disinterested  theor- 
izing is  possible  and  desirable,  just 
doesn't  reflect  reality.  But  neither 
writer  points  out  that  this  insistence 
on  "objectivity"  has  been  a  standard 
weapon  in  the  anti-feminist  arsenal. 
Applied  only  to  oppressed  groups,  it 
constitutes  a  biased  standard  for  defin- 
ing "scholarship,"  and  is  used  within 
and  without  the  university  to  neutral- 
ize and  debunk  radical  thought. 

Susan  Woods  demonstrates  the  re- 
lation between  experience  and  theory 
in  a  different  way.  By  rejecting  the 
view  that  the  present  restaurant  labor 
structure  is  permanent,  she  finds  op- 
tions not  available  in  Freeman's  ap- 
proach to  the  university.  It  seems  fa- 
cile to  say  that  radical  change  begins 
with  the  assumption  that  change  is 
possible.  But  strategies  resulting  from 
this  and  the  opposing  view  differ  pri- 
marily because  the  assumption  of 
change  often  forces  critical  observa- 
tion and  a  reasoned  strategy,  while  the 
assumption  of  permanence  yields  bas- 
cally  the  "like-it-or-leave-it"  approach. 

Woods  also  gives  a  good  object  les- 
son: her  clear  appraisal  of  the  difficult 
contradictions  involved  in  the  reality 
of  waitressing  is  a  first  step  toward  the 
development  of  an  organizing  strategy. 
Her  approach  underscores  the  fact  that 
if  our  theories  are  to  endure  and  ac- 
complish anything,  they  have  to  mir- 
ror what  we  see,  not  what  we  'need' 
to  see.  Thus  her  analysis  recalls  Flax 
in  the  conclusion  "that  sexism  is  not  a 
subset  of  classism  or  any  other  con- 
flict. 

The  "Organizers'  Dialogue"  feature 
was  instituted  to  communicate  poten- 
tially differing  experiences  for  the  re- 


lntroduction/5 


ciprocal  purposes  of  refining  our  the- 
ory and  focusing  our  activism.  This 
series  deals  with  lesbian  mother  custo- 
dy defense  from  four  perspectives:  the 
legal;  the  fiscal;  the  national;  and  the 
theoretical.  This  sometimes  contra- 
dictory dialogue  explores  most  of  the 
fundamental  questions  involved— e.g., 
whether  there  is  legal  precedent  value 
and  how  the  political  cost/benefit  ra- 
tio ought  to  be  weighed. 

Wendy  Wells's  piece  on  the  origins 
of  mercenary  prostitution  presents  yet 
another  sort  of  theorizing.  Its  focus  is 
on  the  remote  past,  and  therefore  on 
circumstances  impossible  to  experi- 
ence directly.  It  makes  clear  that 
when  we  say  that  action  and  theory 
are  inseparable,  we  are  not  saying  that 
the  only  true  source  of  theory  is  the 
present  time.  Theory  as  generated  by 
history  uses  what  is  known  about  the 
past  in  the  way  that  examinations  of 
the  present  use  first-hand  action  and 
experience.  The  chore  for  both  is  to 
build  an  analytical  structure  in  which 
all  relevant,  known  characteristics  can 
logically  coexist,  and  which  can  be 
confirmed  by  prior  and  succeeding  de- 
velopments. Both  are  hypotheses, 
subject  to  revision. 

Apart  from  providing  an  example 
of  another  approach  to  theory,  Wells's 
contribution  is  her  implied  challenge 
to  others  to  continue  her  investiga- 
tion. She  is,  and  we  are,  hampered  in 
this  by  distance  and  the  fact  that  his- 
tory is  the  study  of  men  rather  than 
the  chronicle  of  human  experience. 

Finally,  Deb  Friedman's  retrospec- 
tive discussion  of  anti-rape  organizing 
and  racism  makes  one  additional  point 
in  the  relation  of  theory  to  action. 
Friedman  clarifies  the  truth  that  no 
single  "real  life"  basis  is  adequate  for 
generating  theories  or  policies  that  will 


affect  all.  In  this  respect,  anti-rape  or- 
ganizing is  an  arena  in  which  the  seri- 
ous problems  involved  in  making  fem- 
inism a  world  view  can  be  productively 
examined.  The  challenge  to  feminism 
is  to  evolve  a  global  analysis  which  is 
distinctive  and  cohesive  enough  to 
constitute  a  new  world  view;  that 
much  is  clear.  But  it  must  also  honor 
in  application  the  different  and  some- 
times conflicting  needs  and  ideals  that 
arise  from  class,  race,  ethnic,  national 
and  other  divergent  experiences.  Fried- 
man's analysis  goes  further,  to  show 
that  elimination  of  racism,  for  ex- 
ample, or  of  sexism,  will  not  suffice. 
Here  she  points  to  the  tendency  of 
many  outside  feminism  not  to  trouble 
to  inform  themselves  of  the  depth  and 
breadth  of  the  movement  before  they 
take  it  to  task,  and  she  censures  the 
tendency  in  many  feminists  to  find 
one  "line"  and  beat  it  to  death. 

What,  then,  does  this  issue  con- 
clude? Our  lives  and  our  theories  are 
being  synthesized.  The  daily  experi- 
ence of  the  inadequacies  and  over- 
simplifications of  our  theory  should 
not  obscure  our  daily  victories,  but 
rather  should  be  seen  as  evidence  that 
our  analyses  are  being  continuously 
honed.  The  revolutionary  responsibili- 
ty is  chiefly  to  insure  that  that  spiral 
of  change  persists.  This  means  that  we 
recognize  individually  and  collectively 
that  the  question  is  not  whether  we 
have  theories,  but  what  those  theories 
are,  and  that  we  continue  to  streng- 
then our  capacity  as  individuals  to  ex- 
amine, apply,  refine  and  communicate 
them. 

Sidney  Oliver  is  currently  exploring 
the  theoretical  similarities  in  feminism, 
appropriate  technology,  and  environ- 
mental ism. 


6/Quest 


FEMINISM 

and  EDUCATION 


graphics  by  Constance  Samaras 


Not  By  Degrees 


By  CHARLOTTE  BUNCH 

This  article  is  excerpted  with  per- 
mission, from  the  book,  Not  By  De- 
grees: Essays  on  Feminist  Educa- 
tion, edited  by  Charlotte  Bunch,  to 
be  published  by  Daughters,  Inc.  in 
1979. 

The  development  of  feminist  theory 
and  a  rigorous  analysis  of  society 
are  more  important  for  us  today  than 
ever  before.  Feminists  need  to  under- 
stand the  forces  working  against  us, 
as  well  as  to  analyze  our  experiences 
as  a  movement,  if  we  are  to  survive 
the  anti-woman  backlash  and  keep 
our  visions  alive.  When  feminists 
despair,  burn  out,  or  give  up,  it  is 
often  because  the  forces  against  us 
are  strong  and  because  our  theo- 
retical framework  does  not  give  us 
a  sense  of  how  individual  activities 
contribute  to  significant  victories  in 
the  future.  A  solid  feminist  theory 
would  help  us  understand  present 
events  in  a  way  that  would  enable 
us  to  develop  the  visions  and  plans 
for   change   that   sustain   people  en- 


gaged in  day-to-day  political  ac- 
tivity. 

When  I  left  the  university  to  do 
full-time  work  in  "the  movement" 
in  the  1960s,  it  didn't  occur  to  me 
that  I  would  return  one  day  to  teach 
or  write  feminist  theory.  Like  many 
others  who  chose  to  become  move- 
ment activists  then,  I  felt  that  I  was 
leaving  behind  not  only  the  academic 
world,  but  also  what  I  saw  as  irrele- 
vant theorizing.  However,  as  I  ex- 
perienced the  problems  of  move- 
ment organizing  when  an  overall  an- 
alysis was  lacking,  felt  the  frustration 
of  conflicts  where  issues  were  not 
clear,  and  observed  people  dropping 
out  of  political  activity,  I  became 
aware  of  the  critical  role  of  theory 
in  the  movement.  I  began  to  see  fem- 
inist theory  not  as  academic,  but  as  a 
process  based  on  understanding  and 
advancing  the  activist  movement. 

While  my  growing  sense  of  the  im- 
portance of  theory  applied  to  all  my 
feminist  work,  the  urgency  that  I 
felt  about  it  became  clearest  during 
my  involvement  with  lesbian-femin- 
ism. When  the  lesbian  issue  became 


Feminism  and  Education/7 


a  major  controversy  in  the  women's 
movement  in  the  early  1970s,  I 
realized  that,  in  order  for  lesbians 
to  function  openly,  we  would  have 
to  understand  why  there  was  so 
much  resistance  to  this  issue.  It  was 
not  enough  to  document  discrimina- 
tion against  homosexuals  or  to  ap- 
peal to  fairness.  We  had  to  figure  out 
why  lesbianism  was  taboo,  why  it 
was  a  threat  to  feminists,  and  then 
devise  strategies  accordingly.  I  saw 
that  my  life  as  a  lesbian  in  the  move- 
ment depended  on,  among  other 
things,  the  development  of  a  theory 
that  would  explain  our  immediate 
conflicts  in  the  context  of  a  long- 
term  view  of  feminism.  This  theore- 
tical perspective  developed  along 
with  our  activism,  but  it  required  us 
consciously  to  ask  certain  questions, 
look  at  our  experiences  in  and  out  of 
the  movement,  and  to  look  at  exist- 
ing feminist  theory  in  new  ways. 
Through  this  process,  new  interpreta- 
tions of  the  relationship  between  les- 
bianism and  feminism,  and  new  strat- 
egies for  ending  lesbian  oppression 
emerged. 


THE 
DRY 


UNIST...  FEMINIST...  FEMi* 


For  example,  as  we  examined  femi- 
nists' fear  of  being  called  "lesbians," 
we  were  able  to  confront  directly 
the  role  that  such  name-calling 
played  in  the  oppression  of  all  wo- 
men. Having  a  theory  about  lesbian 
oppression  did  not  tell  us  what  to 
do  tactically,  but  it  did  provide  a 
framework  for  understanding  situa- 
tions, for  placing  them  in  a  broader 
context,  and  for  evaluating  possible 
courses  of  action.  This  experience 
showed  me  that  theory  was  not  sim- 
ply intellectually  interesting,  but 
was  crucial  to  the  survival  of  fem- 
inism. 

The  Functions  of  Feminist  Theory 

Theory  enables  us  to  see  immediate 
needs  in  terms  of  long-range  goals 
and  an  overall  perspective  on  the 
world  J  It  thus  gives  us  a  framework 
for  evaluating  various  strategies  in 
both  the  long  and  the  short  run 
and  for  seeing  the  types  of  changes 
that  they  are  likely  to  produce. 
Theory  is  not  just  a  body  of  facts  or 
a  set  of  personal  opinions.  It  involves 
explanations  and  hypotheses  that  are 
based  on  available  knowledge  and  ex- 
perience. It  is  also  dependent  on  con- 
jecture and  insight  about  how  to 
interpret  those  facts  and  experiences 
and  their  significance. 

No  theory  is  totally  "objective," 
since  it  reflects  the  interests,  values, 
and  assumptions  of  those  who  cre- 
ated it.  Feminist  theory  relies  on  the 
underlying  assumption  that  it  will  aid 
in  the  liberation  of  women.  Feminist 
theory,  therefore,  is  not  an  unen- 
gaged study  of  women,  but  is  an  ef- 
fort to  bring  insights  from  the  move- 
ment and  from  various  female  ex- 
periences together  with  research  and 


8/Quest,  vol.  V.  no.  1,  summer,  1979 


data-gathering,  to  produce  new  ap- 
proaches to  understanding  and  end- 
ing female  oppression. 

While  feminist  theory  begins  with 
the  immediate  need  to  end  women's 
oppression,  it  is  also  a  way  of  viewing 
the  world.  Feminism  is  an  entire 
world  view  or  gestalt,  not  just  a  laun- 
dry list  of  "women's  issues."  Femi- 
nist theory  provides  a  basis  for  un- 
derstanding every  area  of  our  lives, 
and  a  feminist  perspective  can  af- 
fect the  world  politically,  culturally, 
economically,  and  spiritually.  The 
initial  tenets  of  feminism  have  al- 
ready been  established— the  idea 
that  power  is  based  on  gender  dif- 
ferences and  that  men's  illegiti- 
mate power  over  women  taints 
all  aspects  of  society,  for  instance. 
But  now  we  face  the  arduous  task 
of  systematically  working  through 
these  ideas,  fleshing  them  out  and 
discovering  new  ones. 

When  the  development  of  feminist 
theory  seems  too  slow  for  the  changes 
that  we  seek,  feminists  are  tempted 
to  submerge  our  insights  into  one  of 
the  century's  two  dominant  progres- 
sive theories  of  reality  and  change: 
democratic  liberalism,  or  Marxist  so- 
cialism. 2  However,  the  limitations  of 
both  of  these  systems  are  increas- 
ingly obvious,  and  while  feminism 
can  learn  from  both  of  them,  it 
must  not  be  tied  to  either,  because 
its  greatest  strength  lies  in  pro- 
viding an  alternative  view  of  the 
world. 

The  full  implications  of  feminism 
will  evolve  over  time,  as  we  organize, 
experiment,  think,  analyze,  and  re- 
vise our  ideas  and  strategies  in  light 
of  our  experiences.  No  theory  emer- 
ges in  full  detail  overnight;  the  domi- 
nant  theories   of  our  day  have  ex- 


panded and  changed  over  many  dec- 
ades. That  it  will  take  time  should 
not  discourage  us.  That  we  might 
fail  to  pursue  our  ideas-given  the 
enormous  need  for  them  in  society 
today— is  unconscionable. 

Because  feminist  theory  is  still 
emerging  and  does  not  have  agreed- 
upon  answers  (or  even  approaches  to 
many  questions),  it  is  difficult  to 
work  out  strategies  based  on  that 
theory.  This  can  lead  feminists  to 
rely  on  the  other  theories  of  change 
or  to  fall  into  the  "any  action/no  ac- 
tion" bind.  When  caught  in  this  bind, 
one  may  go  ahead  with  action— any 
action— for  its  own  sake,  or  be  para- 
lyzed, taking  no  action  for  lack  of  a 
sense  of  what  is  "right."  To  escape 
this  bind,  we  must  remember  that 
we  do  not  need,  and  indeed  never 
will  have,  all  the  answers  before 
we  act,  and  that  it  is  often  only 
through  taking  action  that  we  can 
discover  some  of  them.  The  purpose 
of  theory,  then,  is  not  to  provide 
a  pat  set  of  answers  about  what  to 
do,  but  to  guide  us  in  sorting  out 
options,  and  to  keep  us  out  of  the 
"any  action/no  action"  bind.  Theory 
also  keeps  us  aware  of  the  questions 
that  need  to  be  asked,  so  that  what 
we  learn  in  each  activity  will  lead 
to  more  effective  strategies  in  the 
future.  Theory  thus  both  grows  out 
of  and  guides  activism  in  a  contin- 
uous, spiraling  process. 

In  pursuing  feminist  theory  as  an 
activist,  I  have  become  increasingly 
aware  of  the  need  to  demystify  it. 
Theory  is  not  something  set  apart 
from  our  lives.  Our  assumptions 
about  reality  and  change  influence 
our  actions  constantly.  The  question 
is  not  whether  we  have  a  theory, 
but   how   aware    we   are   of  the  as- 


Feminism  and  Education/9 


sumptions  behind  our  actions,  and 
how  conscious  we  are  of  the  choices 
we  make— daily— among  different 
theories.  For  example,  when  we 
decide  whether  to  put  our  ener- 
gies into  a  rape  crisis  center  or  in- 
to efforts  to  change  rape  laws,  we 
are  acting  according  to  certain 
theories  about  how  service  projects 
and  legislation  affect  change.  These 
theories  may  be  implicit  or  explicit 
but  they  are  always  there. 

A  Model  for  Theory 

Theory  doesn't  necessarily  progress 
in  a  linear  fashion,  but  examining 
its  components  is  useful  in  under- 
standing existing  political  theory  as 
well  as  in  developing  new  insights. 
In  the  model  I  have  developed,  I 
divide  theory  into  four  interrelated 
parts:  description,  analysis,  vision, 
and  strategy. 

1)  Description:  Describing  what 
exists  may  sound  simple,  but  the 
choices  that  we  make  about  inter- 
preting and  naming  reality  provide 
the  basis  for  the  rest  of  our  theory. 
Changing  people's  perceptions  of  the 
world  through  new  descriptions  of 
reality  is  usually  a  prerequisite  for  al- 
tering that  reality.  For  example,  15 
years  ago,  few  people  would  say  that 
women  in  the  US  are  oppressed.  To- 
day the  oppression  of  women  is  ac- 
knowledged by  a  vast  number  of 
people,  primarily  because  of  femi- 
nist work  which  described  that  op- 
pression in  a  number  of  ways.' This 
work  has  involved  consciousness- 
raising  as  well  as  gathering  and  in- 
terpreting facts  about  women  in 
order  to  substantiate  our  assertions. 
Description  is  necessary  for  all 
theory;  unfortunately  for  feminism, 


much  of  our  work  has  not  yet  gone 
beyond  this  point. 

2)  Analysis:  Analyzing  why  that 
reality  exists  involves  determining 
its  origins  and  the  reasons  for  its 
perpetuation.  This  is  perhaps  the 
most  complex  task  of  theory  and  is 
often  seen  as  its  entire  function.  In 
seeking  to  understand  the  sources  of 
women's  oppression  and  why  it  is 
perpetuated,  we  have  to  examine  bio- 
logy, economics,  psychology,  sexu- 
ality, and  so  on.  We  must  also  look 
at  what  groups  and  institutions  bene- 
fit from  oppression,  and  why  they 
will  therefore  strive  to  maintain  it. 
Analyzing  why  women  are  oppressed 
involves  such  things  as  sorting  out 
how  the  forms  of  oppression  change 
over  time  while  the  basic  fact  of  op- 
pression remains,  or  probing  how  the 
forms  of  oppression  vary  in  different 
cultures  while  there  are  cross  cul- 
tural similarities. 

Analysis  of  why  something  happens 
sometimes  gets  short-circuited  by  the 
temptation  to  ascribe  everything  to 
one  single  factor,  such  as  capitalism 
or  motherhood.  In  developing  an  anal- 
lysis,  I  find  that  it  is  useful  to  focus 
initially  on  a  phenomenon  in  a  limi- 
ted context  and  consider  a  wide  range 
of  factors  that  may  affect  it.  Then, 
as  that  context  is  understood,  the 
analysis  can  be  expanded.  Above 
all,  we  need  not  feel  that  we  must 
answer  the  "why"  of  everything 
all  at  once  with  a  single  explanation. 

3)  Vision:  Determining  what  should 
exist  requires  establishing  principles 
(or  values)  and  setting  goals.  In 
taking  action  to  bring  about  change, 
we  operate  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously out  of  certain  assumptions 
about  what  is  right  or  what  we  va- 
lue    (principles),    and    out    of    our 


1  o/Quest 


sense  of  what  society  ought  to  be 
(goals).  This  aspect  of  theory  in- 
volves making  a  conscious  choice 
about  those  principles  in  order  to 
make  our  visions  and  goals  concrete. 
We  must  look  at  our  basic  assump- 
tions about  such  things  as  human 
nature  and  how  it  can  be  changed, 
about  the  relationship  of  individuals 
to  groups,  about  whether  men  and 
women  are  essentially  different,  for 
example.  We  may  choose  not  to 
address  some  of  these  issues  yet, 
but  since  every  action  carries  im- 
plicit assumptions,  we  must  be  con- 
scious of  them  so  that  we  do  not 
operate  out  of  old  theoretical  frame- 
works by  default.  The  clearer  we  are 
about  our  principles— for  example, 
whether  we  think  that  women  should 
gain  as  much  power  as  possible  in 
every  area,  or  believe,  instead,  that 
power  itself  should  be  eliminated- 
the  more  easily  we  can  set  our  long- 
term  goals.  Immediate  goals  can  then 
be  based  on  an  assessment  of  what 
can  be  accomplished  that  may  be 
short  of  our  long-term  vision,  but 
moves  toward,  not  away,  from  it. 
Visions,  principles,  and  goals  will 
change  with  experience,  but  the  more 
explicit  we  make  them,  the  more 
our  actions  can  be  not  simply  re- 
actions to  what  we  don't  like,  but 
also  directed  toward  creating  the 
society  we  want. 

4)  Strategy:  Hypothesizing  how  to 
change  what  is  to  what  should  be 
moves  directly  into  questions  of 
changing  reality.  Some  people  see 
strategy  not  as  part  of  theory,  but 
rather,  as  a  planning  process  based 
on  theory.  But  I  include  strategy 
here  in  its  broadest  sense— the 
overall  approach  one  takes  to  how  to 
accomplish     one's    goals.    The    des- 


criptive and  analytic  processes  of 
theory  help  develop  a  more  sys- 
tematic understanding  of  the  way 
things  work,  but  they  usually  do  not 
make  obvious  what  one  should  do. 
Developing  a  strategy  requires  that 
we  draw  out  the  consequences  of 
our  theory  and  suggest  general  di- 
rections for  change. 

Like  the  other  aspects  of  theory, 
this  involves  a  combination  of  in- 
formation-gathering and  creative  spe- 
culation. It  entails  making  judgments 
about  what  will  lead  to  change- 
judgments  that  are  based  both  on 
description  and  analysis  of  reality, 
and  on  visions,  principles,  and  goals. 
Developing  a  strategy  also  involves 
examining  various  tools  for  change- 
legislative,  military,  spiritual— and  de- 
termining which  are  most  effective 
in  what  situations.  There  are  many 
questions  to  consider,  such  as  what 
sectors  of  society  can  best  be  mobi- 
lized to  carry  out  which  types  of 
action.  And  in  working  out  which 
strategies  will  be  most  effective, 
the  interaction  between  developing 
theory  and  actively  experimenting 
with  it  becomes  most  clear.  For  in 
all  aspects  of  theory  development, 
theory  and  activism  continually  in- 
form and  alter  each  other. 

Using  the  Model 

This  four-part  model  for  theory 
can  be  used  in  many  ways.  In  my 
feminist  theory  classes,  we  have 
tried  to  understand  different  theories 
by  outlining  how  various  authors 
address  each  of  its  developmental 
parts.  For  example,  we  take  Shula- 
mith  Firestone's  Dialectic  of  Sex, 
and  discuss  her  approach  to  des- 
cription, analysis,  vision  and  strategy. 


Feminism  and  Education/11 


Then  we  compare  her  ideas  in  each 
area  with  those  of  other  radical  femi- 
nists, in  an  effort  to  see  the  common 
tenets  of  radical  feminism,  the  im- 
portant areas  of  disagreement,  and 
the  strategy  implications  of  those 
differences.  We  then  take  the  same 
approach  to  socialist-feminist  authors, 
compare  them  to  each  other  and  to 
radical  feminist  works,  etc. 


have  been  suggested.  These  range 
from  the  idea  that  men  fear  wo- 
men's powers  to  create  life  and  there- 
fore compensate  by  controlling  re- 
production, to  the  proposition  that 
capitalism  is  the  primary  cause,  be- 
cause it  must  control  the  number  of 
workers  produced,  to  the  view  that 
the  Catholic  Church  is  the  dominant 
perpetuator    of    this    situation,    be- 


theorv 


theory 


\BCI 


a  -i  a  a  a  a  a  a  a  a  a  n  ;<  t  a  a  >  i  a  aaaaaaaaayia 
a  ..  a  a  a  a  a  »  a     bhhbbbhbbbbhipc^cccc': 

c  v.c  ctccco-dd-trfddddriddddddHdd- 
d  »;  t!  il  (1  d  ■!  j  d  d  i  ii  a  d  d  i!  d  t  c  e  ii  e  e  e  c  i  t  »  ,'  , 
I'leeeeffeittH'teeueeeettttfefffP 

MfieceuertU'Ceetftefeeeeeuteec 
i  p  •»  e     e  f  c  f  e  f     'eeeeeef  ueee;e  e«        e 

»e«ee««      ffff'ffffffffflig     ggts-sgiu* 

;.ai«s;     r.lii  h  It  h  \i  h  i,  ii  i\  h  h  a  it  Ji  i,  U  V.  I.  K  <i  h 

h  l  '..  \  i»  i.  fa  g  fa » i  i  i  i  i  i  i ;  i  j  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  i ,  j  i  i  i  i  i ,  j  j 

« i  i  i  i i  i  i  i  i  i  i  t  i  i  i  i !  i  i  i  i  i  i  j  j  j  j  k  k  k  k k  k  III 
lini.llllimimiHMfilllUHIinmmnm 
«i  m  n.  it;  m  :it  iti  m  :n  m  m  hi  m  va  <u  ft  ft  6  u  a  n  n  n  n  : 
'»  n  II  a  a  n  ;i  n  i,  n  n  a  n  u  n  a  n  ii  h  a  n  i,  n  <i  it  n  n 
iiijijjjjiij|ji«jjjjkkk  k  kk  kk  kkkkkkknu 
kki.kkkkkkkkkkkkkk06o666666n1.1i6o 

6  •«<><>  O0009O0OO0       00      A-O.  0  Ot«««OCiip;p 

*>P?PPPPPP!)pppji(jqfii<)nqqqq(jiTrT-rr: 
•r/riiirrrtrx    trnnirntrri  '»u;rni   r . 

sssssssss     s^sssstltl     itttttltt  t  Itttti  t  . 

t  f  <  t  t  t  t  t  t  1 1  t  f  t  t  t  t  t  t  t  t  t  1 1  (  t  t  t  t  t  u  u  u  u  u  ii  •■  "i 
it  it  ».i  ii  u  u  u  u  u  u  ii  u  11  u  u  u  u  u  ••.  a  0  n  u  u  u  h  u  u  u ; 
u  u  u  v  ^  -.  v  v  \  >  v  w  »  w  w  w  w  w  w  w  w  w  w  w  «  x  v  x 

\  v  v  >  j  v  v  v  y  v  y  y  j  vy2inzniim****e. 
tf  ft  ii  ii  OE  «,  ?  <.  ?  i  !  i  !  &  &  &  *  s  •  »  »  »  <.  «  «  ,  )  )(  (  <  ; 
-I  - 


Another  way  to  use  this  approach 
to  theory  is  to  examine  possible 
ways  of  addressing  a  specific  issue 
in  terms  of  these  processes.  For  ex- 
ample, on  the  issue  of  reproductive 
freedom,  we  can  use  theoretical 
work  to  understand  the  implications 
behind  various  strategies.  Consider- 
able work  has  been  done  detailing 
the  variety  of  ways  in  which  women 
lack  control  over  reproduction,  from 
forced  sterilization  to  negligence  in 
the  development  of  contraceptives. 
Several  analyses  of  why  women  do 
not    have    control    over  our   bodies 


cause  its  control  over  reproduction 
and  matters  of  family  life  is  central 
to  its  power.  Most  analyses  also  look 
at  which  institutions  are  most  in- 
fluential and  which  are  most  vul- 
nerable to  change,  and  the  relations 
between  them— e.g.,  how  the  Cath- 
olic Church  affects  hospital  and  gov- 
ernment policies. 

There  are  considerable  differences 
of  opinion  about  how  reproduction 
should  be  treated.  Some  feminists 
argue  that  women  should  have  ab- 
solute control  over  our  bodies  and 
reproduction    at    all    times   and    in 


1 2/Quest 


all  circumstances.  Others  contend 
that  there  can  be  some  legitimate 
limits  on  an  individual  woman's 
control— for  example,  in  the  case 
of  abortion,  limiting  a  woman's 
right  to  abortion  on  demand  to  the 
first  trimester.  Some  argue  that  the 
state  should  prescribe  standards  of 
control  that  "protect"  women,  such 
as  the  requirement  of  a  30-day 
waiting  period  for  any  sterilization; 
and  still  others  hold  that  a  woman's 
control  must  be  subordinate  to  the 
obligation  of  government  to  super- 
vise overall  population  growth. 

The  practical  consequences  of  these 
differences  in  theory  become  clear 
when  strategies  for  gaining  wo- 
men's reproductive  rights  are  dis- 
cussed. Even  among  those  who  a- 
gree  that  women's  lack  of  control 
over  reproduction  is  central  to  our 
oppression,  there  are  differences  in 
strategy  based  on  differences  in  an- 
alysis and  vision.  Those  who  think 
that  the  Catholic  Church  is  the  prime 
enemy  of  women's  reproductive  rights 
may  focus  on  efforts  to  remove 
Church  influence  on  the  state,  the 
fight  against  religious  tax  exemptions, 
and  so  on,  while  those  who  see 
multinational  corporations  as  the  pri- 
mary controller  of  population  issues 
would  focus  on  them.  The  contro- 
versy among  feminists  over  whether 
having  the  government  require  a  30- 
day  waiting  period  for  all  steri- 
lizations would  protect  women  or 
further  abridge  our  rights  to  con- 
trol our  bodies,  illustrates  how  dis- 
agreement over  vision  and  goals 
leads  to  different  strategies,  and 
often  to  conflict  over  what  we  will 
demand. 

This  example,  though  simplified 
here,    illustrates    how   the   four-part 


model  in  particular,  and  theory  in 
general,  can  be  used  to  clarify  prac- 
tical political  problems.  When  we 
understand  the  basis  of  our  dis- 
agreements and  the  nature  of  the 
forces  against  us,  we  are  better 
equipped  to  come  to  some  agreement 
or  to  realize  when  compromise  may 
not  be  possible.  Theory  helps  clarify 
how  things  work  and  what  our 
choices  are,  and  thus  aids  in  deter- 
mining where  to  put  our  energies 
and  how  to  challenge  the  sources  of 
our  oppression  most  effectively. 

Theory  is  also  a  tool  for  passing 
on  the  knowledge  we  have  gained 
from  our  life  experiences  and  move- 
ment projects.  Feminists  need  to  ana- 
lyze personal  experiences  as  well 
as  political  developments— to  sort  out 
our  initial  assumptions  about  goals 
and  analysis,  to  look  at  the  strategies 
we  used  and  why,  and  to  evaluate 
the  results  in  terms  of  what  could 
be  learned  for  the  future.  Making 
such  feminist  analysis  accessible  to 
others  usually  involves  writing  it 
down,  which  brings  us  to  feminist 
education. 

Teaching  Feminist  Theory 

My  approach  to  teaching  feminist 
theory  assumes  that  it  is  part  of  an 
educational  process  that  is  connec- 
ted to  the  feminist  political  strug- 
gle. 3  As  such,  feminist  theory  un- 
derlies all  feminist  education— e.g., 
a  course  on  women  artists,  when 
taught  from  a  feminist  perspective, 
should  not  only  include  the  work 
of  particular  artists  but  also  a  politi- 
cal analysis  of  why  women's  art  has 
not  received  proper  attention.  Femi- 
nist theory  should  be  present  in  this 
way    throughout    a    feminist   curri- 


Feminism  and  Education/13 


culum,  but  it  also  needs  to  be  taught 
as  a  separate  subject  where  politi- 
cal theories  can  be  explored  in  depth. 

A  feminist  theory  course  begins 
with  teaching  the  basic  skills  of  how 
to  read,  analyze,  and  think  about 
ideas.  The  course  must  also  give  in- 
formation about  existing  feminist 
theory,  about  how  that  theory  af- 
fects our  lives,  and  about  where  to 
go  to  learn  more  theory.  To  get 
students  personally  involved,  a  teach- 
er must  challenge  them  to  develop 
their  own  ideas  and  to  analyze  the 
assumptions  behind  their  actions. 

These  are  the  central  tasks  of  teach- 
ing feminist  theory  as  I  see  them,  af- 
ter doing  it  in  a  variety  of  settings 
since  1970.  I  have  taught  women  in 
universtites  and  women's  centers  and 
summer  institutes,  in  public  and  pri- 
vate institutions,  as  undergraduates, 
graduates  in  Women's  Studies,  semi- 
narians, and  feminist  activists,  and  I 
have  worked  on  transmitting  theory 
through  feminist  publications.  What 
I  have  found  in  all  these  cases  is  that 
women's  problems  with  theory  most 
often  grow  out  of  their  trouble 
with  thinking  about  ideas,  and 
their  view  that  their  own  thoughts 
and  experiences  are  not  important 
enough  to  be  the  basis  of  theory. 
Or,  to  put  it  in  a  slightly  different 
way,  many  women  have  difficulty 
both  in  systematically  pursuing 
thoughts  and  in  believing  that  what 
they  think  makes  any  difference. 
These  problems  with  thinking  and 
with  believing  in  the  importance 
of  one's  thoughts  and  experience 
are  related. 

When  teaching  feminist  theory, 
one  must  counter  such  attitudes 
and  find  ways  to  encourage  women 
to    think    systematically    about    the 


world.  Our  society  (and  indeed 
all  societies  today),  trains  only  a 
few  people  to  think  in  this  manner, 
mostly  those  from  the  classes  it  ex- 
pects to  control  the  social  order. 
Certainly  most  women  are  not  ex- 
pected to  take  control,  and,  in  con- 
sequence, are  not  encouraged  to 
think  analytically.  In  fact,  critical 
thinking  is  the  antithesis  of  women's 
traditional  role.  Women  are  supposed 
to  worry  about  mundane  survival 
problems,  to  brood  about  fate,  and 
to  fantasize  in  a  personal  manner. 
We  are  not  meant  to  think  analyti- 
cally about  society,  to  question  the 
way  things  are,  or  to  consider  how 
things  could  be  different.  Such  think- 
ing involves  an  active,  not  a  passive, 
relationship  to  the  world.  It  requires 
confidence  that  your  thoughts  are 
worth  pursuing  and  that  you  can 
make  a  difference.  And  it  demands 
looking  beyond  how  to  make  do,  and 
into  how  to  make  "making  do"  dif- 
ferent—how to  change  the  structures 
that  control  our  lives.  My  goal  in 
teaching  feminist  theory  is  to  pro- 
voke women  to  think  about  their 
lives  and  society  in  this  way. 

To  counter  women's  negativity  to- 
ward and  fear  of  theory,  it  has  to 
be  presented  as  something  with  prac- 
tical consequences  for  one's  life 
and  as  something  that  can  be  made 
accessible  to  anyone.  One  of  the 
ways  women  misunderstand,  and 
thereby  avoid,  theory  is  manifested 
in  the  "too  hard/too  easy"  paradox. 
Many  women  assume  that  theory 
is  esoteric  and  concerns  matters 
that  are  removed  from  daily  life. 
As  a  consequence,  they  regard  some- 
thing as  properly  theoretical  only  if 
it  is  very  abstract  and  they  don't  un- 
derstand  it  very  well-implying  that 


1 4  /Quest 


it  can't  be  real  theory  unless  it  is 
"too  hard"  for  them  to  grasp.  The 
flip  side  of  this  attitude  is  wanting 
all  theory  to  be  "easy"-implying 
that  if  it  requires  reading  slowly,  or 
returning  to  it  later,  or  looking  up 
words  in  the  dictionary,  then  it 
is  of  no  use.  Both  attitudes  prevent 
a  realistic  approach  to  theory.  Read- 
ing and  writing  theory  is  not  easy 
(I  point  this  out  to  students  lest 
they  think  that  my  class  will  be  a 
"soft"  woman's  course),  but  it 
can  be  done,  and  it  can  be  made 
comprehensible. 


r 


r  v c r  *rV" c c r  ' !* " *  ' '  "  "  "  ■  ■  " " 
d  n  n  a  ° ,','  ,','  ?  ",DtD(  ]  »  °  °  °  ?  'j  » Vn',,'„ '- 

'■''-'/..',.',! ,'  '  !  '  ' ,'  '  '  M  ■'"  >  'fin!  p' 

•  <•  G  (,  (,  (   ('.,'  ,',  ,',   '      ''''  ''  '■  ("  G  <•(•<■  I.  i.i, 

||I^lIrll^l,llm,,M^H,,l|,I^^«''"• 

J-'.u.ii.ii,,      ' '   '.""""""■'■•■'.«i 


Underlying  some  women's  diffi- 
culties with  theory  are  problems  of 
literacy  -  of  reading,  writing  and 
thinking.  Without  the  basic  skills 
of  reading  and  writing,  women  face 
limits  to  how  actively  they  can  en- 
gage in  theory.  In  my  experience, 
people  who  do  not  see  reading  and 
writing  as  basic  are  usually  those 
who  can  take  them  for  granted.4 
Revolutionary  movements  have  al- 
most always  seen  developing  a  gene- 
ral literacy  as  one  of  their  most  im- 
portant tasks.  Yet  in  this  country, 


where  we  assume  that  most  of  us 
can  read  and  write,  it  is  often  over- 
looked. In  fact,  not  only  are  many 
people  illiterate,  but  we  are  also 
rapidly  moving  into  a  generally 
post-literate  era. 

Reading  and  writing  are  valuable 
in  and  of  themselves,  and  women 
should  have  access  to  their  plea- 
sures. Beyond  that,  they  are  vital 
to  change  for  several  reasons.  First, 
they  provide  a  means  of  conveying 
ideas  and  information  that  may  not 
be  readily  available  in  the  popular 
media.  For  example,  the  ideas  of 
women's  liberation  first  spread 
through  mimeographed  articles  that 
were  passed  around  long  before  it 
was  possible  to  get  the  attention 
of  the  mass  media— and  with  more 
clarity  than  the  mass  media  later 
portrayed  feminism.  Second,  reading 
and  writing  help  develop  an  indivi- 
dual's imagination  and  ability  to 
think,  whereas  much  of  mass  cul- 
ture, especially  television,  pacifies 
and  encourages  conformity  rather 
than  creativity.  (Studies  of  the  ef- 
fects TV  has  on  children— such  as 
the  way  it  emphasizes  the  immediate 
dramatic  moment  at  the  expense  of 
reflective  thought— have  demonstra- 
ted these  consequences.)  Third,  an 
individual's  access,  through  reading 
a  variety  of  interpretations  of  reality, 
increases  that  person's  capacity  to 
think  for  herself,  to  go  against  the 
norms  of  the  culture,  and  to  con- 
ceive of  alternatives  for  society- 
all  of  which  are  fundamental  to  ac- 
ting politically.  Fourth,  reading  and 
writing  aid  each  woman's  indivi- 
dual survival  and  success  in  the 
world,  by  increasing  her  ability  to 
function  in  her  chosen  endeavors. 
And  finally,  the  written  word  is  still 


Feminism  and  Education/15 


the  cheapest  and  most  accessible 
form  of  mass  communication.  This 
makes  it  useful  to  those  who  have 
limited  resources.  Feminists  should 
of  course  use  other  mediums  as  well, 
but  I  emphasize  the  political  impor- 
tance of  literacy  because  it  is  often 
overlooked.  When  we  recall  why 
literacy  is  important  to  movements, 
it  becomes  clear  that  we  should 
neither  assume  that  women  are  al- 
ready literate,  nor  ignore  the  value 
of  teaching  women  to  read,  write, 
and  think  as  part  of  feminist  educa- 
tion. 

Teaching  Techniques 

In  most  of  my  courses,  I  have  not 
had  to  teach  the  basic  skills  of  read- 
ing and  writing  so  much  as  the  skills 
of  reading  and  writing  critically  as 
part  of  learning  to  think  in  new 
ways.  There  is  no  one  method  for 
thinking  and  there  is  no  one  way  to 
teach  it.  I  have  used  several  tech- 
niques to  encourage  thinking  and  to 
provide  women  with  tools  for 
analyzing  the  world. 5 

I  began  by  introducing  the  four- 
part  model  of  theory,  and  then  en- 
courage students  to  use  the  model 
in  looking  at  everything  around  them, 
as  well  as  in  reading  "theory."  For 
example,  in  one  classroom  exercise 
I  pass  out  a  variety  of  feminist  and 
non-feminist  women's  magazines. 
Each  student  examines  one  during 
class  and  uses  the  four-part  model 
to  tell  the  rest  of  us  what  theoreti- 
cal assumptions  are  embodied  in  that 
magazine:  what  is  its  view  of  reality 
for  women?  What  does  it  imply  a- 
bout  how,  why  or  whether  that  re- 
ality needs  to  change?  What  are  its 
approaches  to  those  changes?  What 


values  does  it  espouse,  etcetera. 
The  exercise  can  be  adapted  to  pop- 
ular movies  or  TV  series,  to  comic 
books— anything.  The  point  is  to  de- 
mystify theory  by  showing  that 
theory  underlies  everything,  and  does 
not  exist  only  in  books.  At  a  sim- 
ple level,  the  exercise  also  makes  a 
student  aware  of  how  she  thinks 
and  analyzes  for  herself. 

There  are  many  situational  assign- 
ments which  enable  students  to  ex- 
plore the  link  between  theory  and 
action,  or  which  require  them  to 
think  through  the  strategic  impli- 
cations of  a  theoretical  position.  For 
instance,  one  can  set  up  a  specific 
situation  and  assign  people  theoreti- 
cal positions  within  it.  The  situa- 
tion might  be  a  women's  center 
board  of  directors  meeting  where  it 
has  to  be  decided  how  to  use  a 
$20,000  gift  it  has  just  received. 
This  situation  can  be  designed 
—leaving  the  students  to  devise 
their  own  options— or  it  can  be  nar- 
rowly defined  so  that  students 
must  choose  between  a  given  set 
of  options.  At  a  DC  Feminist  Alli- 
ance workshop  on  theory,  for  ex- 
ample, the  group  had  to  choose  be- 
tween using  the  money  for  a  les- 
bian mother's  defense  fund,  divi- 
ding it  equally  between  groups 
affiliated  with  the  organization,  or 
using  it  for  office  space  and  staff 
for  the  organization. 6 

Once  a  situation  is  defined,  each 
student  is  assigned  a  theoretical 
position  to  represent  in  the  dis- 
cussion—for example,  she  must  be  an 
anarchist-feminist,  a  liberal-feminist, 
or  a  particular  person  whose  theories 
have  been  studied,  such  as  Elizabeth 
Cady  Stanton  or  Juliet  Mitchell. 
After  the  exercise,  we  discuss  why 


1 6/ Quest 


each  thought  that  a  particualr  theory 
would  lead  to  a  certain  position  on 
the  issues  and  what  questions  it 
raised  for  her. 

Another  variation  on  the  situational 
approach  is  to  break  into  small  groups, 
assign  each  a  particular  identity, 
and  ask  each  to  take  positions  on 
certain  issues-for  example,  you  are 
a  socialist-feminist  women's  union 
and  you  must  decide  whether  to  join 
with  other  groups  to  demand  wages 
for  housework.  After  we  have  stu- 
died various  feminist  theories,  I  have 
turned  the  situation  approach  around 
by  giving  students  a  particular  issue 
to  resolve  in  which  they  represent 
their  own  opinions— asking,  for  ex- 
ample, "Do  you  favor  a  wages  for 
housework  demand?"  Afterwards, 
we  discuss  what  assumptions  and 
theories  they  found  themselves  using 
to  arrive  at  a  decision. 

The  situations  can  be  varied  any 
number  of  ways  and  carried  out  in 
a  few  minutes  or  over  several  weeks. 
I  have  often  found  that  what  may 
have  seemed  abstract  when  first 
discussed  in  class  comes  alive  during 
these  exercises.  The  exercises  also 
train  students  to  think  systemati- 
cally and  help  them  to  gain  con- 
fidence in  applying  theory  to  real- 
life  situations. 

To  get  students  to  think  creatively, 
a  teacher  must  convince  them  that 
they  should  not  try  to  figure  out  the 
"right"  thing  to  say.  Those  most 
oriented  toward  politics  seek  the  "cor- 
rect line,"  while  those  oriented  to 
the  academy  seek  the  "correct  an- 
swer." The  effect  is  usually  the  same. 
Concentrating  on  what  is  "right"  or 
expected  stymies  creative  thought.  I 
often  create  situational  assignments 
and   give    examples   in    my    lectures 


where  there  is  clearly  no  "right" 
answer,  but  rather  a  number  of  op- 
tions that  depend  on  deciding  be- 
tween different  approaches  and  val- 
ues, rather  than  on  finding  the  so- 
called  truth.  Getting  away  from  the 
"right  answer"  or  "correct  line"  men- 
tality is  particularly  important  in  a 
theory  course,  because  comprehend- 
ing theory  and  its  role  depends  so 
much  on  understanding  the  impor- 
tance of  interpretation  and  specu- 
lation. Since  theory  is  primarily 
about  interpreting  reality,  it  de- 
pends on  leaps  of  perception,  spec- 
ulation, and  imagination— most  of 
which  get  stifled  by  trying  to  be 
"correct." 

I  want  to  see  women  creating  more 
theory,  and  to  do  this  I  have  used 
techniques  in  the  classroom  that 
come  out  of  my  experiences  in 
seeking  women  to  write  theoreti- 
cal articles  for  Quest:  A  Feminist 
Quarterly.  To  assist  someone  in  her 
efforts  to  put  her  analysis  on  paper, 
we  have  found  it  useful  to  ask  for 
responses  to  other  articles,  or  to  pro- 
vide concrete  questions  to  address. 
In  my  classes,  I  initially  asked  for 
term  papers  in  which  students  were 
to  analyze  a  particular  topic,  but 
this  generally  meant  that  they  pulled 
together  some  facts  with  others' 
opinions,  and  did  not  make  their 
own  efforts  at  analysis.  Now  I  re- 
quire a  journal  in  which  students 
outline  the  basic  ideas  of  all  the 
readings  assigned  to  the  class  and 
give  their  responses  to  those  ideas. 
This  approach  has  yielded  both  more 
originality  and  more  systematic  work 
on  classroom  readings.  I  now  pro- 
vide specific  questions  for  papers 
to  address  and/or  position  papers 
to    respond    to,    rather    than    free- 


Feminism  and  Education/17 


form  topics.  These  approaches  help 
students  work  out  what  they  think, 
just  as  they  enable  activists  who 
seldom  write  to  record  insights 
and  analysis  which  would  other- 
wise be  lost.  The  point  is,  that  giving 
someone  something  to  start  with 
besides  a  blank  page  helps  her  to 
write. 

The  crux  of  teaching  feminist 
theory  is  getting  women  to  analyze 
and  think  about  others'  ideas  as  well 
as  to  develop  their  own.  I  also  want 
to  teach  specific  feminist  theories, 
and  most  of  the  classroom  time  is 
used  in  lectures  and  discussions  of 
such  theories.  But  I  have  found 
that  giving  information  is  the  easiest 
part  of  teaching.  The  real  challenge 
is  to  teach  skills  and  inspire  an  in- 
terest that  enables  students  to  un- 
derstand that  content  more  fully 
during  the  course,  and  to  take  that 
understanding  with  them  into  the 
rest  of  their  lives. 


Charlotte  Bunch,  feminist  activist, 
editor,  teacher,  public  speaker,  and 
writer,  has  published  four  anthologies 
of  feminist  writings  and  is  editor  of 
Quest:  A  Feminist  Quarterly. 


FOOTNOTES 

1  There  are  many  approaches  to  theory, 
and  those  interested  In  exploring  more 
about  how  theory  is  constructed  should 
look  at  the  literature  of  political  philoso- 
phy. A  model  for  feminist  theory  similar 
to  the  one  that  I  discuss  in  this  paper  was 
developed  by  Judy  Smith,  of  the  Women's 
Resource  Center,  in  Missoula,  Montana. 

^For  more  discussion  of  this  problem 
and  of  nonaligned  feminism  as  a  response 
to  it,  see:  Charlotte  Bunch,  "Beyond 
Either/Or:  Feminist  Options,"  111:1 
Quest:  A  Feminist  Quarterly  (Summer, 
1976),  pp.  2-17. 

^For  an  elaboration  of  my  definition 
of  feminist  education,  see  my  introduction 
to  Not  by  Degrees:  Essays  on  Feminist 
Education,  edited  by  Charlotte  Bunch. 

^Discussing  the  relationship  of  literacy 
to  politics  is  not  unique  to  feminism.  The 
topic  has  been  widely  debated  in  political 
circles,  and  for  recent  opinions,  I  recom- 
mend: "The  Politics  of  Literacy,"  No.  8, 
a  special  issue  of  The  Radical  Teacher 
(May,  1978). 

^There  are  volumes  of  literature  on 
teaching  the  basics  of  how  to  read  and 
write.  The  most  useful  exploration  of 
teaching  reaching  and  writing  along  with 
political  and  analytic  skills  is  Paulo 
Freire's  Pedagogy  of  the  Oppressed  (Her- 
der and  Herder,  1972).  Freire  describes 
an  educational  process  that  is  similar  to 
consciousness-raising. 

^For  a  full  description  of  the  work- 
shop, see:  "Feminist  Theory  Workshop, 
May  6-7,  1978,"  published  by  D.C.  Area 
Feminist  Alliance  Skills  Task  Force,  P.O. 
Box  19362,  Washington,  D.C,  20036. 


1 8IQuest 


LATIN  AMERICAN 
PERSPECTIVES 


FUTURE  ISSUES  ON 


Latin  American 
Perspectives 

is  a  theoretical  and  practice 
journal  for  the  discussion  and  debate 
of  critical  issues  relating  to 
capitalism  and  socialism  as  they 
teachers,  students  and  workers 
throughout  the  Americas 


RECENT  PAST 
ISSUES: 

DEPENDENCY  THEORY  A  CRITICAL 

REASSESSMENT  (ISSUE  1,  SPRING  1974> 

CHILE  BLOOD  ON  THE  PEACEFUL  ROAD 

(ISSUE  2,  SUMMER  1974) 

ARGENTINA  PERONISM  AND     OUT  OF 

CRISIS  (ISSUE  3,  FALL  1974) 

CONFRONTING  THEORY  AND 

PRACTICE  ARTICLES  ON 

IMPERIALISM  AND  DEPENDENCY 

(ISSUE  4,  SPRING  1975) 

MEXICO  THE  LIMITS  OF  STATE 

CAPITALISM  (ISSUE  5,  SUMMER 

1975) 

COLOMBIA  THE  ANTI-IMPERIALIST 

STRUGGLE  (ISSUE  6,  FALL  1975) 

CUBA  LA  REVOLUTION  EN  MARCHA 

(ISSUE  7,  SUPPLEMENT  1975) 

IMPERIALISM  AND  THE  WORKING  CLASS 

IN  LATIN  AMERICA  (ISSUE  8,  WINTER  1  976) 

CAPITALISM:  THE  PROCESS  OF 

UNDERDEVELOPMENT  ISSUE  9.  SPRING 

1976) 

PUERTO  RICO:  CLASS  STRUGGLE  AND  NATIONAL 

LIBERATION  (ISSUE  10.  SUMMER  1976) 

DEPENDENCY  THEORY  AND  DIMENSIONS  OF 

IMPERIALISM  (ISSUE  1 1 ,  FALL  1 976) 


•  Peasantry 
and  Rural 

Underdevelopment 

•  National 

Minorities 

•  Brazil 

•  Mexico 

•Military  and  State 

•  Africa  and 
Latin  America, 

•  Central  America 

WOMEN  AND  THE 
CLASS  STRUGGLE 

(Issue  1 2-1 3,  Winter- 
Spring  1977) 

PERU:  BOURGEOIS 
REVOLUTION  AND 
CLASS  STRUGGLE 

(ISSUE  14,  Summer  1977) 

POPULATION  AND 

IMPERIALISM  — 

WOMEN  IN  REVOLUTION 

(ISSUE  15,  Fall  1977) 

CULTURE  IN  THE 

AGE  OF  MASS 

MEDIA 

(ISSUE  16,  Winter  1978) 


THE  CARIBBEAN, 
BOLIVIA,  AND  BLACK  FOLKLORE 

(ISSUE  17,  Spring  1978) 


$3.50  single  issue,  $5.00  double  issue 
Discount  of  20%  on  orders  of  ten  or  more 


Send  Subscription  to: 

Latin  American  Perspectives 
c/o  C.M.S. 
Post  Office  Box  792 
Riverside,  California  92502 

Name 


Each  issue  ot  Latin 
American  Perspectives  is  a 
comprehensive,  self- 
contained  book  on  one  of 
Latin  America's  most  urgent 
topics. 


Street. 
City 


State 


Zip. 


Subscription  Rates 

(4  Issues) 

1Yr.2Yr. 

Individuals  $12  $22 
Students  & 

Unemployed       $10  $18 

Educlnst.  $20  $36 
Corporations  and 

Gov.  Agencies  $40  $76 
Add  for 

Foreign  mail       $1  $2 


Feminism  and  Education/19 


Women  Do  Theory 


Editor's  Note:  This  article  is  an  edited 
version  of  a  presentation  delivered  at 
the  Feminist  Theory  Workshop  spon- 
sored by  the  DC  Area  Feminist  Al- 
liance, May  6-7,  1978. 

By  JANE  FLAX 

I  begin  with  an  overview  of  feminist 
theory  and  a  discussion  of  the  activity 
of  theorizing.  I  then  present  a  theore- 
tical framework  that  I've  developed 
after  trying  various  theories  and  find- 
ing none  of  them  sufficient  to  explain 
the  range  of  things  I  think  a  feminist 
theorist  needs  to  explain. 

Let  me  say  a  little  about  how  I 
ended  up  doing  feminist  theory.  I 
have  been  interested  in  philosophy  and 
political  theory  for  a  long  time.  I  am 
also  interested  in  psychoanalysis,  and 
have  practiced  as  a  feminist  therapist. 
So,  partly,  I've  been  trying  to  put  to- 
gether more  traditional  ideas  of  theory 
with  those  I've  learned  as  a  therapist, 
especially  from  psychoanalysis. 

Very  early  I  began  to  connect 
theory  with  political  activity.  I  chose 
political  science  because  I  thought 
there  I  would  learn  about  politics  — 
which  was  a  mistake.  Some  political 
scientists  seem  to  consider  theory  to 
be  something  done  3,000  years  ago  by 
Aristotle  and  Plato,  unrelated  to  the 
present  world.  And  yet,  one. of  my 
attractions  to  theory  was  that  through 
it,  I  could  learn  to  systematize  my  ex- 
perience. Political  science  was  not 
much  help. 

Over  time,  however,  I  have  found 
traditional  theory  to  be  very  helpful  in 

20/Quest 


recognizing  other  people's  mental  pro- 
cesses as  they  try  to  understand  the 
structure  of  the  world  systematically. 
That  is,  much  traditional  theory  is  a 
kind  of  internal  discourse  among 
thinkers  —  like  a  3,000-year  conversa- 
tion in  which  people  take  up  each 
others'  ideas  and  reapply  them. 
I'm  interested  in  many  parts  of  that 
discourse:  what  can  politics  do;  what 
is  the  ideal  political  system;  what  are 
just  relationships;  what  does  "equali- 
ty" mean? 

These  issues  have  been  dealt  with  in 
the  women's  movement,  but  notalways 
in  the  context  of  theory.  For  instance, 
what  it  would  mean  to  have  a  really 
liberated  society  is  a  question  of 
equality  and  justice  that  has  been  de- 
bated since  the  first  political  theory 
was  attempted.  But  feminists  don't 
often  think  of  our  questions  as  part  of 
that  ongoing  political  discourse. 

In  traditional  political  theory,  how- 
ever, the  relationships  between  men 
and  women,  and  the  status  of  women, 
are  rarely  discussed.  They  are  cer- 
tainly not  generally  seen  as  problems. 
Some  traditional  political  theorists 
talk  about  the  family  and  the  role  it 
plays  for  the  state  of  course;  and  some 
have  argued  for  the  liberation  of  wom- 
en. Plato,  for  instance,  argued  that 
women  could  be  philosopher  kings 
since  these  should  be  chosen  on  merit 
and  no  inherent  proof  existed  that 
women  were  any  less  intellectually 
capable   than   men.*     Other  political 


*An    interesting  sidelight  is  that  the  head 
Copyright  DC  Area  Feminist  Alliance  1978 


theorists,  however,  have  argued  that 
woman  cannot  think  abstractly  and 
has  a  less  developed  moral  sense. 
Thus,  part  of  the  problem  feminist 
theorists  face  is  taking  the  general 
"grammar"  and  concepts  of  tradi- 
tional theory  and  applying  them  to 
women  and  the  issues  that  affect  us. 

This  brings  me  to  the  questions, 
"what  is  feminist  theory?"  and,  more 
generally,  "what  is  theory?"  The 
most  important  characteristic  of 
theory  is  that  it  is  a.  systematic,  analy- 
tic approach  to  everyday  experience. 
This  everybody  does  unconsciously. 
To  theorize,  then,  is  to  bring  this  un- 
conscious process  to  a  conscious 
level  so  it  can  be  developed  and  refined. 
All  of  us  operate  on  theories,  though 
most  of  them  are  implicit.  We  screen 
out  certain  things;  we  allow  others  to 
affect  us;  we  make  choices  and  we 
don't  always  understand  why. 
Theory,  in  other  words,  makes  those 
choices  conscious,  and  enables  us  to 
use  them  more  efficiently. 

For  example,  implicit  in  my  choices 
about  the  work  I  could  do  is  an  under- 
standing of  where  power  lies,  what  I'm 
likely  to  be  able  to  do,  where  I'm 
likely  to  meet  the  most  frustration, 
and  when  I'm  likely  to  be  most  ef- 
fective. I  might  not  think  through 
those  things  consciously,  but  I  make 
choices  on  these  bases.  If  you  push 
that  explanation,  you'll  find  a  series 
of  assumptions  about  the  way  the 
world  works,  what's  available  (to  me), 
and  what  isn't.  That's  implicit  theory- 
making.  The  problem  is  to  make  it 
explicit. 


of  Plato's  academy  was  a  woman  who  was 
stoned  by  the  Christians  —  one  of  the  first 
of  the  Christians'  many  acts  against  women 
playing  an  intellectual,  active  role. 


Blocks  to  Explicit  Theory 

One  of  the  problems  with  theory  is 
that  women  aren't  supposed  to  be  able 
to  do  it;  women  aren't  supposed  to  be 
able  to  think  abstractly.  So  when  you 
say  to  a  woman,  "Okay,  now  let's 
read  theory,"  she's  likely  to  panic. 

In  addition,  theoretical  writing  is 
often  so  full  of  jargon  that  it  seems 
divorced  from  ordinary  experience. 
Unfortunately,  many  theorists  have  an 
entrepreneurial  interest,  a  territorial 
mentality,  and  they  encourage  every- 
one else  to  believe  that  their  work  is 
impossibly  complex.  This  discourages 
women  —  and  men  —  from  engaging  in 
theory  because  it  seems  hostile  and  un- 
intelligible. I  don't  think  that  the  is- 
sues are  inherently  so  difficult  or  so 
far  removed  from  ordinary  under- 
standing. I  think  theorists  build  turfs 
and  make  it  difficult  for  others  to 
undertand  that  turf  -  just  like  any 
other  professional. 

Feminist  Theory 

Feminist  theory  is  based  on  a  ser- 
ies of  assumptions.  First,  it  assumes 
that  men  and  women  have  different 
experiences;  that  the  world  is  not  the 
same  for  men  and  women.  Some 
women  think  the  experiences  of  wom- 
en should  be  identical  to  the  exper- 
iences of  men.  Others  would  like  to 
transform  the  world  so  that  there  are 
no  such  dichotomous  experiences. 
Proponents  of  both  views,  however,  as- 
sume that  women's  experiences  differ 
from  men's,  and  that  one  task  of  femi- 
nist theory  is  to  explain  that  differ- 
ence. 

Secondly,  feminist  theory  assumes 
that  women's  oppression  is  not  a  sub- 
set of  some  other  social  relationship. 


Feminism  and  Education/21 


Some  argue  that  if  the  class  system 
were  destroyed,  then  women  would 
not  be  oppressed  —  I  don't  classify 
that  as  feminist  theory.  Feminist 
theory  assumes  that  women's  oppres- 
sion is  a  unique  constellation  of  social 
problems  and  has  to  be  understood  in 
itself,  and  not  as  a  subset  of  class  or 
any  other  structure. 

It  also  assumes  that  women's  op- 
pression is  not  merely  a  case  of  what 
the  Chinese  call  "bad  attitudes."  I 
have  problems  with  the  word  "sex- 
ism," because  the  term  implies  that 
women's  oppression  will  disappear 
when  men  become  more  enlightened. 
On  the  contrary,  I  think  feminist 
theory  assumes  that  the  oppression  of 
women  is  part  of  the  way  the  structure 
of  the  world  is  organized,  and  that  one 
task  of  feminist  theory  is  to  explain 
how  and  why  this  structure  evolved. 


Feminist  theory  names  this  struc- 
ture "patriarchy,"  and  assumes  that  it 
is  an  historical  force  that  has  a  mater- 
ial and  psychological  base.  What  I 
mean  by  "patriarchy"  is  the  system  in 
which  men  have  more  power  than 
women,  and  have  more  access  to  what- 
ever society  esteems.  What  society 
esteems  obviously  varies  from  culture 
to  culture;  but  if  you  look  at  the 
spheres  of  power,  you'll  find  that  all 
who  have  it  are  male.  This  is  a  long- 
term  historical  fact  rooted  in  real 
things.  It's  not  a  question  of  bad  at- 
titudes; it's  not  an  historical  accident 
—  there  are  real  advantages  to  men  in 
retaining  control  over  women.  Femi- 
nist theorists  want  to  explain  why 
that's  so. 

Patriarchy  works  backwards  as  well. 
It  affects  the  way  men  and  women  feel 
about    themselves,    and    is   so   deeply 


22/Quest 


internalized  that  we  can't  imagine  a 
world  without  gender.  As  much  as  we 
talk  about  androgyny,  or  some  situa- 
tion in  which  gender  isn't  so  signifi- 
cant, I  don't  think  any  of  us  could 
imagine  a  world  in  which  gender 
would  not  bring  with  it  many  special 
meanings.  We  may  still  want  to  at- 
tach special  meanings  to  gender,  but  a 
feminist  theory  would  argue  that  the 
power  attached  to  gender  should  dis- 
appear; it  should  not  determine 
whether  a  person  is  excluded  or  in- 
cluded in  whatever  is  esteemed  by  so- 
ciety. 

Goals  of  Feminist  Theory 

Feminist  theory  has  several  pur- 
poses. The  first  is  to  understand  the 
power  differential  between  men  and 
women.  How  did  it  come  into  being? 
Why  does  it  exist  now?  What  main- 
tains it?  How  do  the  power  relations 
between  men  and  women  affect  other 
power  relations  —  for  instance,  race 
and  class  -  and  how  does  patriarchy 
reinforce  other  oppressive  power  struc- 
tures? 

Secondly,  the  purpose  is  to  under- 
stand women's  oppression  —  how  it 
evolved,  how  it  changes  over  time, 
how  it's  related  to  other  forms  of  op- 
pression, and  finally,  how  to  change 
our  oppression. 

In  feminist  theory,  one  issue  that 
emerges  consistently  is  the  necessity 
to  undertand  the  family,  because  it  is 
one  of  the  central  mediating  structures 
between  all  other  structures  of  oppres- 
sion. The  family  is  where  we're  inter- 
nally formed,  where  we  learn  about 
gender,  where  we  experience  class 
and  race  systems  in  personal  and  inti- 
mate ways.  Therefore,  understanding 
the  functions  of  the  family  should  be 


one  of  the  crucial  goals  of  feminist 
theory;  yet  it  remains  an  area  that  is 
particularly  undeveloped. 

A  third  purpose  of  feminist  theory 
is  to  overcome  oppression.  Feminist 
theory  is  the  foundation  of  action  and 
there  is  no  pretense  that  theory  can  be 
neutral.  Within  feminist  theory  is  a 
commitment  to  changeoppressivestruc- 
tures  and  to  connect  abstract  ideas 
with  concrete  problems  for  political 
action.  It  is  senseless  to  study  the  situ- 
ation of  women  without  a  concomit- 
ant commitment  to  do  something 
about  it.  The  theorist  has  to  draw 
out  the  consequences  of  the  theory 
and  use  life  experience  as  a  part  of  her 
basis  for  understanding,  for  feeding 
into  the  development  of  theory. 

Traditional  political  theory  has  al- 
ways been  attached  to  action.  Plato 
wrote  The  Republic  partly  because  he 
thought  that  Athenian  democracy  was 
degenerating  and  he  wanted  to  under- 
stand why,  and  how.  It's  only  con- 
temporary social  science  theory  that 
claims  to  be  objective,  neutral,  value- 
free.  I  don't  think  any  form  of  know- 
ledge is  neutral,  but  certainly  feminist 
theory  cannot  claim  neutrality.  I 
think  that's  one  of  the  problems  of 
women's  studies  programs.  They  are 
too  often  developed  as  though  they 
are  mere  intellectual  exercises;  some 
may  be,  but  the  study  of  women  is 
not. 


The  Evolving  Theoretical  Framework 

I  assume  that  feminist  theory  must 
point  to  a  clear  and  real  base  for  the 
oppression  of  women  —  feminist 
theory  has  to  be  rooted  in  human  ex- 
perience. I  also  assume  that  there  are 
three  basic  realms  of  human  activity. 


Feminism  and  Education/23 


The  first  is  production  —  we  need 
to  produce  food,  clothing  and  shelter 
for  our  survival.  (Obviously,  different 
cultures  will  produce  in  different 
ways.  Even  people  who  live  on  tropi- 
cal islands  have  to  organize  the  gather- 
ing and  preparation  of  coconuts.) 
Marx  called  this  the  material  sub- 
structure of  human  life,  and  I  call  it 
the  realm  of  production. 

People  also  need  to  reproduce.  Not 
only  must  we  produce  the  next  genera- 
tion biologically,  but  we  also  need  to 
reproduce  good  citizens  for  the  society. 
We  need  to  inculcate  the  values,  atti- 
tudes, and  beliefs  appropriate  to  that 
culture.  A  good  American  citizen  will 
have  ideas  and  expectations  very  dif- 
ferent from  a  good  Mesopotamian 
citizen  living  3,000  years  ago.  But  no 
matter  which  society,  somehow  the 
unformed  person  must  be  trained  in 
its  values.  In  our  society,  accultura- 
tion is  conducted  by  a  variety  of 
organizations,  including  the  family  and 
later  the  school,  and  the  state  is  in- 
volved in  setting  out  certain  policies 
which  translate  into  procedures  for  ac- 
culturating  individuals. 

The  third  realm  of  human  activity 
is  the  individual's  internal  life.  This  is 
what  Freud  called  "the  unconscious," 
and  what  I  call  "psychodynamics." 
The  psychodynamic  sphere  is  where 
our  biological  and  our  mental  lives 
meet,  and  must  be  organized.  One  of 
the  most  important  aspects  of  this 
sphere  is  sexuality.  One  of  the  ques- 
tions feminists  must  ask  is  how  a  basic- 
ally   "polymorphous  species"**  ends 

**Polymorphous  means  that  we  can  derive 
erotic  pleasure  from  a  wide  variety  of  ex- 
periences; not  only  from  experiences  be- 
tween ourselves  and  other  persons,  but  also 
between  ourselves  and  all  sorts  of  physical 
obj  ects. 


up,  in  most  cultures,  a  genitally- 
oriented,  heterosexual  and  monoga- 
mous species.  Though  all  cultures 
allow  varying  degrees  and  varieties  of 
sexual  pleasure,  every  civilization 
channels  its  citizens'  eroticism  into 
practices  acceptable  to  the  society. 

When  we  talk  about  the  situation  of 
women,  we  must  examine  how  all 
three  spheres  cooperate  to  produce 
our  oppression.  The  elimination  of  an 
oppressive  structure  in  one  sphere  only 
is  inadequate  because  the  other 
spheres  will  re-emerge  as  even  more 
oppressive. 

For  instance,  in  the  Soviet  Union, 
where  the  class  system  is  supposedly 
abolished,  men  still  retain  the  power. 
The  upper  structure  of  the  Communist 
Party  is  almost  entirely  male.  And 
while  women  may  move  into  occupa- 
tions (as  in  the  United  States),  those 
occupations  lose  their  prestige  when 
they  do.t 

Why  didn't  the  oppression  of  wom- 
en disappear?  For  one  thing,  the 
structure  of  the  family  was  not  altered 
—  no  efforts  were  made  to  change  the 
reproductive  spheres.tt  So,  even 
though  one  structure  of  oppression 
may  have  been  dealt  with,  the  other 
two  remain  intact.  Hence,  we  cannot 
expect  women  to  be  fully  participating 
persons,  nor  that  the  full  range  of 
women's  experience  will  be  expressed 
in  social  values.  This  is  a  material 
view  of  women  in  that  it  locates  op- 
pression within  our  material  lives. 
And  yet  it  also  teaches  us  to  look  at 

tSeventy-five  percent  of  physicians  in  the 
Soviet  Union  are  women,  but  a  physician 
there  is  like  a  social  worker  here. 
tt it's  not  permissible  to  be  a  homosexual, 
or  to. engage  in  sexual  relations  with  many 
different  persons  of  either  gender  in  the 
Soviet  Union,  China  or  Cuba. 


24/Quest 


each  of  the  three  spheres  of  human 
activity,  to  see  how  each  one  particu- 
larly impinges  upon  women. 

The  Intersection  of  Spheres 

One  of  the  most  important  charac- 
teristics of  the  family  is  that  all  three 
spheres  intersect  here.  In  our  society, 
the  family  is  the  structure  in  which  we 
learn  to  repress  and  channel  our  sexu- 
ality —  where  homosexuality  is  for- 
bidden and  where  heterosexuality  is 
promoted.  It's  also  the  place  in  which, 
obviously,  external  authority  is  trans- 
mitted by  and  translated  in  our  par- 
ents' teachings.  It's  in  the  family  that 
the  standards  of  acceptable  social  be- 
havior are  first  taught. 

Even  though  most  production  is  no 
longer  done  within  the  family,  this  is 
still  the  structure  in  which  we  are 
taught  behaviors  appropriate  to  our 
class.  Lillian  Rubin,  in  Worlds  of  Pain, 
shows  that  working-class  people  be- 
come acculturated  in  the  proper  ex- 
pectations of  their  class  and  that  these 
expectations  are  perpetuated  from 
generation  to  generation.  So,  the  class 
system  impinges  upon  the  family,  not 
only  in  the  obvious  ways  (such  as  the 
kinds  of  housing  or  childcare  you  can 
afford),  but  also  in  more  subtle  ways. 

Other  structures  influence  and  are 
perpetuated  by  these  three  spheres. 
The  state,  for  example,  structures  and 
benefits  from  the  ways  reproduction 
and  psychodynamics  interact  in  class 
divisions  and  modes  of  production.  It 
also  benefits  from  the  lingering  effects 
of  the  psychodynamic  sphere  on  poli- 
tical and  personal  action. 

Reproduction  is  obviously  segre- 
gated on  the  basis  of  sex.  Women  are 
nurturers,  men  are  authority  figures  - 
a  very  important  distinction  in  terms 


of  the  developing  person.  This  means 
that  both  acculturation  and  reproduc- 
tion are  sex-segregated. 

Thus,  as  feminism  teaches  us,  the 
class  system  is  not  the  same  for  men 
and  women.  It's  a  mistake  to  take 
traditional  class  analysis  and  impose  it 
upon  the  experience  of  women  when 
it  is  clear  that  women's  work  is  sex- 
segregated  and  class-segregated  (80% 
of  women  work  in  jobs  where  more 
than  half  the  jobs  are  held  by  women). 

And  finally,  the  psychodynamic 
sphere  so  thoroughly  remembers  that 
we're  either  a  male  or  a  female  person, 
that  gender  becomes  part  of  who  we 
are.  Thus,  though  we  succeed  in  de- 
veloping an  analysis  of  patriarchy  and 
capitalism,  we  still  find  ourselves  re- 
peating old,  self-defeating  patterns. 
We  can't  explain  how  this  happens. 
Rationally,  we've  got  it  all  worked 
out,  and  yet  something  refuses  to 
change.  That's  partly  because  a  great 
deal  happens  unconsciously,  as  we  act 
out  old  patterns  that  are  accessible 
neither  to  reason  nor  to  control  since 
the  psychodynamic  sphere  as  uncon- 
scious. It's  the  realm  of  dreams  and 
associations.  It's  the  world  of  sexuali- 
ty; it's  your  internal  life.  But  also  it's 
hard  for  us  to  grasp  because  feminists 
haven't  done  much  work  on  it. 

Conclusion 

My  assumptions  are,  then,  that 
these  three  spheres  of  life  are  crucial 
for  everybody,  that  they're  exper- 
ienced differently  by  men  and  wom- 
en, and  that  both  the  experience  and 
the  oppression  of  women  are  rooted  in 
all  three.  I  believe  we  must  examine 
each  sphere  to  see  how  women's  and 
men's  experience  are  different,  and 
how  it  contributes  to  that  difference. 


Feminism  and  Education/25 


If  we  would  end  the  oppression  of 
women,  we  must  transform  all  three 
spheres;  change  in  one  sphere  alone 
will  not  liberate  women. 

The  psychodynamic  sphere  can  be 
changed  by  completely  transforming 
the  rearing  of  children.  Dorothy 
Dinnerstein's  book,  The  Mermaid  and 
the  Minotaur,  is  a  good  reference  on 
the  transformation  of  childrearing. 
Dinnerstein  maintains  that  both  males 
and  females  have  to  be  present  in  the 
child's  life  from  infancy.  It's  impor- 
tant that  children  not  be  raised  by  one 
female  person,  or  a  group  of  female 
persons.  The  child  also  needs  peers. 
In  fact,  it  makes  day  care  and  child- 
rearing  not  something  that  enables 
women  to  work,  but  locates  both  right 
in  the  center  of  feminist  demands.  A 
feminist  revolution  must  deal  with  the 
way  children  are  reared.  To  create 
liberated  persons  requires  a  transfor- 
mation in  childrearing. 


It  also  means  that  homosexuality 
is  not  just  a  nicety  we  support  to  ap- 
pease our  lesbian  sisters.  We  must 
recognize  that  heterosexuality  is  also 
part  of  the  structure  of  the  oppression 
of  women.  Sexual  repression  is  one  of 
the  ways  in  which  women  are  op- 
pressed and  one  of  the  ways  in  which 
patriarchy  is  maintained.  On  another 
level,  restraining  sexuality  is  a  very 
powerful  way  of  controlling  people  - 
as  Wilhelm  Reich  understoood  in  his 
analysis  of  the  Nazis.  Therefore,  to 
fight  for  a  variety  of  expressions  of 
sexuality  has  to  be  part  of  feminism. 
It  shouldn't  be  incorporated  because 
lesbians  insist,  "What  about  us?" 
It's  absolutely  central  to  feminism. 
These  are  two  concrete  conclusions 
which  grow  out  of  an  analysis  of  the 
psychodynamic  sphere. 

Jane  Flax  is  a  professor  of  political 
theory  at  Howard  University. 


The  Feminist  Scholar 


By  JO  FREEMAN 

*An  earlier  version  of  this  paper 
was  presented  as  the  keynote  address 
at  the  Feminist  Scholar  conference 
at  Montclair  State  College,  Upper 
Montclair,  NJ,  May  16,  1974. 


At  first  glance,  there  appears 
to  be  an  inherentcontradiction  in. the 
term  "feminist  scholar."  The  idea  of 
the  scholar  implies  one  who  sits  back 
and  dispassionately  studies  a  topic; 
who  seeks  and  objectively  weighs  all 


evidence,  forming  an  opinion  only 
after  the  data  are  in.  Yet  as  a  fem- 
inist, when  I  am  dealing  with  ques- 
tions concerning  women,  I  don't  feel 
in  the  least  dispassionate;  the  "truth" 
is  largely  predetermined  by  the  fem- 
inist values  that  I  hold;  and  while 
I'm  willing  to  look  at  all  evidence,  I 
reserve  the  right  to  interpret  it  in  a 
way  that  will  support  my  position. 
To  be  a  feminist,  in  effect,  is  to  ad- 
vocate a  particular  point  of  view. 
Starting  from  the  premise  that  wo- 
men and  men  have  the  same  poten- 
tial for  individual  development,  this 


26 1  Quest 


view  examines  the  way  in  which  so- 
cial institutions  create  differences; 
it  rejects  the  idea  that  there  is  any 
meaningful  choice  for  members  of 
either  sex  as  long  as  there  are  soc- 
ially prescribed  sex  roles  and  social 
penalties  for  those  who  deviate 
from  them.  This  is  the  description 
of  a  decisively  political  position— 
which  I  use  my  academic  training 
to  support. 

Such  an  alliance  of  scholarship 
and  advocacy  would  have  been 
thought  an  unholy  one  fifteen  or  so 
years  ago.  Those  were  the  days  when 
the  myth  of  value-free  social  science 
predominated.  People  really  believed 
-or  at  least  said  they  did-that  they 
could  approach  a  fresh  research  pro- 
blem uncontaminated  by  their  past 
experiences  and  present  circumstan- 
ces. Since  then,  however,  the  ra- 
dical critique  of  social  science  has 
made  us  aware  that  all  knowledge 
reflects  a  bias.  People's  background 
and  position  in  the  social  structure 
not  only  determine  their  interpre- 
tation, but  filter  out  what  they 
think  they  see.  In  the  words  of  one 
anonymous  pundit,  "How  you  stand 
depends  on  where  you  sit." 

Fortunately,  this  critique  pre- 
ceded the  women's  liberation  move- 
ment. It  therefore  made  it  easier 
to  be  both  advocate  and  scholar. 
Most  academicians  are  now  sensi- 
tive to  the  fact  that  we  all  have  va- 
lues which  lead  us  to  particular  re- 
search projects,  which  define  our 
methods,  our  conclusions.  Points  of 
view  not  only  exist  within  discip- 
lines but  can  be  brought  to  discip- 
lines. Sociology  has  even  been  de- 
scribed as  the  attempt  to  draw  a 
mathematically  precise  line  between 
unwarranted   assumptions  and  fore- 


gone conclusions.  Thus,  the  fact 
that  my  scholarship  is  guided  by  a 
feminist  perspective  does  not  make 
it  qualitatively  different  than  that 
of  others. 

Nonetheless  the  awareness  of  ubi- 
quitous bias  does  impose  upon  one 
some  responsibilities  which  those 
who  thought  they  were  value-free 
could  blissfully  ignore.  The  primary 
responsibility  is  to  not  be  blinded 
by  one's  own  politics.  There  is  a  time 
for  pure  advocacy  and  a  time  for  crit- 
ical reflection.  Just  as  the  awareness 
of  the  inevitable  bias  of  any  scholar- 
ship makes  it  easier  to  apply  one's 
own,  so  must  that  awareness  make 
one  constantly  reexamine  one's  per- 
ceptions. This  responsibility  grows 
greater  as  the  acceptability  and  in- 
fluence of  one's  perspective— feminist 
or  non-feminist— increases.  When  one 
is  an  outsider,  criticizing  the  estab- 
lished view,  one  can  legitimately 
muster  all  one's  forces  for  the  assault 
without  tolerance  for  differing  points 
of  view.  But  singlemindedness  is  a 
privilege  permissible  only  to  those 
out  of  power.  The  more  established 
one  becomes,  the  less  one  can  afford 
it.  To  fail  to  acknowledge  the  re- 
sponsibility that  comes  with  power, 
is  to  undermine  the  right  to  hold  it. 

Feminists  are  a  long  way  from 
gaining  much  institutional  power, 
so  in  many  ways  this  responsibility 
is  still  a  theoretical  one.  Nonethe- 
less, the  need  for  it  can  be  seen  in 
those  few  situations  where  we  do 
exercise  significant  influence.  The 
best  example  is  the  classroom.  You 
may  personally  like,  associate  with 
or  support  someone  on  the  basis 
of  whether  or  not  they  agree  with 
you.  But  you  cannot  morally  grade 
them  on  that  basis.  Good  teaching 


Feminism  and  Education/27 


does  not  permit  pushing  a  line. 
Power  must  always  be  used  with 
discretion. 

Provided  this  discretion  is  used, 
feminist  advocacy  is  as  compatible 
with  being  a  scholar  as  are  the  many 
other  political  views  scholars  hold. 
But  if  feminism  is  compatible  with 
scholarship,  is  it  necessarily  compa- 
tible with  academia?  Frankly,  I 
think  it  is  not.  Not  only  is  there  an 
inherent  contradiction  between  the 
values  of  the  academic  world  and 
those  of  feminism,  but  that  world 
does  not  look  favorably  upon  seri- 
ous dissidents  from  the  status  quo— 
especially  if  such  dissidents  are 
brash  enough  to  live  their  beliefs 
(as  feminism  requires).  Cooly  pointed 
out  almost  50  years  ago  that: 

It  is  strange  that  we  have  so  few 
men  of  genius  on  our  faculties:  we 
are  always  trying  to  get  them.  Of 
course,  they  must  have  undergone 
the  regular  academic  training  (say 
ten  years  in  graduate  study  and 
subordinate  positions)  and  be  gen- 
tlemanly, dependable,  pleasant  to 
live  with,  and  not  apt  to  make  trou- 
ble by  urging  eccentric  ideas.  1 

To  explain  the  above  conclusions, 
I  must  digress  from  the  subject  of 
feminist  scholarship  to  examine  the 
structure  and  values  of  the  academic 
profession.  Contrary  to  popular  be- 
lief ,  the  academic  establishment  is 
not  in  business  to  pursue  truth,  pro- 
mulgate knowledge,  or  even  to  pack- 
age people.  Its  purpose  is  the  pro- 
duction of  prestige.2 

The  Prestige  System 

Once  one  accepts  the  prevalence 
of  the  prestige-motive,  most  of  the 


otherwise  strange  actions  of  aca- 
demics become  quite  clear.  After 
all,  why  do  intelligent  people  spend 
five  to  ten  years  of  their  lives,  paying 
their  own  way,  to  earn,  the  Ph.D  un- 
ion card  necessary  for  a  possible  job 
whose  starting  salary  is  less  than 
that  of  a  New  York  sanitation  work- 
er? Why  is  a  school's  value  judged 
more  by  the  number  of  Nobel  Prize 
winners  it  can  list  in  its  catalog 
than  by  the  number  or  success  of 
its  students?  Why  is  the  American 
Council  on  Education's  regular  rating 
of  graduate  schools  based  on  faculty 
peer  group  estimation  rather  than 
by  the  kinds  of  courses  offered? 
Why  is  it  that  we  all  categorize  uni- 
versities according  to  their  prestige- 
ranking  without  wondering  if  there 
is  any  substantive  basis  for  this  rank- 
ing? Why  do  academics  prefer  to 
publish  in  low  circulation  journals, 
and  literally  thumb  their  noses  at 
anyone  who  seeks  a  wider  audience 
through  the  popular  press?  Why  are 
academicians'  status  determined  not 
by  the  courses  they  teach  but  where 
they  teach  them? 

Just  as  the  "profit-motive"  has  in- 
formed the  analysis  of  our  economic 
system,  so  the  "prestige-motive"  un- 
derlines our  academic  system. 

Not  all  institutions  of  higher  educa- 
tion pursue  prestige  down  the  same 
paths.  But  academia  is  a  hierarchy 
and  at  the  top  the  thirty  or  forty 
"major  universities"  set  the  ethos 
for  the  academic  world  at  large. 

They  do  this  through  their  hegem- 
ony over  public  attention,  their  con- 
nections with  the  private  and  public 
elites,  their  role  as  gatekeepers  to 
the  professional  journals  and  most  of 
all  through  their"  Ph.D.'s,  who  staff 
a  preponderance  of  all  four-year  in- 


28/Quest 


stitutions.  Even  when  these  graduates 
commit  themselves  to  institutions 
with  a  different  purpose  than  those 
in  which  they  were  trained,  they 
still  carry  with  them  the  values  of 
their  home  institutions— institutions 
who  measure  "productivity"  by  pub- 
lication. 3 

Despite  myths  about  merit,  in  the 
prestige  system  "productivity"  is  de- 
termined not  by  any  objective  rating, 
but  by  the  subjective  feelings  of 
one's  disciplinary  peers.  What  counts 
is  not  what  you  do  but  what  other 
people  think  of  what  you  do.4  In 
order  for  others  to  judge  what  you 
do,  they  must  see  it.  They  don't 
see  teaching.  How  many  faculty 
members  ever  visit  the  classroom  of 
another;  or  inquire  of  their  students 
as  to  their  colleagues'  pedagogical 
effectiveness?  One  must  publish  be- 
cause that  is  the  only  way  to  be 
seen— and  hence  the  only  way  to 
count. 

However,  one's  colleagues  rarely 
see    publications    in    journals    out- 


side their  own  discipline,  or  even 
their  own  speciality.  After  all,  no 
one  has  time  to  read  everything. 
They  do  see  publication— in  those 
journals  they  read,  and/or  on  the  to- 
pics they  do  their  own  research  on. 
Thus,  where  you  publish  and  what 
you  publish  on  is  more  important 
than  the  quality  of  what  you  say. 
Research  on  women,  for  example,  is 
rarely  read  by  malexolleagues,  and  is 
largely  considered  to  be  at  worse  fad- 
dish, and  at  best  narrow.  Even  if  one 
has  written  twenty  papers  on  ex- 
tremely diverse  aspects  of  women's 
existence,  it  is  still  considered  to  be 
in  the  same  subfield  and  hardly  com- 
parable to  five  good  papers  on  voting 
statistics  or  Melville's  novels. 

The  topic  of  women  aside,  most 
disciplines  are  subject  to  their  own 
intellectual  and  stylistic  trends,  and 
if  one  is  not  going  with  the  tide,  one 
often  can  be  washed  out.  Depart- 
ments quite  deliberately  hire  and 
fire,  in  part,  on  what  kind  of  research 
they    want   to    support,    and   many 


Feminism  and  Education/29 


young  scholars  have  seen  their  ca- 
reers go  down  the  drain  because  they 
didn't  fit  the  right  category  at  the 
right  time.5  The  moral  to  this  story 
is  that  one  must  not  only  publish  or 
perish,  one  may  also  publish  and  per- 
ish. 

One  can  try  to  opt  out  of  this 
game  by  decisively  insisting  on  doing 
one's  own  work  regardless  of  the 
consequences.  The  usual  results  are 


not  conducive  to  scholarship,  fem- 
inist or  otherwise.  One  either  ends 
up  as  a  research  assistant  finding  the 
facts  for  someone  else's  theories,  an 
overworked  instructor  in  a  "low-pres- 
tige" school  with  a  teaching  load  so 
heavy  one  barely  has  time  to  do 
one's  lectures  let  alone  one's  re- 
search ...  or  unemployed.  The  con- 
tinuing constriction  of  academic  jobs 
does  not  make  these  prospects  ap- 
pear brighter  in  the  future. 

It  is  only  when  faced  with  one  of 
these  prospects  that  one  becomes 
acutely  aware  of  why  the  prestige 
system    manages    to    hold   together. 


The  more  prestigious  places  usually 
have  the  resources  young  scholars 
desperately  need.  Laboratories,  gov- 
ernment grants,  research  libraries, 
collegual  expertise,  small  course 
loads,  computers,  contacts  with 
foundations,  publishers  and  journals, 
are  just  some  of  the  more  tangible 
assets.  Universities  get  these  by 
playing  the  prestige  game  and  thus 
do   not   look  favorably  upon  those 


TENURE 


otiwe* 


who  violate  the  rules.6 

It  is  only  when  one  lacks  the  in- 
stitutional supports  one  needs  that 
one  realizes  how  dependent  indivi- 
dual scholars  are  upon  them.  The 
ivory  tower  thinkers  who  need  only 
their  own  books  and  their  own  muses 
are  very  rare,  and  usually  in  the  hu- 
manities. Because  success  begats  suc- 
cess it  is  easier  to  attract  even  out- 
side support  if  the  scholar  is  associ- 
ated with  a  place  that  has  a  tradi- 
tion of  receiving  it.  After  all,  the  peo- 
ple who  give  out  the  grants  are  part 
of  the  same  networks  as  most  of 
those  who  receive  them.  They  look 


30/Quest 


after  their  own.  Prestige  is  not  a 
very  mobile  good,  and  tends  to  re- 
main in  its  place  of  origin.  A  new 
school  takes  years  to  acquire  a  rep- 
utation, and  a  declining  university 
takes  years  to  lose  one. 

The  Double  Bind 

Let  us  suppose  the  scholar  is  one  of 
those  fortunate  few  who  comes 
equipped  with  most  of  her  resources 
and  could  care  less  about  prestige. 
What  then?  As  a  general  rule  of 
thumb,  the  lower  the  school  on  the 
prestige  ladder,  the  greater  the  course 
load.  Since  there  are  only  so  many 
hours  in  the  day,  one  is  then  faced 
with  the  onerous  choice  of  either 
shortchanging  one's  students  or  short- 
changing one's  research.  Some  ener- 
getic souls  can  manage  to  do  both, 
but  most  would  collapse  in  physi- 
cal exhaustion.  If  one  does  manage 
to  work  in  a  place  with  a  small 
course  load  it  is  still  difficult  to  be 
both  a  good  teacher  and  a  good 
scholar  unless  one  has  tenure. 

Education  is  not  the  purpose  of 
academia  and  teaching  counts  for 
little  in  most  tenure  decisions.  A 
poor  teaching  reputation  will  be  used 
against  you  by  your  opponents,  but 
a  good  teaching  reputation  only 
makes  you  a  threat.  In  their  strug- 
gles to  make  a  name  for  themselves, 
most  faculty  cannot  afford  time  for 
students.  A  popular  teacher  becomes 
a  standard  of  comparison  which  they 
cannot  meet.  Students  begin  to 
question  why  other  faculty  aren't 
as  good,  while  they  flock  to  the 
popular  courses.  This  has  roughly 
the  same  effect  as  the  efficient 
factory  worker  has  on  his  assembly 
line— known     in     union     terms     as 


TENURE 


otiittD«" 


"speed  up."  One  can  much  more 
justifiably  be  satisfied  with  poor 
teaching  if  everyone  else  in  the 
department  does  the  same. 

If  one  is  at  a  school  which  looks  on 
teaching  favorably,  the  fear  of 
"speed  up"  is  still  prevalent,  but  it 
is  focused  on  "excessive"  research 
(generally  known  as  "careerism") 
rather  than  popular  teaching.  In 
these  schools  it  is  simply  assumed 
that  if  one  publishes  frequently 
the  time  for  research  must  be  at  the 
expense  of  other  faculty  responsi- 
bilities. This  excuse  is  used  to  rid  the 
department  of  productive  scholars 
who  might  raise  the  standards  for 
tenure. 

By  now  it  should  be  clear  how  the 
structure  of  the  academic  world 
makes  it  difficult  to  be  a  produc- 
tive scholar  of  any  kind  outside  the 
major  universities.  These  universities 
in  turn  operate  as  exclusive  clubs 
and  by  so  doing  define  what  is  ac- 
ceptable scholarship.  Even  if  a  wo- 
man   should    find    herself  admitted. 


Feminism  and  Education/31 


temporarily,  to  some  of  these  clubs, 
she  is  still  limited  in  the  kind  of  re- 
search she  can  pursue  by  the  defini- 
tion of  what  is  acceptable.  She  must 
constantly  defend  the  value  of  what 
she  does  to  her  colleagues,  who  do 
not  wish  to  see  the  prestige  of  their 
department  "diluted  by  mediocrity." 

Most  faculty,  especially  the  un- 
tenured  ones,  are  constantly  on  the 
defensive.  Their  closest  colleagues 
are  in  reality  their  closest  rivals. 
Much  more  than  in  graduate  school, 
the  faculty  peer  group  is  highly  com- 
petitive, and  rarely  disposed  to  mu- 
tual assistance.  The  reason  it  is  so 
competitive  is  that  there  are  virtu- 
ally no  collective  benefits  from 
academic  activities. 

Prestige  from  research  and  pub- 
lication accrues  to  the  individual 
scholar  and  the  department  at  large, 
but  not  to  other  scholars  in  the  de- 
partment. Grant  money  may  sup- 
port students  or  research  assistants, 
but  rarely  colleagues.  Popularity  with 
students  simply  makes  your  col- 
leagues look  worse.  In  contrast,  non- 
prestige -gaining  activities,  such  as  in- 
volvement in  committee  work  or  ac- 
ceptance of  difficult  courses  or  sche- 
dules imposes  burdens,  but  gains  no 
credit  at  tenure  time.  It  does  not 
take  too  long  for  new  faculty  to  see 
that  it  is  not  in  their  self  interest  to 
take  on  additional  responsibilities. 

Consequently,  what  faculty  com- 
pete for  is  not  prestige,  which  can 
only  be  conveyed  from  the  outside, 
but  time— time  off  from  heavy  teach- 
ing loads,  onerous  courses  and  other 
departmental  responsibilities.  It  is 
this  time  that  faculty  need  to  pro- 
duce the  publications  that  gain  pres- 
tige. It  is  to  get  this  time  that  faculty 
engage    in    the    internecine    warfare 


for  which  academia  is  notorious. 

In  the  competition  for  time,  wo- 
men are  frequently  at  a  disadvan- 
tage. First  of  all,  as  in  any  hierarchy, 
costs  and  burdens  are  generally 
passed  on  to  the  lowest  level,  and 
this  is  where  women  are  to  be  found, 
if  at  all.  Secondly,  because  women 
are  usually  "deviant"  in  the  faculty 
environment,  it  is  difficult  for  them 
to  find  other  faculty  with  common 
backgrounds  with  whom  they  can 
ally.  This  is  somewhat  alleviated  in 
those  rare  departments  with  more 
than  one  woman.  Third,  and  most 
important,  the  traditional  attitudes 
and  expectations  about  women  re- 
main. Women's  scholarly  achieve- 
ments are  simply  viewed  as  of  lesser 
importance  than  those  of  men;  they 
do  not  bring  prestige. 7  Concomi- 
tantly, woman  are  expected ',  much 
more  than  men,  to  render  service  to 
the  campus  community.  Doing  the 
departmental  housekeeping  chores  is 
quite  consistent  with  their  tradi- 
tional role.  A  woman  may  even  be 
hired  for  that  purpose  and  not  find 
out  until  it  is  too  late. 

For  these  reasons,  women  faculty 
tend  to  receive  their  strongest  and 
most  immediate  colleagial  rewards 
from  committee  or  student  work 
rather  than  professional  and  pub- 
lishing activity.  Yet  it  is  still  the 
traditional  double  bind:  those  wom- 
en who  stick  to  their  books  and  their 
labs  are  labelled  "incompatible"  or 
"uncooperative"  and  those  who 
don't  are  dismissed  when  tenure  time 
comes  for  insufficient  publications. 

The  Feminist  Impact 

The  operation  of  the  prestige- 
motive  can  be  easily  seen  if  we  ex- 


32/Quest 


amine  the  kind  of  impact  the  wo- 
men's liberation  movement  has  had 
on  academia.  There  have  been  basi- 
cally three  different  kinds  of  de- 
mands that  the  movement  has  made. 
The  first  is  for  more  and  better 
jobs— affirmative  action.  The  second 
is  for  curricular  changes-courses 
on  women,  and  even  degrees  for 
those  courses.  The  third  demand 
has  been  for  a  variety  of  fringe 
benefits  such  as  gynecological  care, 
women's  centers  and  child  care. 

Starting  from  the  proposition  that 
an  institution  gives  in  first  in  those 
areas  which  either  cost  the  least  or 
it  values  the  least,  what  has  been 
the  success  of  the  movement?  The 
low  cost  fringe  benefits— such  as 
women's  centers  and  feminist 
speakers— have  often  been  gained. 
The  expensive  ones  like  child  care 
have  not  been.  Curricular  changes 
have  come  fairly  readily.  It  is  es- 
timated that  there  are  several  thou- 
sand women's  studies  courses,  at 
least  two  dozen  majors  and  elev- 
en graduate  programs  in  women's 
studies. 8 

Needless  to  say,  none  of  the  ma- 
jors are  at  the  highest  prestige 
schools.  Gains  in  hiring  have  been 
virtually  nonexistent.  The  employ- 
ment of  female  academics  has  in- 
creased by  only  one  percent  since 
affirmative  action  programs  were  in- 
stituted, and  the  percentage  with 
tenure  has  actually  decreased.  Since, 
I  suspect,  the  percentage  of  Ph.Ds 
who  are  women  has  increased  by 
more  than  that,  the  net  result  has 
probably  been  a  minus  one.  While 
the  declining  academic  job  market 
creates  difficulty  for  even  the  best- 
intentioned  departments,  it  is  clear 
that  the  curriculum  has  been  more 


responsive  to  change  than  have  the 
personnel  committees. 

Why  is  this  so?  I  suggest  it  is  be- 
cause the  curriculum  is  where  the 
academic  world  has  the  least  at 
stake.  The  buyers  of  curricula  are 
students,  and  students  do  not  con- 
trol prestige.  Instead,  by  permitting 
or  even  encouraging  courses  on  wo- 
men, the  university  can  make  some 
very  real  gains.  1)  They  remove  some 
of  the  pressure  on  job  demands  as 
female  faculty  can  be  hired  for  wo- 
men's studies  courses-in  new  pro- 
grams or  with  new  lines— which 
doesn't  involve  telling  the  regular 
departments  they  must  hire  women. 
2)  It  allows  the  universities  an  op- 
portunity to  attract  students— who 
pay  tuition-by  appearing  to  be 
"with  it."  Course  offerings  are 
really  the  only  place  the  student 
view  counts— as  long  as  it  doesn't 
require  eliminating  any  of  the  es- 
tablished courses  but  only  adding 
new  ones.  In  this  era  of  decreasing 
enrollments,  many  women's  studies 
programs  maintain  their  precarious 
hold  on  the  budget  by  touting  their 
large  student  enrollments.  3)  In  most 
cases,  the  real  costs  are  often  borne 
by  the  women  faculty.  They  are  the 
ones  who  have  to  put  the  time  and 
energy  in  to  setting  up  the  programs 
or  preparing  the  new  courses.  Fre- 
quently women's  studies  courses  are 
taught  as  "overloads"  in  addition  to 
the  regular  course  load  and  even 
when  they  are  not,  they  only  use  up 
the  free  choice  course  options  fac- 
ulty have  available  to  them.  Those 
faculty  who  teach  primarily  women's 
studies  courses  pay  for  this  privi- 
lege by  becoming  non-persons  within 
their  original  discipline.  As  long  as 
the    creation    of    new    departments 


Feminism  and  Education/33 


with  their  own  budgets  is  not  de- 
manded, the  formation  of  women's 
studies  programs  involves  a  lot  of 
faculty  committee  work  and  very 
little  money.  When  such  new  depart- 
ments are  created,  they  effectively 
segregate  the  active  feminists  from 
the  rest  of  the  faculty,  and  from 
many  students. 

One    can    readily    see    the    signifi- 
cance  of  faculty  availability  to  set 


TENURE 


DENIED. 


high-prestige  schools  decreased  and 
they  appeared  in  the  state  colleges. 
Why?  The  graduate  students  gradu- 
ated. The  junior  faculty  women 
weren't  reappointed,  and  both  fol- 
lowed the  traditional  path  of  aca- 
demic women  into  the  second  eche- 
lon schools,  taking  their  courses 
with  them. 

Appointments  in  the  regular  depart- 
ments  on  the  regular  lines,  on  the 


up  these  programs  by  looking  at 
their  pattern  of  diffusion.  Women's 
colleges  have  had  many  such  courses 
for  years,  and  they  were  among  the 
first  to  initiate  new  ones  in  response 
to  the  demands  of  the  feminist 
movement.  The  other  origin  was 
in  the  high  prestige  universities 
where  most  Ph.D.s  are  incubated. 
Here  they  were  largely  initiated  and 
taught  by  graduate  students— occa- 
sionally without  pay.  Some  of  them 
were  taught  by  junior  faculty  wo- 
men. After  a  couple  of  years,  the 
number  of  women's  courses  in  the 


other  hand,  present  difficulties.  The 
faculty  prerogative  that  is  most 
zealously  guarded  is  the  right  to 
make  personnel  decisions.  The  ad- 
ministration usually  has  the  right- 
seldom  exercised— to  veto  depart- 
mental recommendations  but  not  to 
force  its  own  preference  upon  them. 
Faculty  are  most  concerned  about 
the  right  to  decide  who  shall  have 
the  prestige  of  associating  with  them, 
not  what  those  people  will  teach. 
The  concomitant  major  concern  is 
the  right  to  make  those  decisions  by 
whatever  means  they  wish.  It  is  the 


34/Quest 


challenge  to  this  right  that  makes 
affirmative  action  investigations  so 
threatening.  Male  faculty  members 
aren't  opposed  to  having  a  woman 
or  two  around— especially  in  the  un- 
tenured  slots.  What  they  are  op- 
posed to  is  having  to  make  their 
decision-making  procedures  public.^ 

The  reality  of  the  matter  is  that 
"merit"  is  only  one  of  the  criteria 
used  in  selecting  colleagues.  Having 
the  right  qualifications  and  the  right 
recommendations  may  get  one 
through  the  first  elimination  round 
to  the  interview  stage,  but  that's 
as  far  as  it  goes.  Beyond  that,  many 
purely  subjective  factors,  centering 
around  how  well  one  "fits  in"  to 
the  department,  are  primary. 10  jhe 
hiring  process  in  academia  is  quite 
similar  to,  and  serves  the  same  func- 
tions as,  sorority  "rushing"in  college. 

However,  since  under  the  prestige 
system  "merit"  is  the  only  legiti- 
mate rationale,  the  role  of  the  other 
factors  cannot  be  publicly  justified  J  1 
Thus  the  real  threat  of  affirmative 
action  requirements  is  that  they  will 
force  departments  to  "objectify" 
their  selection  procedures  or  to  ad- 
mit that  they  are,  in  fact,  not  ob- 
jective. Neither  consequence  is 
minor.  If  procedures  are  objectified, 
one  of  the  main  supports  of  the 
prestige  system  is  lost.  The  academic 
community,  like  similar  social  struc- 
tures, has  its  own  economy.  This 
economy  is  based  on  an  exchange 
of  favors,  not  money.  Jobs,  infor- 
mation about  openings,  publication 
in  anthologies  and  even  in  jour- 
nals, participation  on  panels,  criti- 
cal reviews,  ideas,  and  other  infor- 
mation are  among  the  favors  that 
can  be  exchanged.  Like  most  pri- 
mitive   economies    these    exchanges 


are  not  quid  pro  quo— but  given  or 
received  as  needed  with  the  under- 
standing that  eventually  they  will  be 
returned.  One  could  look  at  the 
academic  community  as  nothing 
more  than  an  overlapping  series  of 
exchange  networks.  Needless  to  say, 
some  faculty  are  in  a  position  to 
give  more  favors  than  they  need  to 
receive.  They  are  compensated  by 
being  accorded  higher  prestige.  To  a 
certain  extent  one  shows  one's  im- 
portance by  the  number  of  favors 
one  can  do.  Objectification  of  se- 
lection procedures  threatens  this  ex- 
change economy  by  removing  part  of 
the  "currency." 

It  is  therefore  unlikely  that  the 
academic  hiring  procedures  will  ever 
be  basically  altered.  In  industry  the 
government  can  pressure  for  affir- 
mative action  through  manipulation 
of  the  "profit-motive"— by  threat- 
ening to  cost  a  recalcitrant  company 
money.  Higher  education  does  not 
operate  on  the  profit  motive  and  is 
not  responsive  to  such  threats.  In- 
deed, the  prestige  motive  defies 
manipulation  because  to  change  the 
hiring  process  is  to  undermine  the 
prestige  system  itself. 

The  Future  of  the  Feminist  Scholar 

From  this  digression  it  should  be 
clear  that  the  future  for  the  feminist 
scholar  is  not  a  bright  one.  There  is 
no  place  in  the  current  academic 
system  where  we  can  find  a  home 
and  it  is  unlikely  that  the  feminist 
perspective  will  ever  be  an  accept- 
able one.  Nor  are  women's  studies 
programs,  where  many  feminists 
have  sought  refuge,  likely  to  prove 
havens  for  scholarship.  Their  situa- 
tion   15   so  tenuous,  that  all  energy 


Feminism  and  Education/35 


will  most  likely  be  directed  into 
teaching  and  program-building  ef- 
forts with  little  left  over  for  research. 
Instead,  the  feminist  scholar  will 
continue  in  the  future,  as  in  the  past, 
to  live  a  schizoid  existence— spending 
most  of  one's  time  engaged  in  sur- 
vival whether  by  teaching,  playing 
departmental  politics  or  doing  con- 
ventional research,  and  hoarding  a 
few  small  moments  of  one's  own  to 
follow  the  feminist  muse. 


FOOTNOTES 

1  Charles  Norton  Cooley,  Life  and  the 
Student:  Roadside  Notes  on  Human  Nature, 
Society  and  Letters  (New  York:  A.  S. 
Knopf,  1951)  p.  184. 

2A  year  after  I  first  gave  this  paper  I  dis- 
covered The  Academic  Marketplace  by 
Theodore  Caplow  and  Reece  J.  McGee  (New 
York:  Basic  Books,  1958).  These  authors 
also  found  that  prestige  was  the  "central 
variable"  which  interpreted  most  of  the 
findings  in  their  study  of  the  vacancy  and 
hiring  process  in  all  the  liberal  arts  depart- 
ments of  ten  "major  universities."  While 
my  observations  were  made  independently 
of  their  analysis,  I  will  cite  them  where  per- 
tinent. They  in  turn  are  indebted  to  Logan 
Wilson's  The  Academic  Man:  Sociology  of  a 
Profession  (London:  Oxford  University 
Press,  1942).  It  is  worth  noting  that  "pres- 
tige" has  been  seen  as  important  by  inde- 
pendent observers  for  a  very  long  time.  I 
would  like  to  thank  Leslie  R.  Wolfe  for  hav- 
ing provided  me  with  a  copy  of  Caplow  and 
McGee,  which  has  long  been  out  of  print. 

^Caplow  and  McGee,  p.  83. 

4/bid.,  p.  128.  "There  is  very  little 
point  in  trying  to  determine  how  good  the 
man  really  is.  .  .  .  What  is  important  is  what 
others  in  the  discipline  think  of  him,  since 
that  is,  in  large  part  how  good  he  is.  Pres- 
tige ...  is  not  a  direct  measure  of  productiv- 
ity but  a  composite  of  subjective  opinion." 

5Ab/tf.,p.91-92,  145. 

^Arthur  Friedman,  "Publish  or  Perish," 
The  University  of  Chicago  Record  6  (Octo- 
ber 31,  1972),  p.  105. 


7  Caplow  and  McGee,  p.  111.  Numerous 
studies  asking  "objective"  judges  to  rate  the 
quality  of  scholarly  articles,  artistic  works, 
vita,  and  other  forms  of  "productivity"  have 
shown  that  those  works  with  female  names 
attached  to  them  are  consistently  rated  in- 
ferior to  the  same  works  with  male  names. 

^Women's  Studies  Newsletter,  (January, 
1976),  p.  8. 

90ne  of  the  best  examples  of  this  fear  is 
Richard  Lester's  Antibias  Regulation  of 
Universities:  Faculty  Problems  and  Their 
Solutions;  A  Report  Prepared  for  the  Carne- 
gie Commission  on  Higher  Education.  (New 
York:  McGraw-Hill,  1974).  Caplow  and 
McGee  analyze  the  internal  political  reasons 
academic  institutions  want  to  maintain  the 
secrecy  of  their  hiring  process  on  p.  187. 
Many  of  the  quotations  they  give  us  as  to 
why  a  particular  person  was  hired  show  a 
high  degree  of  capriciousness  which  would 
be  reason  enough  to  desire  secrecy. 

10Caplow  and  McGee,  p.  133-134. 

11/£>/c/.,p.181. 

Jo  Freeman  is  the  author  of  The 
Politics  of  Women's  Liberation  (Long- 
man, 1975)  and  editor  of  Women:  A 
Feminist  Perspective  (May field,  1975 
and  1979). 


TENURE 


36/Quest 


praxis  jour 


Available 
February 


A  Journal  oj Radical  Perspectives  on  the  Arts 


Robert  Sayre,  'Goldmann  and  Modern 
Realism  :  Introduction  to  the  Balcony 
Article' 

Lucien  Goldmann,  'Genet's  The  Balcony :  A 
Realist  Play' 

Stefan  Morawski,  'Historicism  and  the 
Philosophy  of  Art' 

Alan  W.  Barnett,  'Jose  Hernandez  Delga- 
dillo :  The  New  Art  of  the  Mexican  Revo- 
lution' 

Marc  Zimmerman,  'Exchange  and  Produc- 
tion :  Structuralist  and  Marxist  Approach- 
es to  Literary  Theory' 
Ariel  Dorfman,  'The  Invisible  Chile :  Three 
Years  of  Cultural  Resistance' 
Marc  Ferro,  'Lagrande  illusion:  Its  Diver- 
gent Receptions  in  Europe' 
Andrew  Turner,  'Ballads  Moribundus'  (28 
drawings) 

William  Hartley,  'Lambras:  A  Vision  of 
Hell  in  the  Third  World' 
James  Goodwin,  'The  Object(ive)s  of  Cine- 
ma :  Vertov  (Factography)  and  Eisenstein 
(Ideography)' 

G.  L.  Ulmen,  'Aesthetics  in  a  "Disenchant- 
ed World'" 


Louis  Aragon,  'John  Heartneld  and  Revolu- 
tionary Beauty' 

Kenneth  Coutts-Smith,  'The  Political  Art  of 
Klaus  Staeck'  (with  over  60  reproductions) 

'The  Image  as  Weapon  :  Interview  with, 
and  Photomontages  by,  Christer  Themp- 
tander' 

Gregory  Renault,  'Over  the  Rainbow :  Dia- 
lect and  Ideology  in  The  Wizard  of  Oz' 

Alberto  Asor  Rosa,  'Gramsci  and  Italian 

Cultural  History' 

Stefan  Heym,  'The  Indifferent  Man'  (short 

story) 

Heinz  Briiggemann,  'Bertolt  Brecht  and 
Karl  Korsch :  Questions  of  Living  and 
Dead  Elements  Within  Marxism' 

Richard  Albrecht  and  Matthias  Mitzschke, 
'Bert  Brecht:  "Bolshevik  Without  a  Party 
Book"  or  Petit-Bourgeois  Intellectual?' 

Thomas  McGrath,  'Some  Notes  on  Walter 
Lowenfels' 

'The  Spanish  Civil  War :  A  Portrait  in 
Verse,  with  Photographs  by  Hans  Namuth 
and  Georg  Reisner' 

David  Craven,  'Towards  a  Newer  Virgil : 
Mondrian  De-mythologized' 


Plus  notes  and  discussion  by  Leonard  Henny,  Marc  Zimmerman,  Edward  Baker  and  Bram 
Dijkstra;  short  reviews  by  Lee  Baxandall,  Jonah  Raskin,  Frank  Galassi  and  David  Peck; 
poetry  by  Yannis  Ritsos,  Ernesto  Cardenal ,  Denise  Levertov,  Thomas  McGrath,  Tanure  Ojaide , 
Peter  Klappert,  Ricardo  Alonso,  Margaret  Randall,  Teresa  de Jesus,  Vicente  Gomez  Kemp,  Don 
Gordon,  Walter  Lowenfels,  Harryette  Mullen,  James  Scully,  Ricardo  Morales,  Mary  Lou  Reker, 
E.  Ethelbert  Miller  and  Susan  Anderson ;  drawings  by  Rene  Castro. 

Single  copies  :  $3-75-  Individual  subscriptions  (including  outside  the  United  States):  $7.oo 
for  two  issues.  Sustaining  subscriptions:  $Z5.oo.  For  checks  in  Canadian  dollars  please 
add  10%.  Praxis  is  distributed  in  the  U.K.,  Europe  and  the  Commonwealth  by  Pluto 
Press,  Unit  10  Spencer  Court,  7  Chalcot  Road,  London  NW  1  8LH,  England.  Subscrip- 
tions: £  4.00. 

Praxis,  P.O.  Box  207,  Goleta,  California  93017  USA 


Feminism  and  Education/37 


iiiiiiii!iniiiiiiiiiiii|iiiiiiii|iiiiiii|iiiiiiii||iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii|iiiiiiii|iiiiiiii|iiiiiiiiiiiiih 


L 


i 

I 

§ 

i 


Dear  Quest  Staff, 

The  "Body  Politic"  is- 
sue was  fantastic— really 
furthered  my  understand- 
ings of  what  it  means  to 
control  our  own  bodies 
and  how  to  look  at  what 
the  patriarchy  is  doing  to 
limit  that.  All  the  articles 
were  very  clearly  written 
(except  the  first  one— too 
intellectually  complex  to 
be  helpful  except  for  her 
conclusions).  The  articles 
themselves  spoke  for 
themselves,  richly,  with 
depth,  information,  in- 
sight—I didn't  even  miss 
the  nice  binding— three 
colors  which  I  love! 
Sincerely, 
Carolyn  Arnold 


H  Dear  Friends  at  Quest, 
S  I    think    I    must    have 

J£  been    one   of  the   charter 

s  subscribers  to  Quest.     At 

Jjf  some  point,  my  subscrip- 

^  tion  lapsed  and  I  did  not 

s  renew  it.     But  I  did  save 

%  my  back  issues. 
g  This  past  year  I  had  the 

Is  occasion  to  dig  them  out. 

=  I   was  helping  to  coordin- 

s  ate  a  list  of  readings  for  a 

s  macroanalysis        seminar. 

=  These  seminars  have  been 

s^  seeded   by  the  Movement 

H"  for  a  New  Society  out  of 

=  Philadelphia.    We  felt  that 


their  bibliography  needed 
more  readings  with  a  fem- 
inist analysis,  although 
they  did  have  some  articles 
from  Quest  already  listed. 
We  particularly  relied  on 
the  "Future  Visions"  is- 
sue, as  well  as  the  one  on 
"Processes  of  Change." 

In  going  back  through 
the  back  issues,  I  found 
many  pieces  which  I  had 
never  read  the  first  time, 
including  the  whole  issue 
on  "Women  and  Spiritual- 
ity." I  also  reread  some.  I 
guess  my  perspective  has 
changed  because  I  certain- 
ly enjoyed  these  pieces 
more  now,  several  years 
after  they  first  appeared. 

Enclosed  please  find 
my  subscription  renewal. 
Welcome  me  back  to  the 
fold. 

In  sisterhood, 
Sally  Banks  Craig 
Washington,  D.C 


Dear  Feminists, 
Your  last  issue,  "Body  Pol- 
itic," was  great.  I  have  felt 
the  need  for  the  move- 
ment to  begin  creating  ra- 
ther than  just  reacting. 
The  potential  is  over- 
whelming. I  am  in  the 
process  of  developing  an 
idea  that  could  facilitate 
women  coming  together  to 


38/Quest,  vol.  V.  no.  1,  summer,  1979 


develop  and  act  out  femin- 
ist theory  and  living,  and 
the  issue  was  a  definite 
stimulus  to  the  concept. 
Enclosed  is  my  renewal 
subscription  and  an  order 
of  Volume  I,  1974-75  and 


Volume 
check. 


II,  1975-76  with  a 

Sincerely, 
Chesie  Lee 
Bay  City,  Wl 


Dear  Quest, 

I  think  your  magazine  is 
great.  You  article  on  the 
process-product  split  was 
especially  enlightening.  In 
fact,  we're  using  it  to  help 
get  organized  our  political 
committee  of  Lesbian  Sis- 
ters of  Fort  Collins.  It's 
nice  to  find  articles  that 
help  with  the  problems  in 
your  life. 

Quest  is  exactly  what  I'd 
hoped  it  would  be,  an  in- 
tellectual, stimulating  jour- 
nal. Keep  up  the  good 
work.       I'm    looking  for- 


ward    to    receiving    your  || 

next  issue.  ^ 

Since  "Big  Mama  Rag"  is  jp 

in  tolerable  financial  shape  ^ 

I've  decided  to  send  you  a  jp 

larger  check.      Hope  you  "|| 

can  use  it.  = 

In  sisterhood,  = 

Karen  Fields  if 

Fort  Collins,  CO  f§ 


Dear  Wimmin  of  Quest, 
I  would  like  to  order  your 
sets  of  Quest,  Volumes  I 
and  II;  and  also  renew  my 
subscription.  I  also  want 
to  tell  you  that  I  have  just 
finished  reading  your 
"Body  Politic"  issue  from 
cover-to-cover,  and  think 
that  it  is  an  enormously 
valuable  collection  of  arti- 
cles. Thank  you  all  for  the 
work  and  energy  you  put 
into  communicating  these 
important  things  to  wim- 
min. 

In  sisterhood, 

Diana  Willow 
Fountainwomon 
Kalamazoo,  Ml 


iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiittiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii^ 


voted  most 
likely  to 
succeed. 


The  game,  that  is. 
Deck  of  52  colorful, 
beautiful  playing  cards 
treat  women  equally 
and  men  realistically. 
Non-sexist  fun  for  all 

TM 

aware  ages. 

$6  check  or  money  order  to  WD  Enter- 
prises, Dept.  J,  8633  Brae  Brooke  Dr., 
Lanham,  Md.  20801.  Money  back 
guarantee. 


Chauvinist 


Letters/39 


Rape,  Racism  &  Reality 


By  DEB  FRIEDMAN 

graphics  by  Carol  Stannard 

This  article  appeared  in  the  July/ 
August  1978  issue  of  the  FAAR/NCN 
Newsletter  (now  entitled  Aegis:  Maga- 
zine on  Ending  Violence  Against  Wom- 
en, P.O.  Box  21033,  Washington,  D.C 
20009). 

Exploring  the  relationship  between 
racism  and  rape  has  not  been  a  signifi- 
cant part  of  the  feminist  analysis  on 
rape.  Feminist  organizers  have  ad- 
dressed racism  through  exposure  of 
myths  concerning  interracial  rape  and 
through  programs  designed  for  out- 
reach to  black,  Hispanic,  Chicano, 
Indian  or  Asian  women.  These  have 
often  come  about  in  response  to  pres- 
sure, or  as  an  outgrowth  of  our  desire 
to  meet  the  needs  of  all  women.  They 
are  not  the  result  of  a  unified  analytic 
position  on  racism  and  rape. 

We  recognize  that  rape  and  racism 
are  part  of  the  same  oppressive  struc- 
ture, and  that  they  are  mutually  sup- 
portive. Perspectives  on  racism  must 
become  part  of  our  analysis  of  rape. 
This  article  was  written  to  begin 
drawing  together  a  comprehensive  an- 
alysis of  rape  that  coordinates  anti- 
rape  with  anti-racism  perspectives. 
[Because  they  express  some  of  the 
concerhs  that  we  feel  need  to  be  ad- 
dressed,] this  article  is  focused  on 
authors  who  have  been  critical  of  the 


anti-rape  movement  for  failing  to  in- 
clude perspectives  on  racism  in  our 
views  of  rape. 

Any  view  of  rape  is  limited  if  it 
fails  to  incorporate  a  perspective  on 
racism  —  first,  because  of  the  particu- 
lar history  of  the  relationship  between 
racism  and  rape  in  this  country  and 
second,  because  any  view  of  rape 
must  account  for  the  fact  that  rape  af- 
fects women  of  different  races  (classes, 
ethnic  groups,  etc.)  in  different  ways. 

The  particular  experience  of  black 
people  in  this  country  inextricably 
links  racism  with  the  act  of  rape.  The 
discriminatory  prosecution  of  black 
men  for  the  crime  of  rape  and  the 
gross  lack  of  sanctions  against  the  rape 
of  black  women  (by  white  men  par- 
ticularly), constitutes  the  reality 
through  which  black  men  and  women 
view  rape. 

Perspectives  on  rape  relevant  to 
black  women  cannot  be  separated 
from  the  experience  of  racism.  This 
includes  racism  toward  black  men  as 
well  as  women.  Lynn  Lloyd,  of  Cham- 
paign County  Women  Against  Rape,  in 
her  review  of  Alison  Edward's  "Rape, 
Racism,  and  the  White  Women's  Move- 
ment: An  Answer  to  Susan  Brown- 
miller,  "1  notes: 

"Alison  Edwards  objects  strongly  to 
Brownmiller's  analysis  of  rape  as  the 
primary  source  of  oppression  of  all 
women  —  this,  she  says,  aligns  all 
women  against  all  men,  regardless  of 


AOIQuest,  vol.  V.  no.  1 ,  summer,  1979 


©      Feminist  Alliance  against   Rape   1978. 


class  or  race.  But  clearly,  a  black  fe- 
male worker  has  more  in  common 
with  a  black  male  worker  than  she 
does  with  Happy  Rockefeller.  I  think 
that  this  is  a  point  which  has  frequent- 
ly been  overlooked  by  white  feminists 
—  that  the  black  women 's  concerns  for 
economic  and  community  survival 
often  take  higher  priority  than  'wom- 
en's issues,'  and  that  frequently  the 
black  woman  will  feel  uncomfortable 
working  with  economically  secure, 
middle-class  white  women  when  their 
concerns  do  not  clearly  include  the 
liberation  of  all  black  people  (not  just 
women).  "2 

Beginning  with  Anne  Braden 
("Open  Letter  to  Southern  White 
Women,"  Southern  Patriot,  1972),  a 
number  of  authors  have  expressed  con- 
cern about  the  racist  potential  of  the 
anti-rape  movement  in  ignoring  the 
particular  experience  of  black  men  and 
women  with  rape.  Braden  focuses 
specifically  on  the  racist  application  of 
rape  laws  against  black  men  and  ex- 
horts white  women  to  examine  how 
they  have  been  used  by  white  men  to 
help  keep  black  men  in  their  place. 
Braden  bases  her  arguments  on  the  his- 
tory of  racism  and  rape  in  this  coun- 
try. Rape  and  laws  against  it  were 
used  by  white  men  to  oppress  black 
people  as  well  as  to  protect  their  pro- 
perty rights  in  women. 

History  of  Racism  and  Rape 

Innumerable  efforts  were  made 
during  slavery  to  degrade  the  dignity 
of  black  people.  According  to 
A.  Leon  Higginbotham,  Jr.,  in  an 
article  in  the  Washington  Post,  degre- 
dation  of  slaves  was  incorporated  into 
the  legal  codes  of  the  southern  colon- 
ies in  order  to  institutionalize  the  dis- 


tinction between  white  indentured  ser- 
vants —  those  who  received  their  free- 
dom after  a  certain  number  of  years  — 
and  black  slaves.  An  example  of  a  law 
which  made  black  the  legal  equivalent 
of  slave  was  passed  in  1680  in  Virginia. 
This  law  stated  "that  no  Negro  or  slave 
may  carry  arms  .  .  .  nor  go  from  his 
owner's  plantation  without  a  certifi- 
cate and  then  only  on  necessary  oc- 
casions. .  .  .  And  further,  if  any  Negro 
lift  up  his  hand  against  any  Christian 
he  shall  receive  thirty  lashes,  and  if 
he  absent  himself  or  lie  out  from  his 
master's  service  and  resist  lawful  ap- 
prehension, he  may  be  killed  and 
this  law  shall  be  published  every  six 
months. "  Higginbotham  notes  that, 
"if  blacks  could  be  whipped  for  lifting 
up  a  hand  against  any  Christian  — 
regard  less  of  the  provocation  —  then 
the  dehumanization  process  was  com- 
plete because  blacks  were  legally  pre- 
cluded from  responding  in  a  manner 
thought  normal  for  whites  or  most 
other  human  beings.  "3 

Sexual  double  standards  were  also 
codified  so  that  the  offspring  of  a 
white  man  and  a  slave  woman  could 
not  by  law  be  recognized  as  free. 
Neither  white  men  nor  white  women 
were  permitted  to  marry  blacks.  The 
law  also  created  strict  penalties  for  a 
white  woman  who  gave  birth  to  the 
child  of  a  black  man;  however,  there 
was  no  law  against  a  white  man  having 
sexual  relations  with  a  black  woman 
and  it  was  not  a  crime  if  a  black  wom- 
an bore  a  white  man's  child.4 

Rape  laws  were  designed  to  main- 
tain the  property  rights  of  white  men 
and  to  control  blacks.  The  law  made 
rape  a  capital  offense  only  for  a  black 
man  found  guilty  of  raping  a  white 
woman.  A  white  man  who  raped  a 
white   woman   could    receive  a  maxi- 


Rape,  Racism  and  Reality/41 


mum  sentence  of  no  more  than  20 
years,  depending  on  the  state.  No- 
where in  the  law  was  the  rape  of  a 
black  woman  considered  a  crime. 

The  rape  of  slave  women  by  whites 
was  in  fact  a  common  occurrence.  In 
addition  to  having  no  protection  from 
the  sexual  whim  of  any  white  man, 
many  black  women  were  forced  to 
comply  with  ongoing  sexual  relations 
with  theii*  white  owners.  Although 
some  black  women  received  slightly 
better  treatment  than  many  of  the 
other  slaves  for  providing  sexual  ser- 
vices to  the  white  owner,  their  rela- 
tionships were  rarely  consensual.  Re- 
fusals were  not  treated  lightly. 

In  addition  to  having  total  sexual 
rights  to  slave  women,  white  slave 
owners  used  black  women  to  breed  a 
constant  supply  of  slave  children.  In 
some  states  in  particular,  slave  breed- 
ing was  a  profitable  trade.  The  use  of 
slave  women  as  "breeders"  and  as  con- 
cubines was  in  total  disregard  of  rela- 
tionships between  black  men  and 
women.  That  a  slave  woman  he  used 
sexually  had  a  husband  was  of  little 
concern  to  the  master.  Thus  were 
blacks  forced  to  bear  sexual  as  well  as 
racial  transgressions  against  them  as  a 
people. 

After  slavery  ended,  sexual  and 
physical  terror  were  used  as  the  means 
of  keeping  blacks  in  their  place.  In 
their  pamphlet  entitled,  "The  Racist 
Use  of  Rape  and  the  Rape  Charge," 
the  Socialist  Women's  Caucus  of 
Louisville  describes  the  end  of  Recon- 
struction: 

"After  the  Civil  War,  there  was  a 
brief  period  of  Reconstruction.  The 
freed  slaves  won  the  right  to  vote  and 
own  land,  and  they  joined  with  poor 
whites  to  set  up  new  governments  in 
the  Old  Confederacy.     This  brief  ex- 


periment in  democracy  was  over- 
thrown literally  by  force  and  violence; 
the  Ku  Klux  Klan  and  other  such 
groups  began  a  reign  of  terror  that 
lasted  for  decades.  .  .  .  This  was  the 
period  when  the  Jim  Crow  laws  were 
enacted  —  making  it  a  crime  for  Black 
and  white  to  come  together  In  any 
way,  even  for  a  game  of  checkers  In 
some  places.  "5 

The  systematic  terrorization  of 
black  communities  by  the  Klan  fre- 
quently included  the  rape  of  black 
women.  A  common  practice  of  the 
Klan  during  an  attack  on  a  black 
community  was  to  rape  the  women, 
and  burn  peoples'  homes  and 
churches.  Rapes  served  to  terrorize 
the  entire  community  in  the  same  way 
as  lynchings.  Blacks  were  powerless  to 
oppose  either  one.  A  number  of  men 
were  in  fact  lynched  for  attempting  to 
defend  women  from  their  attackers. 
By  viciously  attacking  black  communi- 
ties, the  Klan  and  those  whose  racial 
prejudice  they  helped  to  stir  up  beat 
the  newly  freed  black  men  and  women 
into  submission.  This  ensured  the  con- 
tinued superior  status  of  whites  and 
furthered  the  division  between  whites 
and  blacks. 

'The  most  effective  tool  for  this 
division  was  the  cry  of  rape.  An  at- 
mosphere was  created  in  which  every 
Black  man  was  pictured  to  the  white 
community  —  poor  and  rich  —  as  a 
savage  potential  rapist,  who  must  be 
kept  under  control.  . .  ."6 

Playing  on  racial  fears  and  sexual 
stereotypes,  the  Klan  was  able  to  con- 
vince whites  that  all  black  men  wanted 
to  rape  white  women.  Charging  a 
number  of  black  men  with  rapes  of 
white  women,  the  Klan  gained  ap- 
proval among  many  whites  for  their 
terrorist  activities. 


A2IQuest 


"In  the  76  years  between  the  sign- 
ing of  the  Emancipation  Proclamation 
and  World  War  II,  approximately 
3,000  Blacks  were  lynched  by  mobs 
and  20%  of  the  victims  had  been 
charged  with  rape. "7 

Despite  the  fact  that  for  every  five 
lynchings,  only  one  involved  an  al- 
leged rape,  the  rape  scare  was  used  by 
whites  to  justify  the  use  of  mob  justice 
against  black  men  and  women.  The 
accusation  of  rape  was  made  by  white 
men  who  often  pressured  women  into 
supporting  their  charge.  In  many 
cases,  the  mere  suggestion  by  a  white 
man  that  a  black  man  had  had  sexual 
relations  with  a  white  woman  was 
enough  provocation  for  a  lynching. 


Through  the  use  of  the  legal  sys- 
tem, the  power  of  the  rape  charge  to 
control  black  men  and  the  vulner- 
ability of  black  women  to  rape  by 
white  men  remained  even  after  the 
Klan's  power  had  greatly  diminished 
by  the  end  of  the  1920s.  Discrimina- 
tory slave  codes  were  eliminated,  but 
the  new  rape  laws  called  for  discre- 
tionary death  sentences  for  rape  con- 
victions. This  allowed  the  courts  to 
sentence  mainly  black  men  to  death 
for  rape. 

Rapes  of  black  women,  although  il- 
legal, continued  to  be  ignored  by  the 
law.  The  general  attitude  toward 
black  women  who  had  sexual  relations 
with    white    men    presupposed    that 


Rape,  Racism  and  Reality /43 


black  women,  because  of  their  reputed 
great  interest  in  and  capacity  for  sex- 
ual activity,  could  not  literally  be 
raped.  Today's  myth  of  the  promis- 
cuity of  black  women  evolved  from 
this  early  assumption  of  black  wom- 
en's complicity  in  "illicit"  sexual  rela- 
tions with  white  men.  According  to 
Gerda  Lerner,  editor  of  Black  Women 
in  White  America:  A  Documentary 
History : 

"By  assuming  a  different  level  of 
sexuality  for  all  Blacks  than  that  of 
whites  and  mythifying  their  greater 
sexual  potency,  the  black  woman 
could  be  made  to  personify  sexual 
freedom  and  abandon.  A  myth  was 
created  that  all  black  women  were 
eager  for  sexual  exploits,  voluntarily 
'loose'  in  their  morals  and,  therefore, 
deserved  none  of  the  consideration 
and  respect  granted  to  white  women. 
Every  black  woman  was,  by  definition, 
a  slut  according  to  this  racist  mytholo- 
gy; therefore,  to  assault  her  and  ex- 
ploit her  sexually  was  not  reprehen- 
sible and  carried  with  it  none  of  the 
normal  communal  sanctions  against 
such  behavior.  A  wide  range  of 
practices  reinforced  this  myth:  the 
laws  against  intermarriage;  the  denial 
of  the  title  'Miss'  or  'Mrs.'  to  any 
black  woman;  the  taboos  against  re- 
spectable social  mixing  of  the  races; 
the  refusal  to  let  black  women  cus- 
tomers try  on  clothing  in  stores  before 
making  a  purchase;  the  assigning  of 
single  toilet  facilities  to  both  sexes  of 
Blacks;  the  different  legal  sanctions 
against  rape,  abuse  of  minors  and 
other  sex  crimes  when  committed 
against  white  or  black  women.  "8 

Angela  Davis,  in  "The  Dialec- 
tics of  Rape,"  points  out: 

"If  rape  was,  in  effect,  institution- 
alized during  slavery,   essentially  the 


same  institutionalized  form  of  rape  is 
present  today  in  such  vestiges  of 
slavery  as  domestic  work.  How  many 
black  women  working  in  the  homes  of 
white  people  have  not  had  to  confront 
the  'man  of  the  house '  as  an  actual  or 
potential  rapist?  "9 

Rapes  of  black  women  by  police 
are  not  infrequent  either.  "Even  at 
the  strongest  time  of  the  civil  rights 
movement  in  Birmingham,  young 
activists  often  stated  that  nothing 
could  protect  Black  women  from  be- 
ing raped  by  Birmingham  police.  As 
recently  as  December,  1974,  in 
Chicago,  a  17-year-old  Black  woman 
reported  that  she  was  gang-raped  by 
10  policemen.  Some  of  the  men  were 
suspended,  but  ultimately  the  whole 
thing  was  swept  under  the  rug.  "1 0 

The  Meaning  Of  History 

The  specific  role  rape  plays  in  the 
subordination  of  black  women  is  per- 
ceived by  Gerda  Lerner  as  one  aspect 
of  the  colonial  oppression  of  blacks: 

"The  practice  of  raping  the  women 
of  a  defeated  enemy  is  worldwide  and 
is  found  in  every  culture.  The  occur- 
rence of  this  practice  during  many  race 
riots  and  during  periods  of  terror 
against  Blacks  at  various  times  in  U.S. 
history  merely  affirms  the  colonial 
nature  of  the  oppression  of  Black 
people  in  the  United  States.  It  is  the 
ultimate  expression  of  contempt  for  a 
defeated  foe,  since  it  symbolizes  his 
helplessness  more  fully  than  any  other 
conceivable  act. .  . . 

"The  historical  record  does  not 
lend  itself  to  interpretations  explain- 
ing such  events  as  the  isolated  acts  of 
criminal  individuals.  The  absence  of 
punishment  of  white  and  Black  men 
for  the  same  offense  simply  under- 
scores the  double  standard  of  justice 


AA/Quest 


for  the  ruler  and  the  ruled.  It  must  be 
understood  that  'individual  acts  of 
criminal  behavior'  on  the  part  of  white 
men  toward  Black  women  arise  out  of 
and  are  reinforced  by  the  prevalent 
cultural  racist  myths.  "1 1 

Angela  Davis  explains  how  colonial 
oppression  of  blacks  is  implied  with 
every  act  of  rape  of  a  black  woman  by 
a  white  man: 

".  .  .  rape  is  not  one-dimensional 
and  homogeneous  —  but  one  feature 
that  does  remain  constant  is  the  overt 
and  flagrant  treatment  of  women, 
through  rape,  as  property.  Particular 
rape  cases  will  then  express  different 
modes  in  which  women  are  handled  as 
property. 

"Thus  when  a  white  man  rapes  a 
black  woman,  the  underlying  meaning 
of  this  crime  remains  inaccessible  if 
one  is  blind  to  the  historical  dimen- 


The  Lesbian 
Community 

Deborah  Goleman 
Wolf 

The  self-concept  of  lesbians  has 
shifted  radically  in  the  1970s.  The 
isolation  and  fear  of  disclosure 
has  given  way  to  an  activist  com- 
munity based  on  lesbian  feminist 
principles.  This  first  book-length 
treatment  of  a  lesbian  community 
illuminates  these  newly  defined 
values  and  attitudes.  Without  ig- 
noring the  difficulties  of  such  a 
life,  Wolf  draws  a  picture  of  a 
strong,  vigorous,  healthy  group 
of  women  who  are  working  to- 
gether productively.  $12.95 

University  of  California  Press 
Berkeley  94720 


sions  of  the  act. .  .  ."  And,  "For  black 
women,  rape  perpetrated  by  white 
men,  like  the  social  stereotype  of 
black  men  as  rapists,  must  be  classed 
among  the  brutal  paraphernalia  of 
racism. ...  "12 

Both  Davis  and  Lerner  note  that 
the  rape  of  black  women  is  directly 
related  to  the  discriminatory  charge  of 
rape  against  black  men.  The  same 
sexual  stereotyping  that  enabled  black 
women  to  be  exploited  caused  black 
men  to  be  feared.  Coupled  with  anti- 
miscegenation  laws  and  their  implica- 
tion that  no  white  woman  would  will- 
ingly have  sex  with  a  black  man, 
myths  of  black  men  being  sexually  ag- 
gressive towards  whites  served  as  the 
excuse  for  enforcing  the  death  penalty 
almost  exclusively  against  black 
rapists.  Rape  laws  were  employed  to 
keep  black  men  in  their  place,  as  the 
following  statistics  suggest. 

"During  the  period  from  1908  to 
1963,  41  Blacks  were  executed  in 
Virginia  for  rape,  13  for  attempted 
rape,  one  for  rape  and  robbery,  and 
one  for  attempted  rape  and  highway 
robbery.  During  the  same  period,  no 
whites  were  put  to  death  for  rape  or 
attempted  rape  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  42%  of  all  convicted  rape  of- 
fenders were  white.  "1 3 

Since  1930,  455  men,  of  whom  405 
were  black,  were  executed  for  rape. 
Few  of  the  victims  of  black  men  ex- 
ecuted for  rape  have  been  black  and 
no  white  man  has  ever  been  executed 
for  the  rape  of  a  black  woman. 

Subsequent  to  the  U.S.  Supreme 
Court's  death  penalty  decision,  in 
1972,  69%  of  the  rapists  sentenced  to 
death  row  have  been  black;  at  least 
five  states  have  restored  the  death 
penalty  for  rape;  and  one  state  has 
adopted   legislation  providing  for  life 


Rape,  Racism  and  Reality /45 


sentences    without    chance   of  parole 
for  convicted  rapistsJ4 

A  number  of  court  cases  charging 
black  men  with  the  rape  of  white 
women  have  been  predicated  on 
frame-ups  and  false  charges.  While 
these  cases  may  not  represent  the 
majority  or  even  a  significant  per- 
centage of  all  cases  in  which  a  black 
man  has  been  accused  of  raping  a 
white  woman,  they  have  come  to 
symbolize  how  blatantly  the  rape 
charge  is  used  to  discriminate  against 
and  control  blacks. 

Following  is  a  brief  description  of 
some  of  the  better  known  cases. 
Most  of  them  had  defense  commit- 
tees involving  participation  by  civil 
rights  groups;  some  were  also  defended 
by  the  Communist  Party. 

Scottsboro  —  In  1931,  two  white 
women  were  on  a  train  returning  from 
Chattanooga,  TN.,  to  Huntsville,  AL. 
A  fight  broke  out  between  whites 
and  blacks  and  the  white  men  were 
chased  off  the  train  by  the  black 
men.  The  two  white  women  were  the 
only  whites  left  on  the  train.  When 
they  pulled  into  the  station  at  Hunts- 
ville, a  large  posse  of  armed  men  who 
had  already  been  informed  of  the  situ- 
ation, were  ready  to  accuse  the  black 
men  of  raping  the  white  women. 
When  asked  if  they  were  raped  by  any 
of  the  black  men  the  women  said  they 
had  been,  and  nine  black  men,  aged 
13  to  20,  were  tried  and  convicted. 
All  but  one  were  sentenced  to  die.  At 
the  second  trial,  one  of  the  women 
said  she  had  lied  (the  other  woman 
held  to  the  original  story)  but  the 
men's  convictions  were  upheld.  The 
judge  in  that  trial  ordered  a  new  trial 
and  by  1951,  20  years  later,  all  of  the 
Scottsboro  "boys"  had  been  acquit- 
ted.   The  Scottsboro  cause  was  taken 


up  by  the  Communist  Party  which 
raised  the  money  for  the  defense 
and  publicized  the  case. 

Willie  McGee  -  In  1951,  Willie 
McGee  was  electrocuted  following 
three  trials  which  resulted  in  his  con- 
viction for  breaking  into  a  home  and 
raping  Willametta  Hawkins,  a  white 
woman  in  Laurel,  Mississippi.  Al- 
though the  fact  that  McGee  was  having 
an  affair  with  Hawkins,  a  married 
woman,  was  never  brought  out  in 
court,  it  was  well  known  among  both 
whites  and  blacks  in  that  community. 
McGee  never  took  the  stand  in  his  own 
defense,  and  Hawkins  never  wavered 
from  her  charge  of  rape.  The  signifi- 
cance of  Hawkins  and  McGee's  prior 
acquaintance  is  that,  while  prior  sexual 
history  has  been  a  sure  defense  in  al- 
most every  other  case  when  it  has  been 
established,  in  this  case,  the  defense 
attorneys  didn't  even  bring  it  up  be- 
cause they  knew  it  would  have  no 
credibility. 

Thomas  Wansley  —  In  the  early 
1960s,  during  civil  rights  organizing  in 
Lynchburg,  Virginia,  Wansley  was 
convicted  of  raping  a  white  woman 
who  could  not  identify  him  as  her  at- 
tacker. The  sentence  was  later  re- 
duced to  life  imprisonment. 

Willie  Burnett  —  Burnett's  case  in- 
volved the  rape  of  a  white  woman  in  a 
laundromat  in  Louisville,  Kentucky,  in 
the  early  1970s.  Her  initial  descrip- 
tion of  the  rapist  differed  markedly 
from  Burnett's  despcription.  Other 
people  present  in  the  laundromat  also 
said  the  descriptions  didn't  match, 
but  Burnett  was  convicted  and  given  a 
life  sentence. 

Delbert  Tibbs  -  In  1975,  Tibbs  was 
accused  of  raping  a  white  woman  and 
murdering  her  male  companion  in 
Florida.    The  woman  said  her  attacker 


AQIQuest 


drove  a  green  pick-up  truck  and  was  a 
"very  Black  man  with  a  pock-marked 
face."  Tibbs,  a  poet  from  Chicago 
who  was  visiting  in  the  area,  has  light 
skin  and  a  clear  complexion.  No  evi- 
dence of  a  green  pick-up  was  found 
either,  but  Tibbs  was  sentenced  to 
death  row. 

Kenneth  Johnson  —  A  series  of 
rapes  in  the  downtown  Buffalo,  New 
York,  business  district  during  the 
1975  Christmas  shopping  season 
prompted  area  merchants  to  pressure 
police  to  find  the  rapist  whose  activi- 
ties were  threatening  their  business. 
A  composite  sketch  of  the  rapist  was 
published  and  Kenneth  Johnson  was 
arrested  (and  also  beaten  during  the  ar- 
rest). While  he  was  in  jail,  at  least  one 
other  similar  rape  took  place,  and  one 
of  the  women  who  was  raped  insisted 
that  Johnson  was  not  the  man  who 
had  attacked  her.  Although  Johnson's 
description  didn't  match  the  rapist's, 
he  was  convicted  for  one  of  the  rapes 
and  sentenced  to  5  to  1 5  years. 1 5 

Emmett  Till  —  Fourteen  year  old 
Till's  crime  was  to  wolf-whistle  at  a 
white  woman  and  brag  about  sexual 
relations  he  had  had  with  white  wom- 
en. Till  was  never  accused  of  any- 
thing. He  was  killed  by  the  husband 
of  the  woman  he  whistled  at  and 
another  man,  both  of  whom  were 
acquitted  of  the  murder,  in  Money, 
Mississippi,  in  1955. 

The  Racist  Potential  of  the 
Anti-Rape  Movement 

A  significant  number  of  the  above 
cases  involve  men  convicted  of  rape 
despite  the  fact  that  their  description 
does  not  match  that  of  the  rapist.  It  is 
not  unusual  for  the  police  to  round  up 
any  black  man  off  the  street  after  a 


rape  has  been  reported.  However,  ar- 
resting the  wrong  man  is  one  thing  — 
and  convicting  and  executing  him  is 
another.  What  this  suggests  is  that 
whites  are  satisfied  to  have  any  black 
man  punished  when  a  white  woman 
has  been  raped  by  a  black  man;  i.e., 
blacks  are  responsible  for  rape. 

The  notion  that  it  is  primarily 
blacks  who  commit  rape  is  deeply  in- 
grained in  the  criminal  justice  system. 
Increasingly,  this  dangerous  fallacy  is 
being  accepted  and  promoted  by  cri- 
minologists and  social  science  re- 
searchers. With  a  few  exceptions,  anti- 
rape  literature  is  mainly  concerned 
with  refuting  the  inter-racial  myth 
(i.e.,  according  to  most  studies,  90%  of 
rapes  are  />7fr77-racial).  The  absence  of 
an  analysis  of  racism  and  rape  in  books 
written  by  feminists  allows  racist 
sociological  interpretations  of  rape  to 
gain  undue  exposure.  Some  of  the 
literature  that  has  been  prompted  by 
the  anti-rape  movement  has  come 
dangerously  close  to  echoing  the 
theme  of  black  man  as  rapist.  For  in- 
stance, June  Bundy  Csida's  Rape: 
How  to  Avoid  It  and  What  to  Do 
about  It  if  You  Can't^  gives  uncriti- 
cal exposure  to  Menachim  Amir's  two 
categories  of  rapists  which  stereotype 
white  rapists  as  sexually-inhibited 
"psychiatric"  rapists  and  black  rapists 
as  sexually-uninhibited  "criminal" 
rapists  from  the  ghetto  J  7 

Susan  Brownmiller's  Against  Our 
Will:  Men,  Women  and  Rape^  epit- 
omizes the  way  the  rape  issue  can  be 
used  to  promote  racist  ideologies.  In 
Against  Our  Will,  rape  is  taken  out  of 
any  social  context  and  used  meta- 
phorically as  the  basis  of  all  interac- 
tions between  men  and  women.  To 
support  her  thesis  of  the  primacy  of 
rape,  Brownmiller  attempts  to  invali- 


Rape,  Racism  and  Reality /47 


date  racism  as  the  primary  issue  in 
any  situation  involving  rape  and  race. 
The  implication  of  this  book,  then,  is 
that  racism  is  no  longer  a  major  con- 
cern for  feminists.  (Brownmiller  her- 
self promotes  the  equal  participation 
of  women  in  institutions  such  as  law 
enforcement  as  the  solution  to  all 
society's  problems.) 

Two  articles  —  "Racism  and  Con- 
temporary Literature  on  Rape"  by 
Angela  Davis,19  and  "Rape,  Racisim 
and  the  White  Women's  Movement," 
by  Alison  Edwards,20  _  appeared  in 
1976  in  response  to  Brownmiller.  Not 
only  do  Edwards  and  Davis  suggest 
that  Brownmiller  is  guilty  of  contribu- 
ting to  the  scapegoating  of  black  men 
for  rape,  but  they  also  feel  that  she 
does  not  deal  correctly  with  racism 
toward  black  women. 

An  example  of  this  is  Brownmiller's 
reaction  to  Gerda  Lerner,  who  describes 
the  rape  of  black  women  by  the  Ku 
Klux  Klan  as  politically  motivated 
abuse  directed  specifically  at  black 
women.  Brownmiller,  in  her  book, 
downplays  the  racial  aspects  of  the 
rape  of  black  women  by  stating  in 
response  to  Lerner  that  "...  a  higher 
political  understanding  is  gained  by  re- 
cognizing that  sexual  intimidation 
knows  no  racial  distinctions,  and  that 
sexual  oppression  of  white  and  black 
women  is  commonly  shared. "21  This 
may  be  true  in  general,  but  Brown- 
miller applies  this  maxim  to  a  situation 
in  which  black  women  only  and  not 
white  women  were  the  targets  for 
rape.  This  shows  total  disregard  for 
the  racism  that  was  being  expressed 
by  the  Klan  toward  black  women, 
and  ignores  the  Klan's  use  of  rape  for 
the  purpose  of  terrorizing  black 
people. 

Edwards  and  Davis  both  discuss  the 


racist  overtones  in  Brownmiller's  treat- 
ment of  the  Scottsboro,  McGee  and 
Till  cases.  In  this  section  of  her  book, 
Brownmiller  makes  reasonable  enough 
assertions  about  sexism  that  in  and  of 
themselves  are  not  racist.  However,  it 
is  her  use  of  situations  in  which  race 
is  a  primary  focus  to  make  an  issue 
of  sexism  that  is  exploitative  and 
racist.  Brownmiller  asserts  that  the 
reputations  of  the  women  in  these 
cases  were  maligned  by  the  defense 
committees  in  their  attempt  to  gain 
these  men  their  freedom  or  save  them 
from  execution.  But  women's  reputa- 
tions are  brought  under  scrutiny  and 
doubted  all  the  time  in  rape  cases. 
Why  does  Brownmiller  use  these 
cases,  which  clearly  involve  racist 
frame-ups,  to  deal  with  a  common- 
ly employed  sexist  defense  tactic? 
The  effect  of  Brownmiller's  over- 
reaction  to  what  had  been  a  blindspot 
to  the  sexism  involved  in  these  cases 
serves  to  undercut  the  significance  of 
the  discriminatory  and  often  false 
charge  of  rape  against  black  men. 

Brownmiller's  absurd  reaction  to 
the  Till  case  is  pointed  to  by  Edwards 
as  an  example  of  the  "extravagant 
lengths  to  which  Brownmiller's  one- 
sidedness  leads  her."  Brownmiller 
states,  "We  are  rightly  aghast  that  a 
whistle  could  be  a  cause  for  murder, 
but  we  must  also  accept  that  Emmett 
Till  and  J.W.  Millam  (his  murderer) 
share  something  in  common.  They 
both  understood  that  the  whistle  was 
no  small  tweet  ...  it  was  a  deliberate 
insult,  just  short  of  physical  assault,  a 
last  reminder  to  Carolyn  Bryant  that 
this  black  boy,  Till,  had  in  mind  to 
possess  her. "22 

Edwards  answers  Brownmiller's 
"remarkable  analysis"  which  "unbe- 
lievably puts  Till  and  his  murderers  in 


48/Quest 


one  class  —  oppressor  —  and  Mrs. 
Bryant  (who  had  chased  Till  with  a 
gun  for  his  melodious  violation  of  her 
womanhood)  in  another  —  oppressed." 
According  to  Edwards,  "Brownmiller 
entirely  misses  the  point  that  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bryant,  though  not  equal  by  any 
means,  share  a  position  in  this  society 
wholly  separate  and  unequal  from 
EmmettTill." 

Brownmiller's  implication  that 
EmmettTill  wanted  to  rape  the  woman 
he  whistled  at  is  indicative  of  the  way 
in  which  Brownmiller  tries  to  draw 
the  reader  into  her  conclusion  that 
blacks  have  a  high  potential  for  rape. 
As  Davis  notes,  "In  exploring  the  con- 
temporary problem  of  rape,  Brown- 
miller attempts  to  convince  us  once 
more  that  Black  men  are  more  inclined 
than  their  white  counterparts  to  be- 
come rapists. "23 

Brownmiller  asserts  that  the  typical 
American  rapist  is  a  lower  class  ghetto 
youth  —  based  on  FBI  statistics.  Rape 
statistics,  however,  are  unreliable  due 
to  the  bias  of  using  mainly  reported 
rapes,  the  bias  of  the  police  in  elimina- 
ting "unfounded"  rapes  from  statis- 
tics, and  other  problems.  This  Brown- 
miller readily  admits,  but  she  does  not 
heed  her  own  advice  to  use  caution  in 
interpreting  these  statistics.  Another 
of  her  conclusions,  based  strictly  on 
biased  statistics,  is  that  the  rate  of 
black  on  white  rapes  is  increasing  and 
is  now  higher  than  the  rate  of  white 
on  black  rapes.  Brownmiller  assumes 
that  the  supposed  rise  in  black  on 
white  rapes  is  due  to  the  black  man  re- 
asserting his  manhood  by  abusing  the 
white  man's  property. 

Brownmiller  also  subscribes  to  the 
racist  "subculture  of  violence"  theory 
that  "within  the  dominant  value  sys- 
tem of  our  culture  there  exists  a  sub- 


culture formed  of  those  from  the 
lower  classes,  the  poor,  the  disenfran- 
chised, the  black,  whose  values  often 
run  counter  to  those  of  the  dominant 
culture,  the  people  in  charge."  (Em- 
phasis added.)24  This  theory  pre- 
supposes a  greater  potential  for  violent 
crime  among  blacks  who  supposedly 
do  not  have  the  same  moral  con- 
straints (values)  as  whites. 

Brownmiller  blatantly  reveals  her 
true  sentiments  at  the  end  of  the 
chapter  on  race: 

"Today  the  incidence  of  actual  rape 
combined  with  the  looming  spectre 
of  the  rapist  in  the  mind's  eye,  and  in 
particular  the  mythified  spectre  of  the 
black  man  as  rapist  to  which  the  black 
man  in  the  name  of  his  manhood  now 
contributes,  must  be  understood  as  a 
control  mechanism  against  the  free- 
dom, mobility  and  aspirations  of  all 
women,  white  and  black.  The  cross- 
roads of  racism  and  sexism  had  to  be  a 
violent  meeting  place.  There  is  no  use 
pretending  it  doesn  't  exist.  "  (Emphasis 
added.pS 

If  Brownmiller's  concern  is  for 
women  —  in  this  case  black  women  — 
she  picks  a  strange  way  to  express  it. 
Rather  than  devoting  space  to  deal- 
ing with  the  situation  of  black  women 
today  in  terms  of  vulnerability  to  rape, 
stereotypes  of  black  victims,  etc.,  she 
is  more  concerned  with  showing  how 
black  men  are  really  the  ones  to  fear. 
In  fact,  most  of  what  she  discusses  in 
her  chapter  on  race  is  black  men 
raping  white  women. 

Critiquing  the  Critics 

In  their  criticism,  both  Edwards 
and  Davis  accept  Brownmiller  as  the 
spokesperson  for  the  feminist  anti- 
rape  movement,  even  though  Brown- 


Rape,  Racism  and  Reality /49 


miller  did  nothing  more  than  produce 
a  one-shot  literary  piece  on  rape.  In 
her  pamphlet,  Edwards  makes  it 
clear  that  she  feels  that  Brownmiller  is 
"representative  of  a  majority  tendency 
in  the  White  Women's  Movement." 
However,  she  never  mentions  a  single 
anti-rape  group  and  addresses  all  of 
her  criticisms  to  Brownmiller  alone. 

Both  Davis  and  Edwards  also  react 
strongly  to  Brownmiller's  assertion 
that  rape  is  systematic  terror  and  vio- 
lence by  men  against  women.  They 
seem  to  feel  that  all  social  ills,  in- 
cluding rape,  are  a  result  of  the  econ- 
omic structure  of  capitalism.  Ignoring 
the  evidence  of  witchburning,  foot- 
binding,  and  infibulation  (practice  of 
mutilating  the  genitals  of  female 
children  to  prevent  premarital  sex, 
common  in  some  parts  of  Northern 
Africa),  Davis  and  Edwards  go  to 
somewhat  the  opposite  extreme  from 
Brownmiller  in  denying  the  specific 
history  of  violence  used  to  control 
women  as  a  group. 

Because  they  deal  with  rape  mainly 
as  a  by-product  of  capitalism  and  class 
struggle,  Davis  and  Edwards  present  no 
other  solution  to  rape  except  social- 
ism. While  total  social  and  economic 
change  is  a  prerequisite  to  the  elimina- 
tion of  rape,  sexism  will  not  automa- 
tically be  eradicated  under  a  socialist 
system.  Solutions  to  rape  must  go 
beyond  economic  transformation  of 
society,  recognizing  the  interest  many 
men  have  in  maintaining  their  person- 
al power  over  women. 

In  spite  of  this,  Davis'  and  Edwards' 
articles  speak  clearly  of  the  dangers  of 
allowing  perspectives  such  as  Brown- 
miller's  to  go  unchallenged.  The  anti- 
rape  movement  as  a  whole  has  resisted 
the  use  of  FBI  and  police  statistics  to 
single     out     black     men    as    rapists. 


Brownmiller's  book  gives  support  to 
those  elements  within  the  anti-rape 
movement  and  outside  of  it  who  pro- 
mote the  belief  that  mainly  black  men 
commit  rape. 

In  dealing  with  rape  and  race  and 
the  contradictions  involved,  there  is  no 
reason  to  assume  that  every  black  man 
who  is  accused  of  rape  is  innocent.  It 
is  important  to  realize  that  whether  in- 
nocent or  guilty,  black  men  are  being 
singled  out  and  allowed  to  bear  the 
brunt  of  punishment  for  rape.  That  in 
itself  is  enough  reason  to  resist  the  dis- 
criminatory charging  of  black  men 
with  rape  —  and  the  arbitrarily  harsh 
sentences  imposed  on  them  —  without 
becoming  liberal  about  rape. 

The  April/May  1975  issue  of  FA  A  R 
News^G  carried  an  article  by  Nancy 
Baker,  of  the  Eugene  Rape  Prevention 
Center,  which  addressed  the  contradic- 
tions of  the  case  of  Walston,  Brown 
and  Hines,  on  trial  for  their  lives  for 
raping  a  white  woman  in  North  Caro- 
lina. The  three  black  men  offered  the 
woman  a  ride  and  she  later  charged 
them  with  raping  her.  Baker's  article 
was  written  in  response  to  a  support 
letter  for  the  men  distributed  by 
Georgia  Senator  Julian  Bond,  presi- 
dent of  the  Southern  Poverty  Law 
Center,  which  contained  many  myths 
about  rape.  Baker  argued  against 
Bond's  implication  that  the  white 
woman  lied  about  the  rape  to  protect 
her  reputation.  Because  she  accepted 
a  ride  from  the  men,  Bond  assumed 
that  she  was  willing  to  have  sex  with 
them  and  only  cried  rape  after  she  was 
seen  getting  out  of  their  car  by  a  group 
of  white  people.  According  to  Baker, 
the  issue  in  this  case  is  that  black  men 
are  denied  access  to  the  same  justice  as 
white  men,  whether  innocent  or 
guilty,  and  therefore  the  question  of 


bO/Quest 


whether  or  not  the  woman  was  lying  is 
irrelevant  to  the  racist  implications  of 
this  case.  What  is  relevant  is  that  a 
similar  case  involving  three  white  men 
would  never  have  gotten  to  court. 
Baker's  reply  showed  that  it  is  not  nec- 
essary to  use  sexist  ideologies  to  com- 
bat racism,  and  vice  versa. 

In  expressing  our  outrage  over  vio- 
lence against  women  and  organizing 
against  its  many  forms,  we  have  a  re- 
sponsibility not  to  ignore  other  kinds 


to  recognize  that  racism  plays  a  pri- 
mary role  in  black  women's  vulner- 
ability to  rape  -  through  racist  struc- 
tures that  force  more  black  women  to 
live  in  insecure  housing,  work  late 
night  jobs,  and  use  inadequate  public 
transportation;  through  racist  myths 
that  say  that  black  women  are  more 
active  sexually  and  therefore  invite 
rape;  and  through  racist  ideologies  that 
value  the  well-being  of  black  women 
even  less  than  that  of  white  women. 


of  oppression,  such  as  racism.  Because 
of  their  mutually-reinforcing  natures, 
sexism  and  racism  are  automatically 
linked  and  must  be  struggled  against 
together.  The  specific  relationship  of 
racism  to  rape  is  particularly  relevant 
to  organizations  fighting  violence 
against  women.  Through  our  organiza- 
tion, we  can  begin  to  tie  together 
these  struggles  in  several  ways.  In  our 
efforts  to  include  the  perspectives  of 
all  women  in  our  analysis  and  in  our 
work,  we  first  need  to  show  in  con- 
crete terms  how  we  plan  to  address 
the  concerns  of  different  groups  of 
people  regarding  rape.  We  also  need  to 
noticeably  and  vocally  oppose  all  ef- 
forts to  make  men  from  oppressed 
groups,  e.g.,  black  men,  appear  more 
responsible  for  rape  than  white  middle 
class  men.    Finally,  we  must  be  willing 


Footnotes 

1.  Alison  Edwards,  "Rape,  Racism  and  the 
White  Women's  Movement:  An  Answer  to 
Susan  Brownmiller."  Sojourner  Truth  Or- 
ganization, P.O.  Box  8493,  Chicago,  IL 
60680. 

2.  Lynn  Lloyd,  "An  Analysis."  Warstle 
(April,  1977).  (Warstle  is  the  newsletter  of 
Champaign  County  Women  Against  Rape, 
1 12  West  Hill  St.,  Champaign,  I L  61820.) 

3.  A.  Leon  Higginbotham,  Jr.,  "Virginia 
Led  the  Way  in  Legal  Oppression."  Washing- 
ton Post  (May  21,  1978). 

4.  Higginbotham. 

5.  Socialist  Women's  Caucus  of  Louisville, 
"The  Racist  Use  of  Rape  and  the  Rape 
Charge"  (July,  1975).  P.O.  Box  11416, 
Louisville,  KY  40211. 

6.  Socialist  Women's  Caucus  of  Louisville. 

7.  Elsie  Scott,  "Rape  and  Racism:  the  Case 
of  the  Southern  Black  Defendant."  United 
Church  of  Christ  Commission  for  Racial 
Justice,  297  Park  Ave.  South,  Rm.  23,  New 
York,  NY  10010.   Newsletter. 


Rape,  Racism  and  Reality /51 


8.  Gerda  Lerner,  ed.,  Black  Women  in 
White  America:  A  Documentary  History 
(New  York:  Vintage  Books,  1973),  p.  163. 
(An  especially  useful  book  for  gaining  a 
historical  perspective.) 

9.  Angela  Davis,  "The  Dialectics  of  Rape." 
Ms.  (June,  1975),  p.  74. 

10. Socialist  Women's  Caucus  of  Louisville. 

11.  Lerner,  p.  172. 

12.  Davis,  "Dialectics  of  Rape." 

13.  Scott. 

14.  Scott. 

15.  Cleveland  Rape  Crisis  Center  Newsletter 
(May/June  1977).  3201  Euclid  Ave.,  Cleve- 
land, OH  44115. 

16. June  Bundy  Csida  and  Joseph  Csida, 
Rape:  How  to  Avoid  It  and  What  to  Do 
About  It  If  You  Can't.  (Lasser,  CA.:  Books 
for  Better  Living,  1974).  ($1.50,  Lasser, 
CA., 91311.) 

17.  Menachim    Amir,    Patterns    in    Forcible 
Rape  (University  of  Chicago  Press,  1971). 

18.  Susan  Brownmiller,  Against  Our  Will: 
Men,  Women  and  Rape  (New  York:  Simon 
and  Schuster,  1975,  paperback  edition). 


19. Angela  Davis,  "Racism  and  Contempor- 
ary    Literature    on    Rape."    Freedomways, 
Vol.  16,  No.  1.  (Nov.  1,1976),  p.  25. 
20.  Edwards. 
21  .Brownmiller,  p.  140. 

22.  Brownmiller,  p.  273. 

23.  Davis,  "Contemporary  Literature  on 
Rape." 

24.  Brownmiller,  p.  196. 
25. Brownmiller,  p.  281. 

26.  Nancy  Baker,  "Walston,  Brown  and 
Hines."  FAAR  News,  (April/May  1975), 
Feminist  Alliance  Against  Rape,  P.O.  Box 
21033,  Washington,  D.C.  20009). 


Deb  Friedman  writes  for  Aegis: 
Magazine  on  Ending  Violence  Against 
Women,  published  by  the  Feminist  Al- 
liance Against  Rape  and  the  National 
Communications  Network,  and  is  a 
member  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of 
the  D.C.  Rape  Crisis  Center. 


FRON      IFRS   aJ°umal  of  women  studies 


In  the  process  of  uncovering  and  defining  our  culture,  our  literature,  and  our  history  as 
women,  we  have  come,  time  and  again,  back  to  our  mothers  and  our  foremothers. 
FRONTIERS  has  devoted  an  entire  issue  (Volume  III,  No.  2)  to  the  topic  of  mothers  and 
daughters.  Articles  include: 


•mother-daughter  relationships  in  the  fic- 
tion of  Doris  Lessing  and  Margaret  Drabble 
•a  diary  of  the  adoption  of  a  daughter 
•classroom  experiences,  and  a  bibliog- 
raphy on  mothers  and  daughters 
•the  generational  differences  in  the  female 
frontier  experience 


•fiction  by  Suzanne  Juhasz 

•poetry  by  Irena  Klepfisz,  Jan  Clausen,  Lyn 

Lifshin 

•art  by  Helen  Barchilon  Redman 

•a  chapter  from  Judith  Pildes'  book  Our 

Mothers'  Daughters 

•a  play  based  on  the  Demeter-Persephone 

myth 


We  are  soliciting  articles  for  Volume  IV,  No.  1 ,  "Literature  of  the  Women's  Movement.''  This  issue  will 
deal  with  feminist  literature,  as  well  as  works  that,  in  the  guise  of  the  "New  Woman,''  exploit  the 
feminist  movement  for  commercial  purposes. 

FRONTIERS  is  published  three  times  a  year  by  a  collective  of  women  living  in  Boulder,  Colorado.  For 
the  past  two  years,  we  have  produced  a  journal  which  integrates  the  best  of  academic  work  with  more 
popular  writing. 

Write  to  FRONTIERS,  Women  Studies  Program,  Hillside  Court  104,  University  of  Colorado,  Boulder,  Colorado 
80309.  Individual  copies  are  $3. 25;  subscriptions  (3  issues)  are  $9  a  year,  or  $15  for  institutions.  All  subscrip- 
tions must  be  prepaid. 


52IQuest 


Federation  of  Organizations  for  Professional  Women 
Annual  Meeting 

Looking  Toward  the  80s 

The  Women's  Movement  and  Women's  Organizations 

Where  Have  We  Been  and  Where  Are  We  Going? 

October  25-26,  1979 

Carnegie  Endowment  for  International  Peace  •  Washington,  DC 


What  Are  the  Issues  that  Divide  Us? 

•  Generations 

•  Minority  and  Majority  Women 

•  Women's  Culture  and  Lesbianism 

•  Professions,  Professionalism  and 
Elitism 

What  Issues  Need  to  Be  Tackled? 

•  In  Public  Policy 

•  In  Grass  Roots  Service 

•  In  Political  Action 

•  In  Research 


What  Are  the  Issues  that  Unite  Us? 

•  Health 

•  Education 

•  Employment 

•  Affirmative  Action 

Who  Is  Funding  the  Women's 
Movement  and  Why? 

•  Ford  Foundation 

•  Rockefeller  Family  Fund 

•  Carnegie  Corporation 

•  Women's  Educational  Equity 

Act  Program 


For  further  information  write: 

Federation  of  Organizations  for  Professional  Women 

2000  P  Street,  NW 

Suite  403 

Washington,  DC  20036 


Rape,  Racism  and  Reality /53 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


graphics  by  Laurie  McLaughlin 

Editors '  Introduction: 

When  we  initially  conceived  of  this 
"Organizers'  Dialogue,  "  we  were  con- 
cerned with  several  basic  questions. 
First,  why  organize  around  lesbian 
mother  custody  defense  cases?  To 
what  extent  are  they  a  service  for  indi- 
vidual women  facing  loss  of  custody 
and  to  what  extent  are  they  a  larger 
organizing  strategy?  As  a  strategy, 
how  do  they  work?  For  example, 
what  is  their  value  as  a  reform  tool, 
especially  if  we  consider  that  they  es- 
tablish no  legal  precedents?  If  they 
are  viewed  as  a  means  of  bringing 
women  into  the  movement,  does  their 
initial  emotional  appeal  sustain  on- 
going involvement? 

Second,  we  wanted  to  understand 
the  theoretical  assumptions  in  organiz- 
ing around  such  an  issue.  What  are  our 
goals?  Are  we  seeking  what  is  best  for 
the  children  involved?  Or  do  we  want 
to  establish  firmly  the  rights  of  women 
to  custody?  Are  we  encouraging  wom- 
en to  struggle  against  custody  chal- 
lenges because  that  threat  is  intoler- 
able, regardless  of  what  may  be  best 
for  either  mother  or  child?  Are  we 
furthering  the  pressures  on  women  to 
conform  to  social  pressures  to  be 
mothers?  Is  the  issue  homosexuality 
or  women's  rights?  What  about  gay 
men?  What  about  mother-right?  And, 
finally,  given  the  time,  energy  and  fi- 
nancial cost  of  waging  such  a  battle,  is 
it  worth  the  struggle? 

We  traced  a  number  of  common 
threads  in  these  dialogues.      The  au- 


thors agree  that  the  issue  of  lesbian 
mother  child  custody  is  politically  im- 
portant because  it  poses  a  fundamental 
challenge  to  the  nuclear  family  struc- 
ture and  to  homophobia.  But  whether 
a  custody  defense  case  is  the  best  or 
most  effective  way  to  carry  out  this 
challenge  is  not  resolved.  Each  author 
discusses  the  enormous  amount  of 
time  and  money  required  for  an  effec- 
tive defense,  but  none  says  whether 
the  cost  is  worth  it  in  terms  of  building 
the  women 's  movement.  The  authors 
also  stress  the  difficulties  posed  in 
organizing:  e.g.,  publicity  can  hurt  an 
individual  mother's  chances  in  court, 
yet  without  it,  it  is  hard  to  raise  mon- 
ey, and  any  organizing  value  is  severely 
limited. 

But  the  largest  questions  left  unan- 
swered concern  our  ideology  on  moth- 
erhood, the  role  of  mothering  and 
stereotyping  of  women  as  mothers. 
Specifically,  while  the  move  towards 
establishing  a  father's  right  to  custody 
is  in  many  ways  an  expression  of  anti- 
homosexual  and  anti-feminist  back- 
lash, how  do  we  combat  the  back/ash 
without  reinforcing  stereotypes  of 
women's  "natural  role"?  And,  assum- 
ing our  goal  is  to  increase  women 's  op- 
tions, including  the  option  to  relin- 
quish custody  of  children  and/or  pri- 
mary responsibility  for  them,  can  this 
be  accomplished  without  increasing 
male  prerogatives  in  that  domain?  If 
we  assume  a  father's  parenting  respon- 
sibilities must  be  increased,  how  can 
we  preclude  that  assumption's  being 
used  as  one  more  weapon  in  the  arsen- 
al against  women?     Finally,  to  what 


54/Qi/esf,vol.  V.  no.  1,  summer,  1979 


Lesbian  Mothers  FiSht  Back 


extent  is  male  responsibility  for  child- 
rearing  important  to  overcoming  sex- 
role  stereotyping  and  abolishing  the 
system  of  patriarchy? 

We  invite  readers  to  address  these 
and  other  questions  raised  by  this  "Or- 
ganizers' Dialogue."  The  theories  we 
develop  must  address  the  important  is- 
sues surrounding  motherhood}  and 
provide  a  framework  for  deciding  how 
best  to  rear  future  generations. 


POLITICAL  AND  LEGAL 
STRATEGIES 


By  NAN  HUNTER  &  NANCY 
POLIKOFF 

Organizing  support  for  and  litigat- 
ing lesbian  mother  custody  cases  pre- 
sent many  tricky  political  and  legal 
issues.  These  activities  also  pose  uni- 
que dilemmas  for  organizers.  A  lesbian 
mother  custody  case  can  materialize 
overnight  when  a  disgruntled  father 
files  suit.  In  our  experience  as  lawyers, 
most  lesbian  mother  support  groups 
begin  with  a  reaction  to  one  particu- 
lar case  which  arises  in  a  community. 
One  result  of  the  single-case  orienta- 
tion from  which  these  groups  often  be- 
gin is  that  the  process  of  developing 
a  political  analysis  to  guide  one's  or- 
ganizing efforts  is  frequently  delayed 
until  much  of  the  political  frame- 
work—position papers,  leaflets,  finan- 
cial appeals,  tactical  decisions,  etc.— 
has  been  set  in  place.  These  cases 
create  the  potential  trap  of  activism 
without  analysis. 


We  believe  that  the  response  to  at- 
tacks on  lesbian  mothers'  custody 
rights  should  be  two-fold.  First,  a  les- 
bian mother's  case  can  be  used  to  at- 
tack this  society's  strongest  phobia 
concerning  homosexuals:  that  they 
will  be  permitted  to  raise  and  influ- 
ence children,  thereby  transmitting  the 
"unnatural"  message  that  the  patri- 
archal family  model  is  less  than  ideal. 
Second,  the  attempts  to  deprive  les- 
bian mothers  of  custody  must  be  con- 
sidered in  the  perspective  of  an  histor- 
ical pattern  of  punishing  independent 
or  political  women  by  declaring  them 
to  be  unfit  mothers  and  taking  their 
children.^ 

The  relatively  recent  judicial  pre- 
sumption in  favor  of  mothers  being 
awarded  custody^  has  often  func- 
tioned merely  as  the  trade-off  for  wo- 
men who  accept  their  place  or  whose 
home  situation  is  within  an  approved 
model.  There  are  millions  of  women 
in  addition  to  lesbian  mothers  who 
also  face  a  daily  threat  of  losing  cus- 
tody of  their  children:  welfare  mo- 
thers, incarcerated  mothers,  politically 
radical  mothers,  heterosexual  mothers 
who  are  not  married  to  their  sexual 
partners,  or  even  sometimes  mothers 
with  jobs  outside  their  homes.  The  les- 
bian mother  deviates  most  from  the 
patriarchal  standard  and  so  presents 
the  greatest  threat  to  male  supremacy. 
But  her  political  bonds  must  extend  to 
other  independent  mothers,  regardless 
of  sexual  preference.  Even  while  we 
are  involved  in  battling  a  particular 
custody  case,  it  is  important  to  build 
those  connections. 


Organizers'  Dialogue/55 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


The  central  dilemma  in  organizing 
support  for  lesbian  mothers  is  the  ex- 
tent to  which  any  one  individual's 
legal  struggle  can  have  sufficient  im- 
pact to  justify  the  enormous  expense 
of  energy  and  other  resources  neces- 
sary to  support  the  litigation.  In  most 
legal  battles,  organizers  and  support 
committees  know  that  the  cases  have 
broad  implications  for  classes  of  per- 
sons extending  beyond  the  individual 
in  the  specific  case.  Think,  for  exam- 
ple, of  Yvonne  Wanrow's  challenge  to 
the  legal  definition  of  self-defense  for 
women,  or  Leonard  Matlovich's  chal- 
lenge to  the  Air  Force  policy  on  ho- 
mosexuality. 

In  a  lesbian  mother  custody  case, 
however,  organizers  and  support  com- 
mittees must  realize  that  little  signifi- 
cant impact  on  the  law  can  result  from 
their  efforts.  Child  custody  is  perhaps 
the  area  of  law  in  which  trial  judges 
have  the  widest  descretion  in  making 
decisions.  This  is  the  practical  appli- 
cation of  the  universal  and  amorphous 
standard  of  the  "best  interests  of  the 
child."  Higher  courts  reverse  the  trial 
judge  only  if  a  clear  abuse  of  discre- 
tion is  apparent  in  the  record.  Although 
a  state  appellate  court  makes  law 
binding  on  all  trial  judges  within 
the  state,  the  most  it  can  do  in  the 
area  of  lesbian  mother  custody  law  is 
to  rule  that  lesbianism  by  itself  is  not 
grounds  for  denial  of  custody.  In  only 
one  state,  California,  has  an  appellate 
court  ever  made  this  ruling. 3  Yet 
that  same  court  decided  eight  years  la- 
ter that  a  trial  judge  could  properly 
conclude  that  "residence  in  a  homo- 


sexual household  would  be  detrimen- 
tal to  the  children  and  contrary  to 
their  best  interests. "4  Thus,  a  legal  vic- 
tory, which  is  only  an  incremental  re- 
form in  the  best  of  situations,  has  vir- 
tually no  value  in  setting  a  precedent 
which  will  be  followed  in  other  les- 
bian mother  cases. 

Because  of  the  wide  discretion  of 
judges  and  the  lack  of  precedents  in 
this  area,  it  is  solely  in  educational  and 
consciousness-raising  work  on  underly- 
ing issues  that  a  lesbian  mother  custo- 
dy case  can  have  any  widespread  im- 
pact. Clearly,  from  this  viewpoint,  les- 
bian mother  cases  pose  a  unique  or- 
ganizing dilemma:  education  depends 
on  publicity,  but  publicity  can  destroy 
whatever  chance  the  individual  lesbian 
mother  has  of  winning  custody.  In  no 
other  kind  of  litigation  does  publicity 
have  the  same  potential  for  destroying 
the  chance  of  victory.  A  judge  who  is 
concerned  about  whether  a  child 
knows  of  a  mother's  lesbianism,  or 
whether  the  community  knows  and 
might  stigmatize  the  child,  could  use 
publicity  about  the  case  as  a  rationale 
for  finding  that  the  best  interests  of 
the  child  require  placement  with  some- 
one other  than  the  lesbian  mother.  Al- 
though the  First  Amendment  gives  us 
the  right  to  publicize  what  we  wish,  if 
a  judge  perceives  that  the  exercise  of 
a  mother's  First  Amendment  rights  is 
not  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child, 
the  mother  can  lose  custody. 

This  dilemma  is  faced  by  all  who 
want  to  organize  around  lesbian  mo- 
thers' custody  battles.  Raising  money 
quietly  means  devoting  many  woman 


56/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  FiSht  Back 


hours  and  resources  to  an  effort  that 
will  affect  one  individual  and  not  ex- 
pand public  consciousness.  Use  of  me- 
dia, benefits,  flyers  and  so  on,  will 
place  the  individual  lesbian  mother  in 
the  position  of  defending  not  only  her 
lesbianism  but  her  right  to  be  open 
about  it.  Anonymous  organizing— 
supporters  publicizing  a  case  without 
naming  the  woman— is  probably  even 
less  effective.  It  may  result  in  less  me- 
dia coverage  and  will  probably  reduce 
outreach,  fundraising  and  other  goals 
of  the  group.  There  are  no  simple  an- 
swers to  these  dilemmas.  Each  indivi- 
dual case  has  to  be  examined  care- 
fully to  determine  what  will  and  will 
not  work— legally,  personally  and  pol- 
itically. A  support  group  should  ser- 
iously weigh  whether  to  invest  its  ef- 
forts in  any  one  case  without  at  least 
some  commitment  to  continuing  and 
broadening  its  work  after  that  case  is 
completed. 

One  important  ongoing  function 
for  support  groups  is  the  development 
of  a  feminist  analysis  of  custody  issues 
which  goes  beyond  the  literal  "equal 
rights"  approach  and  explicitly  links 
the  issues  of  lesbian  mothers'  custody 
with  the  problems  of  other  indepen- 
dent mothers.  Concurrent  with  the 
present  backlash  against  lesbians  and 
other  independent  mothers  is  the 
growth  of  the  "fathers'  rights"  move- 
ment. A  great  many  women  probably 
blame  the  women's  movement  for 
what  they  perceive  as  a  new  equality 
in  custody  cases  which  robs  them  of  a 
previous  bias  in  their  favor.  Feminists 


should  articulate  and  publicize  posi- 
tions on  custody  cases  that  stress  a 
pro-mother  stance  in  all  situations  in 
which  women  are  threatened  with  the 
loss  of  their  children  because  of  their 
sexual,  political* or  economic  oppres- 
sion. 

FOOTNOTES 

1  Women  have  lost  custody  because  of 
their  involvement  in  the  birth  control  move- 
ment, e.g.,  In  re:  Besant,  11  Ch.D  508 
(1879),  and  in  leftist  groups  —  e.g.,  Eaton  v. 
Eaton,  122  N.J.  Eq.  142,  191  A.  839 
(1937).  See  also:  "Casenote,"  49  Harvard 
Law  Review  831. 

^The  "tender  years  presumption"  (that  a 
young  child  should  be  with  its  mother)  orig- 
inated in  the  1839  Custody  of  Infants  Act 
in  England,  and  was  a  reversal  of  previous 
Western  law  that  children,  like  all  other  fam- 
ily property,  belong  to  the  father. 

3Nadler  v.  Superior  Court,  255  Cal.  App. 
2d  523,  63  Cal.  Rptr.  352  (1967). 

4Chaffin  v.  Frye,  45  Cal.  App.  3d 
39,    47,    119    Cal.    Rptr.    22,    26    (1975). 

Nan  Hunter  and  Nancy  Polikoffare 
lawyers  with  the  Washington,  D.C. 
Feminist  Law  Collective:  Holmes, 
Hunter,  Polikoffand  Bod  ley. 


WAGES  DUE  LESBIANS 


By  ELLEN  AGGER  & 
FRANCIEWYLAND 

Editor's  Note:    "Wages  Due  Lesbians" 
is  part  of  the  "Wages  for  Housework  " 

Organizers'  Dialogue/57 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


campaign.  The  basic  analysis  under- 
lying their  politics  is  that  society  is 
based  on  power  relations,  within 
which  the  least  powerful  groups  have 
the  least  money.  Within  the  confines 
of  the  family,  the  man  is  analogous  to 
the  state  and  the  woman  to  the  ex- 
ploited laborer.  The  husband  rules  be- 
cause he  controls  his  wife 's  unpaid  la- 
bor. One  of  their  major  assumptions, 
therefore,  is  that  if  women  are  paid  for 
all  labor  performed,  including  house- 
work, women 's  oppression  will  end. 

The  situation  of  the  lesbian  mother 
epitomizes  the  weakness  of  the  posi- 
tion of  all  women  in  this  society.  She 
threatens  the  "natural"  role  of  women 
by  refusing  to  be  a  sexual,  physical, 
and  emotional  servant  to  a  man.  She 
also  imparts  that  struggle  for  indepen- 
dence to  her  children,  whether  those 
children  choose  to  be  homo-  or  hetero- 
sexual themselves.  This  makes  her  ex- 
tremely vulnerable  to  be  deemed  "un- 
fit" to  be  a  mother  and  lose  custody 
of  her  children.  Anyone  can  lay  claim 
to  her  children— ex-husband,  relatives, 
or  the  State  itself.  Any  woman  who  re- 
fuses to  service  a  man  and  bring  up 
children  in  the  presence  of  and  under 
the  power  of  a  man  is  vulnerable  to 
losing  custody.  She  may  be  a  lesbian, 
a  prostitute,  a  prisoner,  black,  disa- 
bled, on  welfare,  or  non-monogamous. 

Given  this  situation,  many  of  us 
think  carefully  before  either  leaving  a 
marriage  or  having  children.  Can  we  af- 
ford to  raise  the  children  on  our  own, 
without  a  man's  wages?  Can  we  face 


the  financial  and  emotional  burdens  of 
a  court  case?  Wages  Due  Lesbians,  an 
autonomous  group  in  the  international 
Wages  for  Housework  Campaign,  has 
been  organizing  for  three  years  to  de- 
fend the  money  that  women  have  won 
in  recognition  of  our  work  in  the 
home,  and  to  extend  that  to  a  full 
living  wage  for  all  women.  Our  pover- 
ty as  women  traps  many  thousands  of 
gay  women  in  marriages  we  cannot  af- 
ford to  leave.  The  visible  lesbian  move- 
ment is  the  tip  of  a  massive  iceberg. 
The  rapidly  increasing  number  of  les- 
bian mothers  taking  custody  battles  to 
court  are  the  beginning  of  the  rebel- 
lion of  women  against  forced  hetero- 
sexuality  and/or  forced  childlessness. 

Our  strategy  is  to  build  a  movement 
to  win  the  money  we  need  in  order  to 
end  our  dependence  on  men  and  to 
make  lesbianism  a  real,  free  choice  for 
any  woman.  This  requires  economic 
independence  for  all  women. 

Our  analysis  leads  us  to  defend 
welfare,  since  it  is  probably  the  sin- 
gle biggest  victory  women  have  won. 
Welfare  has  been  a  source  of  incalcul- 
able power  for  women  despite  its 
failure  to  provide  a  decent  standard  of 
living  and  the  stigma  attached  to  wo- 
men receiving  it.  It  has  directly  in- 
creased women's  ability  to  live  on  our 
own  or  with  another  woman  without 
having  to  abandon  our  children.  All 
women's  level  of  financial  indepen- 
dence has  been  increased  by  the  exis- 
tence of  welfare.  Gains  in  welfare  have 
made  possible  rises  in  the  minimum, 
wage. 


58/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  FiSht  Back 


Wages  Due  Lesbians  also  sees  our 
role  as  working  to  show  all  women  the 
commonality  between  our  fight  to  be 
both  lesbians  and  mothers  and  that  of 
all  women  who  are  fighting  for  inde- 
pendence and  autonomy  in  relation  to 
men.  Part  of  our  weakness  as  lesbians, 
which  the  State  and  the  courts  try  to 
reinforce,  is  our  isolation  from  other 
women.  To  the  extent  that  lesbians  are 
invisible,  we  are  assumed  to  be  "queer" 
and  different  from  other  women,  who 
are  supposed  to  be  happy  and  ful- 
filled in  their  dependent  relationships 
with  men.  But  straight  women— black 
and  white,  mothers  and  childless  wo- 
men, women  with  and  without  jobs 
outside  the  home— have  themselves  ex- 
posed the  myth  of  this  "fulfillment." 


Straight  women  in  the  Wages  for 
Housework  campaign  are  speaking  out 
publicly  in  support  of  lesbians.  They 
know  that  until  lesbians  are  strong, 
every  woman  will  dread  being  called  a 
"dyke"  if  she  makes  too  much  trouble 
on  the  job  or  at  home.  Every  woman's 
insurance  is  to  help  lesbians  remove 
the  stigma  attached  to  coming  out. 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  is  fighting  for 
custody  rights  for  women  because  it  is 
we  women  who  invest  our  lives  in 
raising  the  children  of  society.  But  be- 
cause  this   work   does   not   receive   a 

wage  like  other  jobs,  it  is  most  often 
overlooked,  devalued  and  considered 
our  natural  role. 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  does  not  insist 
that  a  lesbian  mother  make  a  public 


wmgr  ^i 

„'-*     m.^.   t  M 

m 

^L 

i^H 

wmrf       < 

L/  yy^m 

fT«     ^ 

V  $  i 

(  * 

r                             I 

Organizers'  Dialogue/59 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


fight.  If  she  does  choose  to  do  so,  we 
can  organize  support  by  letter  writing 
campaigns,  helping  her  find  good 
lawyers,  putting  pressure  on  local 
and  state  or  provincial  politicians,  and 
helping  her  find  expert  witnesses  to 
testify.  However,  most  custody  battles 
involving  lesbian  women  never  get  as 
far  as  the  courtroom.  Often  we  have 
given  up  custody  of  our  children 
rather  than  face  the  costs  of  a  court 
fight. 

When  we  do  win,  it  is  often  only 
because  the  husband  does  not  want 
the  children.  The  "evidence"  allegedly 
"proves"  that  lesbians  are  unfit  mo- 
thers. We  must  submit  to  a  barrage 
of  testing  and  psychiatric  examina- 
tions to  prove  otherwise.  We  must 
prove  we  can  provide  a  more  "nor- 
mal" home  than  the  husband,  show 
that  we  are  exemplary  mothers,  have 
steady  jobs  and  incomes,  stable  rela- 
tionships (if  any),  and  are  not  involved 
publicly  with  lesbian  or  gay  rights 
organizations  ("being  a  missionary 
out  to  convert  heterosexuals").  If 
the  husband  has  not  charged  us  with 
being  lesbian,  we  may  decide  to  keep 
our  lesbianism  quiet,  to  improve  our 
chances  of  winning,  even  though  we 
know  this  means  years  of  anxious 
secrecy,  since  a  custody  decision  is 
never  final. 

There  is  an  increasing  trend  toward 
"equality"  for  fathers.  In  reality  this 
means  that  women  will  lose  custody 
more  frequently.  The  woman  often 
is  not  considered  to  be  the  "best  par- 
ent" when  financial  criteria  are  taken 
into  account.    We  must  stand  up  for 


women's  right  to  custody  based  on  her 
work  as  the  parent  who  has  borne  and 
raised  the  children.  Custody  decisions 
must  not  be  made  on  the  basis  of 
which  parent  has  the  money  to  pro- 
vide the  college  education,  or  on  the 
basis  of  sexual  preference.  Our  own 
fight  as  lesbian  women  against  sexual 
coercion  makes  us  eminently  fit  to 
mother  our  children. 

There  has  been  a  tendency  in  the 
lesbian  movement  to  try  to  force  wo- 
men to  go  public  when  fighting  a  cus- 
tody case,  as  a  condition  for  lending 
her  organized  support.  What  is  at  stake 
is  the  mother's  relationship  with  her 
children.  She  must  define  what  is  most 
important  to  her.  We  can  offer  support 
to  her  to  win  her  fight  any  way  she 
can,  whether  in  court  or  out,  in  what- 
ever way  is  necessary. 

If  a  case  in  which  the  mother  is 
publicly  lesbian  does  go  to  court  and 
sets  a  precedent  in  that  state  or  pro- 
vince, that  victory  gives  more  power 
to  other  women  in  future  fights.  Still, 
we  cannot  encourage  any  woman  to 
take  the  risk  of  losing  her  children  if 
she  and  her  legal  counsel  feel  that  risk 
is  present.  When  a  case  is  won  out  of 
court,  or  is  won  in  court  without  being 
officially  reported  by  the  court,  we  in 
organizations  like  Wages  Due  Lesbians 
can  still  circulate  the  information  in- 
ternationally and  publicize  the  victory. 
An  individual  woman's  name  and  par- 
ticular circumstances  are  not  essential. 
If  we  wait  for  individual  women  who 
are  desperate  enough  to  risk  martyr- 
dom, we  are  squandering  the  power 
we  can  make  available  to  any  lesbian 


60/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  FiSht  Back 


mother.  We  also  lose  the  power  that 
we  can  build  for  all  of  us  through  help- 
ing women  win. 

Financial  support  is  crucial.  A  court 
battle  can  cost  thousands  of  dollars, 
most  of  which  is  not  covered  by  legal 
aid  programs.  Lawyers'  fees,  psy- 
chiatric assessments,  social  workers, 
and  other  professional  witnesses  all 
cost  money.  This  cost  is  one  of  the 
most  important  factors  for  most 
women  when  they  consider  whether 
or  not  to  go  to  court.  We  can  help 
to  provide  access  to  those  professionals 
who  are  sympathetic  and  expert, 
as  well  as  to  official  documents  and 
records  from  other  cases. 

Any  public  demonstration  of  sup- 
port for  lesbian  custody  rights  which 
connects  it  to  the  struggles  of  all  wo- 
men helps  influence  the  general  cli- 
mate of  opinion.  We  must  use  the 
media  as  much  as  possible.  The  circu- 
lation of  daily  newspapers  and  the 
mass  audiences  reached  by  television 
and  radio  are  worth  many  times  the  a- 
mount  of  exposure  provided  by  a 
thousand  leaflets.  Mass  media  cover- 
age is  worth  the  risks  of  misrepresenta- 
tion we  face  when  we  do  not  control 
those  media. 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  (Toronto)  has 
recently  started  one  of  the  first  de- 
fense funds  available  to  any  woman 
who  needs  it.  Since  the  launching  of 
the  Lesbian  Mothers'  Defense  Fund  in 
March  1978,  a  wide  range  of  commu- 
nity, church  and  professional  groups, 
women's  and  gay  men's  organizations, 
as  well  as  lesbian  groups,  have  en- 
dorsed our  aims  and  donated  hundreds 
of  dollars.   We   have  published   (with 


Falling  Wall  Press,  Bristol,  England) 
one  of  the  first  pamphlets  on  custody 
strategy,  Motherhood,  Lesbianism  and 
Child  Custody  by  Francie  Wyland.  It 
shows  the  connections  between  our 
fight  for  custody  rights  and  money  for 
all  women. 

Last  July  (1977)  with  support  from 
a  wide  range  of  lesbian,  women,  gay 
and  community  groups,  we  picketed 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Province 
of  Ontario  (Canada)  to  bring  attention 
to  our  demand  that  we  not  be  forced 
to  choose  between  our  children  and 
our  sexuality.  We  also  demanded  an 
end  to  the  growing  practice  of  con- 
sidering both  parents'  incomes  in  judg- 
ing a  case.  We  also  organized  a  benefit 
dance  on  behalf  of  a  lesbian  mother 
who  was  fighting  a  case  but  was  forced 
to  be  anonymous.  We  described  her 
situation  to  the  media,  at  conferences 
and  public  meetings  and  said  publicly 
what  she  could  not  say.  She  won  un- 
conditional custody  in  November 
1977.  Other  Wages  Due  Lesbian 
groups  are  doing  similar  wor£  all  over 
North  America. 

In  Canada,  as  elsewhere,  there  is  a 
resurgence  of  hostility  against  homo- 
sexuals. Though  these  attacks  appear 
to  be  aimed  at  gay  men,  lesbian  mo- 
thers and  other  lesbians  who  work 
with  and  raise  children  are  bearing  the 
brunt  of  these  attacks.  The  attacks  are 
the  result  of  our  fight  for  indepen- 
dence from  the  power  of  men. 

In  the  face  of  these  crusades  and 
the  economic  crisis  that  acts  to  rein- 
force our  dependence  on  men,  lesbian 
mother's  defense  funds  and  groups  like 
Wages  Due  Lesbians  must  express  and 


Organizers'  Dialogue/61 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


support  the  struggles  of  the  weakest 
and  least  visible  among  us— lesbian 
mothers.  It  is  the  risk  of  losing  our 
children  through  our  lesbianism  and/ 
or  our  poverty  that  prevents  millions 
of  lesbians  from  coming  out.  When  we 
organize  against  any  woman  paying 
that  price,  we  organize  toward  a  les- 
bian movement  whose  power  we  can 
now  only  begin  to  imagine.  We  or- 
ganize toward  a  life  for  ourselves  in 
which  we  are  no  longer  isolated  from 
each  other,  from  straight  women,  or 
from  the  children  we  each  may  want 
to  have. 
Other  Wages  Due  Lesbians: 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  (New  York) 
c/o  Brown 
100  Boerum  Place 
Brooklyn,  New  York  11 201 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  (Philadelphia) 
c/o  Albright 
602  S.  48th  Street 
Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania  19143 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  (San  Francisco) 

c/o  Rafferty 

Box  14512 

San  Francisco,  California  941 14 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  (London,  England) 

c/o  Hall 

79  Princess  Road 

London  N.W.6 

England 

Wages  Due  Lesbians  (Winnipeg) 
40  Luxton  Ave. 
Winnipeg 
Manitoba,  Canada 


Ellen  Agger  has  been  active  in  the 
Wages  for  Housework  campaign  since 
1975  when  she  co-founded  Wages  Due 
Lesbians.  She  has  worked  as  an  em- 
ployment counselor  and  as  a  waitress. 

Francie  Wyland  is  the  author  of 
Motherhood,  Lesbianism  and  Child 
Custody.  She  helped  form  Wages  Due 
Lesbians  in  1975  and  is  a  founding 
member  of  the  first  Canadian  Les- 
bian Mothers'  Defense  Fund.  Francie 
has  worked  as  a  counselor  in  a  num- 
ber of  community-based  social  ser- 
vices for  women. 


LESBIAN  MOTHERS 
NATIONAL  DEFENSE  FUND 


By  GERALDINE  COLE,  PAM 
KEELEY&JOANPITELL 

The  Lesbian  Mothers'  National  De- 
fense Fund  was  organized  by  four  les- 
bians in  Seattle  in  1974  in  response  to 
the  need  for  legal  support  for  lesbian 
mothers  who  are  involved  in  custody 
disputes.  We  had  no  real  experience 
either  in  organizing  a  national  move- 
ment or  in  the  legal  issues  surrounding 
child  custody. 

After  four  years,  we  have  learned  a 
lot.  Our  working  membership  has  fluc- 
tuated as  women  become  aware  of  the 
commitment  required  to  do  this  type 
of  work.  As  of  April,  1978,  we  had  a 
national  membership  of  approximately 
450;  a  full-time  working  membership  of 
three;  and  two  part-time  members  who 
are  involved  mainly  in  setting  up  re- 
gional outreach  projects.  We  all  work 


62/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  Fight  Back 


at  full-time  jobs  apart  from  LMNDF. 
Some  of  us  are  mothers;  one  member 
is  a  lawyer.  We  are  extremely  proud  of 
the  work  we  do. 

We  are  writing  this  article  to  share 
the  experience  we  have  gained  and  the 
information  and  resources  we  have  ac- 
cumulated. More  importantly,  we  see  a 
need  for  the  development  of  a  stronger, 
more  focused  network  of  the  various 
lesbian  mother  defense  groups  through- 
out the  country.  We  hope  this  article 
will  stimulate  such  a  dialogue. 

What  Are  the  Issues? 

LMNDF  is  neither  fighting  to  estab- 
lish women's  automatic  right  to  custo- 
dy nor  to  promote  the  concept  of  Mo- 
th eright.  What  we  work  for  is  the  eli- 
mination of  lesbianism  as  a  determi- 
nant issue  in  child  custody.  A  woman 
is  neither  a  good  nor  a  bad  mother  be- 
cause she  is  a  lesbian.  We  make  no 
claims  to  absolute  knowledge  of  the 
"best  interests"  of  any  particular 
child.  However,  the  standards  present- 
ly used  in  courts  to  determine  the  fit- 
ness of  any  parent  are  based  upon  val- 
ues we  do  not  share.  It  is  equally  un- 
just and  intolerable  for  women  to  lose 
custody  of  their  children  for  reasons 
of  race,  class  or  lesbianism.  Mothers  al- 
so lose  their  children  because  they  are 
feminists,  poorer  than  their  children's 
father,  handicapped,  involved  in  inter- 
racial relationships  or  politically  ac- 
tive. None  of  these  factors  has  any- 
thing to  do  with  a  woman's  ability  to 
provide  a  loving,  healthy  environment 
for  her  children.  For  many  reasons,  in- 
cluding available  time  and  energy,  we 


have  chosen  to  focus  on  the  lesbian 
issue. 

Many  gay  men  are  also  denied  cus- 
tody and  visitation  rights.  We  will  pro- 
vide them  with  information  and  legal 
resources.  However,  since  most  men 
have  access  to  more  money  than  wo- 
men do,  we  reserve  our  financial  assis- 
tance for  lesbians. 

Lesbian  custody  cases  are  one  of 
the  most  blatant  manifestations  of  ho- 
mophobia. Homophobia,  however,  is 
only  symptomatic  of  the  much  larger 
evil  of  institutionalized  patriarchy. 
Even  if  the  fear  and  hatred  of  homo- 
sexuals suddenly  disappeared,  women 
would  still  be  fighting  for  custody  in  a 
system    that    is    dominated    by   men. 

Why  Organize  Around  These  Issues? 

Present  statistics  indicate  that  there 
are  1.5  million  lesbian  mothers  in  the 
United  States  today.  Many  of  these 
women  are  still  married  and  might 
come  out  of  the  closet  if  the  legal  sys- 
tem weren't  leaning  against  the  other 
side  of  the  door.  For  those  of  us  who 
have  been  able  to  be  open  lesbians, 
that  choice  often  means  choosing  be- 
tween rearing  our  children  or  living 
our  lives.  Faced  with  that  choice,  we 
have  two  options:  to  roll  over  or  to 
fight  back.  The  individual  lesbian 
mother  in  this  crisis  does  not  have  the 
resources  to  fight  back  alone. 

We  work  to  insure  a  woman's  right 
to  choose.  As  other  groups  work  for 
abortion  rights,  against  forced  sterili- 
zation, and  for  the  right  of  women  to 
defend  themselves  against  violence,  we 
are  concerned  with  a  lesbian's  right  to 


Organizers'  Dialogue/63 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


rear  her  children  without  judicial  inter- 
ference. 

Raising  Money 

We  are  committed  to  providing 
financial  assistance,  because  without  it 
lesbian  mothers  would  not  have  the 
option  of  fighting  for  their  children. 
An  average  contested  lesbian  mother 
custody  case  costs  $10,000,  and  can 
cost  as  much  as  $50,000,  The  financial 
burden  of  these  cases  is  enormous  and 
should  never  be  minimized  when  de- 
ciding whether  or  not  to  fight  through 
the  courts. 

We  rely  primarily  on  small  dona- 
tions and  subscriptions  to  our  bi- 
monthly newsletter  "Mom's  Apple 
Pie."  We  also  hold  local  benefits 
several  times  a  year  and  encourage 
women  in  other  cities  to  do  the  same 
for  us,  or  for  local  cases.  A  few  sizable 
contributions  have  been  made  by 
individual  women  and  groups. 

The  bulk  of  our  money  goes  to 
pay  lawyers  and  expert  witnesses.  We 
attempt  to  insure  that  women  get 
quality  legal  representation  and  testi- 
mony from  people  knowledgeable  in 
the  field  of  sexuality.  We  are  some- 
times criticized  for  subsidizing  these 
professionals  who,  for  the  most  part, 
are  middle  or  upper  middle  class.  How- 
ever, lesbian  mothers  need  the  ser- 
vices of  these  individuals  to  win.  We 
are  therefore  obliged  to  pay  what 
they  charge.  We  have  established  a 
network  of  experienced  and  sympathe- 
tic attorneys  and  experts  who  some- 
times reduce  or  waive  their  fees,  and 
who  almost  always  accept  small 
monthly  installments  from  us. 


Custody  Battles  Affect  the  Lives 
of  Those  Involved 

Just  as  the  financial  toll  of  fighting 
a  lesbian  mother  case  is  devastating, 
the  emotional  costs  are  often  ruinous. 
These  two  elements  are  difficult  to 
separate.  The  prospect  of  having  every 
detail  of  one's  life  scrutinized  in  court 
is  horrifying.  A  mother  may  be  asked 
everything  from  what  she  does  in  bed, 
to  why  she  allowed  her  child  to  go  to 
school  last  October  with  a  runny  nose, 
to  how  frequently  she  vacuums  her 
rug. 

Court  dates  are  not  scheduled  at 
the  mother's  convenience.  She  may  be 
living  "on  the  edge"  for  years.  A  les- 
bian mother  and  her  friends  and  sup- 
porters must  endure  postponements, 
temporary  hearings,  examinations,  de- 
positions, visits  from  social  workers 
and  endless  conferences  with  lawyers. 
It  is  possible  that  her  parents,  siblings, 
neighbors  or  her  own  children  will  tes- 
tify against  her.  If  her  adversary  has 
money,  she  may  be  followed  by  a  de- 
tective, and  she  always  lives  with  the 
fear  that  her  children  may  be  snatched. 
The  daily  tension  this  causes  often  re- 
sults in  broken  relationships. 

If  a  mother  is  lucky  enough  to  live 
in  a  lesbian  community  that  can  give 
her  support,  her  every  action  is  scrut- 
inized by  her  sisters.  Her  fundraising 
methods,  her  trial  strategy,  and  the  sex 
of  her  children  will  be  publicly  com- 
mented upon  and  criticized.  In  vary- 
ing degrees,  she  will  be  expected  to  ed- 
ucate the  community  and  take  an  ac- 
tive role  in  fundraising,  as  well  as 
carry   on   her   usual    life.   We  do  not 


64/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  FiSht  Back 


mean  to  be  overly  cynical  about  this, 
as  there  are  advantages  and  disadvant- 
ages to  having  a  supportive  com- 
munity. But,  it  is  worth  paying  the 
price  of  the  pressures  mentioned  above 
for  the  security  of  knowing  you  are 
not  alone. 

Only  those  directly  involved  can  de- 
cide whether  or  not  to  enter  into  such 
an  ordeal.  We  try  to  let  women  know 
what  their  individual  situations  mean 
in  terms  of  their  chances  in  court,  as 
well  as  the  affect  of  the  trauma  on 
their  lives.  We  never  glamorize  going  to 
court. 

Supporting  a  Mother's  Decision 

In  many  important  ways,  each  les- 
bian mother  faced  with  a  custody  bat- 
tle is  in  a  unique  situation.  Issues  to 
consider  include:  community  support; 
the  focus  of  that  support  and  how 
long  it  can  be  provided;  the  mother's 
work  skills  that  she  can  and  wants  to 
use  to  support  herself  and  her  child- 
ren; her  self-concept  as  a  'lesbian- 
mother';  the  mother's  experience  with 
collective  (or  alternative)  support  in 
raising  her  child  and  how  the  ulti- 
mate custody  determination  will  affect 
these  other  people;  and  the  climate  of 
the  courts  in  her  area.  These  issues, 
and  many,  many  others,  are  factors  of 
differing  importance  in  each  mother's 
decision  about  how,  and  if,  she  will 
fight. 

After  educating  a  lesbian  mother 
about  the  alternatives  she  has  to 
choose  from  in  her  particular  situa- 
tion, the  final  decision  on  what  course 
she  will  take  is  hers.  A  mother  faces 


the  consequences  of  her  decision  a- 
lone,  regardless  of  how  much  support 
she  has  from  friends  or  relatives.  It  is 
a  basic  premise  of  LMNFD  that  we 
support  a  woman's  judgment  about 
what  strategy  is  best  for  her. 

This  includes  the  decision  not  to 
fight.  Women's  culture  has  always 
been  centered  around  the  nurturing 
of  children.  The  combination  of  this 
cultural  expectation  with  the  personal 
instinct  to  fight,  and  the  political  en- 
couragement to  do  so,  make  the 
choice  to  give  up  a  child  at  least  as 
difficult  as  the  decision  to  fight  for 
one.  We  support  a  woman's  choice  to 
live  apart  from  her  children. 

The  Courts 

Custody  determinations  are  made 
on  the  basis  of  the  very  vague  and  ar- 
bitrary standard  of  "the  best  interests 
of  the  child."  This  standard  leaves  a 
lesbian  mother  at  the  mercy  of  one 
judge's  discretion,  since  custody  trials 
are  almost  never  juried.  Not  only  does 
a  judge  have  sole  power  in  making  the 
final  custody  award,  but  he  also  has 
the  right,  in  many  instances,  to  decide 
what  testimony  may  or  may  not  be 
heard  by  the  court.  When  a  lesbian 
mother  faces  a  judge,  she  is  facing  an 
individual's  personal  fears  and  prejudi- 
ces. 

Custody  decisions  are  never  final. 
Even  if  a  lesbian  is  awarded  custody, 
she  lives  under  the  constant  threat 
that  her  children  can  be  taken  from 
her  in  a  subsequent  modification  (or 
"material  -  change  -  in  -circumstance") 
hearing.  A  mother  thus  takes    a  cer- 


Organizers'  Dialogue/65 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


tain  risk  in  trying  to  hide  her  lesbi- 
anism from  the  court  in  the  first  trial, 
since  it  could  be  the  reason  she  finds 
herself  in  court  a  second  or  third  time. 

Few  limitations  are  placed  on  the 
degree  to  which  a  mother's  life  can  be 
scrutinized  in  court.  Given  this  fact, 
a  lesbian  mother  is  at  a  great  disad- 
vantage when  she  goes  to  court.  Her 
best  chance  for  winning  is  to  retain 
a  lawyer  who  is  experienced,  sympa- 
thetic, and,  perhaps  most  important, 
not  intimidated  by  the  homophobia 
present  in  most  courtrooms  when  the 
issue  of  lesbianism  is  raised.  It  is  also 
imperative  that  courts  be  educated 
through  the  use  of  expert  witnesses 
(medical  doctors,  psychologists, 
clergy,  etc.)  who  try  to  dispel  the 
myths  surrounding  the  lesbian  mother. 
These  myths  include:  she  is  criminal, 
immoral,  mentally  ill,  or  her  child- 
ren will  suffer  peer  pressure  as  a  re- 
sult of  having  a  lesbian  parent.  The 
most  frightening  accusation,  from  the 
standpoint  of  heterosexual  courts,  is 
that  her  children  will  become  homo- 
sexual. This  is  often  the  reason  les- 
bian mothers  lose  custody,  though 
such  decisions  are  almost  always 
couched  in  other,  more  obscure 
reasons. 

Custody  cases  should  almost  never 
be  approached  from  the  standpoint  of 
setting  favorable  precedents.  Even  if  a 
State  Supreme  Court  should  rule  in 
favor  of  a  lesbian  mother,  such  a  de- 
cision would  have  no  power  to  neces- 
sarily affect  the  outcome  of  another 
case  in  the  same  state;  and  it  has  no 
effect  on  lesbian  mother  cases  in  other 


states.  The  only  obligation  a  judge  has 
is  to  review  precedent-setting  decisions 
made  by  higher  courts.  He  is  left  free 
to  use  his  discretion  in  subsequent 
cases.  Thus,  when  it  is  possible  for 
women  to  negotiate  custody  outside 
of  the  courts  we  strongly  encourage 
them  to  do  so.  Court  battles  should 
be  seen  as  a  last  resort.  Vindication  of 
what  is  "right"  and  "just"  should  not 
be  expected. 

Organizing  Local  Defense  Funds 

When  possible,  it  is  best  to  organize 
a  local  defense  fund/commitee.  Re- 
sources of  national  and  regional  de- 
fense funds  are  limited,  and  local  wo- 
men are  more  familiar  with  sources  of 
support  in  their  own  areas.  The  size 
of  the  group  should  be  appropriate  to 
the  amount  of  work  required  for  each 
case.  If  a  one  or  two  year  battle  is 
expected  (and  this  is  common),  and 
the  mother  has  little  money,  then 
fundraising  will  become  a  major  focus 
of  the  group's  efforts.  Press  releases, 
public  speaking  and  benefits  require 
a  substantial  amount  of  time  and  en- 
ergy. Potential  defense  group  mem- 
bers should  realistically  assess  the  ex- 
tent of  the  commitment  they  are 
willing  and  able  to  make.  At  the  on- 
set, individual  expectations  and  res- 
ponsibilities should  be  clarified.  What 
is  the  role  of  the  group— fundraising, 
helping  with  strategy,  and/or  to  pro- 
vide emotional  support?  What  does 
the  group  expect  from  the  mother 
and/or  her  lover  in  terms  of  decision- 
making?   Serious    conflicts    can    arise 


66/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  Fight  Back 


¥    '         1 

I                   3  ■ 

*  ^  Im 

m                w^J            M 

^^r                          ilfl 

Wg 

i/     T                  1 

hf\                      M 

J 

*_  y *<  1 

if  these  issues  are  not  clarified  at  the 
beginning.  Usually,  the  mother  is 
emotionally  overwhelmed  by  the 
situation  and  may  become  immo- 
bilized by  it.  Women  who  have  not 
been  politically  active  before  may 
find  themselves  unable  to  respond  to 
the  unfamiliar  public  arena.  Acting 
as  a  group  member  may  be  as  foreign 
to  them  as  the  judicial  system  which 
they  are  about  to  enter.  Consequently, 
some  women  may  feel  no  compunc- 
tion to  participate  in  the  process  of 
their  own  defense  group.  We  caution 
potential  defense  fund  members  not 
to  be  overly  dismayed  by  this  and  to 
avoid  spending  inordinate  amounts  of 
time   developing  a  woman's  political 


consciousness  or  sense  of  well  being. 
It  would  be  wise  in  this  situation  to 
refer  the  mother  to  a  more  appropri- 
ate group  or  individual.  Certain  areas 
now  offer  counseling  centers  specif- 
ically for  lesbian  mothers. 

Our  success  as  an  organization  and 
as  a  movement  cannot  be  measured  by 
how  many  lesbian  mothers  win  in  the 
courts.  Winning  is  a  moot  point  since 
we  a/most  never  'win'  anything  that 
we  did  not  already  have  in  the  first 
place. 

We  have  been  very  successful  in 
educating  the  public  to  the  needs  and 
concerns  of  lesbian  mothers.  Each 
year  we  are  asked  more  often  to  speak 
and  write  on  this  issue.  We  have  estab- 


Organizers'  Dialogue/67 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


lished  that  lesbian  mothers  exist  and 
that  they  are  not  going  to  surrender 
without  a  fight. 

We  have  been  successful  in  estab- 
lishing a  strong  network  of  lawyers 
and  experts  around  the  nation  who 
can  be  relied  upon  to  help  us  in  our 
struggle.  Unfortunately,  this  network 
is  weakest  in  rural  areas  where  the 
need  is  often  the  greatest.  We  also 
have  been  instrumental  in  the  forma- 
tion of  many  local  defense  groups. 

Our  most  important  step  forward 
has  been  making  our  existence  known 
to  an  increasing  number  of  lesbian 
mothers.  They  now  know  they  have 
the  support  to  make  a  choice.  Four 
years  ago,  ninety  percent  of  our  calls 
were  from  women  who  had  already 
been  to  court  and  lost.  Today,  more 
and  more  lesbians  call  us  before  they 
go  to  court,  many  at  the  first  sign  of 
a  custody  dispute.  Much  of  our  grati- 
fication comes  from  watching  lesbian 
mothers  move  from  a  defensive  posi- 
tion to  an  offensive  one. 

LMNDF  is  the  only  ongoing  na- 
tional defense  fund  in  the  United 
States.  Our  caseload  has  quadrupled 
over  the  past  two  years.  Every  month 
we  process  an  average  of  five  new 
cases,  answer  fifty  pieces  of  mail  and 
as  many  phone  calls.  A  large  fundrai- 
ser (which  we  do  about  twice  each 
year)  raises  the  weekly  number  of 
hours  we  each  work  from  ten  to  fifty. 
The  amount  of  work,  however,  does 
not  compare  to  the  stress  we  each  feel 
from  working  on  such  an  emotionally 
charged  issue.  We  are  in  the  position 
of  advising  women  on  decisions  that 
will  affect  the  rest  of  their  lives.  The 


difficulty  in  finding  women  to  work 
with  us  under  these  circumstances  is 
enormous. 

Our  ultimate  goal  is  self-elimi- 
nation, but  it  will  be  a  long  time  be- 
fore lesbian  mother  defense  groups 
are  unnecessary.  A  tremendous  a- 
mount  of  work  remains.  Legislative 
work  is  only  beginning  and  our  tax- 
exempt  status  prohibits  us  from  par- 
ticipating in  it.  Other  types  of  groups 
need  to  form  to  do  it.  Creative  fund- 
raising  campaigns  need  to  be  waged 
on  a  national  scale.  The  network  of 
lawyers  and  expert  witnesses  must 
be  expanded  so  that  every  lesbian 
mother,  regardless  of  how  geographi- 
cally isolated,  has  these  resources 
readily  available  to  her.  We  want 
every  lesbian  mother,  whether  or  not 
she  is  faced  with  a  custody  fight,  to 
know  that  groups  exist  for  her  use. 
LMNDF  has  only  taken  the  first  step. 


Lesbian     Mother's    National    Defense 

Fund 
P.O.  Box  21 567 
Seattle,  WA  98111 
(206)  325-2643 


The  following  is  a  list  of  current  les- 
bian mother  groups: 

Dykes  &  Tykes* 

East  Coast  Lesbian  Mother  Defense 

Fund 
110  E.  23rd  Street,  Rm.  502 
New  York,  NY  10010 
(212)441-3384 


68/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  FiSht  Back 


Custody  Action  for  Lesbian  Mothers 

(CALM) 
1427  Walnut  Street 
Philadelphia,  PA  19102 
(215)  563-3055  (day);  667-7508  (eve) 

Lesbian  Defense  Fund-Vermont 

P.O.  Box  4 

Essex  Junction,  VT  05452 

Ann  Arbor  Lesbian  Mother  Collective* 

c/o  FFCU 

508  E.  William 

Ann  Arbor,  Ml  48104 

(31 3)  971  -3525;  662-7449;  761  -5933 

*Offers  counseling  and  rap  groups  for 

lesbian  mothers  on  various  topics. 

FOOTNOTES 

1  Women  have  lost  custody  because  of 
their  involvement  in  the  birth  control  move- 
ment, e.g.,  in  re:  Besant,  11  Ch.D.  508 
(1879),  and  in  leftist  groups— e.g.,  Eaton  v. 
Eaton,  122  N.J.  Eq.  142,  191  A.  839  (1937). 
See  also:  "Casenote,"  49  Harvard  Law  Re- 
view 831  (1936)  and  36  Columbia  Law  Re- 
view 678  (1936).  The  British  Parliament 
once  passed  a  law  forbidding  courts  to 
award  custody  to  a  mother  who  had  com- 
mitted adultery.  Custody  of  Infants  Act,  2 
&  3  Vict.,  c.  54,  at  179  (1839).  And  in 
many  American  courts,  a  presumption  still 
exists  against  granting  custody  to  an  "adul- 
terous mother."  See  Annot.,  Award  of  Cus- 
tody of  Child  to  Parent  Against  Whom  Di- 
vorce is  Decreed,  23  A.L.R.  3d  6  (1969). 


Geraldine  Cole  is  a  fancy  worker,  a 
mother,  and  one  of  the  founding  mem- 
bers of  LMNDF. 

Pam  Keeley  was  a  member  of  the 
Rache/e  Yaseen  Defense  Fund  in  Den- 
ver before  joining  LMNFD  in.  April, 
1977.   She  is  a  registered  nurse  cur- 


rently working  in  a  gay  private  prac- 
tice in  Seattle. 

Joan  Pitell  is  the  program  manager 
for  a  medical  research  project  at  the 
University  of  Washington  and  joined 
LMNDF  in  March,  1975.  She  is  cur- 
rently active  in  the  campaign  to  defeat 
an  anti-gay  initiative  in  Seattle. 


A  FUNDRAISING  STRATEGY 


By  JULIA  FITZ-RANDOLPH 

The  Rachele  Yaseen  Defense  Fund 
was  established  to  raise  money  for  a 
custody  case  based  in  Denver  from 
July  1976  to  November  1977.  Five 
women  including  the  two  mothers 
(Ginny  and  Pam),  an  attorney,  a  jour- 
nalist and  a  fund-raiser  formed  the  de- 
fense committee.  They  raised  a  total 
of  $12,500.  Ginny  (the  biological 
mother)  won  her  battle  to  keep  her 
daughter,  Rachele,  and  they  are  still 
living  together  in  Denver.  The  case 
was  fought  out  of  state  and  required 
additional  money  for  air  fares,  witness 
travel  expenses,  and  long  distance 
telephone  calls  with  attorneys.  The 
attitude  of  the  core  group  was  that 
they  needed  to  raise  enough  money 
so  that  lack  of  it  was  not  a  factor  in 
determining  crucial  legal  decisions  and 
strategies. 

The  overriding  assumption  of  the 
Defense  Committee  was  that  given 
enough  money,  we  could  win  the  case. 


Organizers'  Dialogue/69 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


Urgency,  emotion  and  politics  were 
our  incentive  as  we  mapped  out  a 
fund  raising  compaign  geared  to  raise 
thousands  of  dollars. 

Our  first  step  was  to  target  our 
most  sympathetic  market,  radical 
feminists  and  lesbian  mothers.  We  sent 
informative  press  releases  to  the  local 
community  through  the  feminist- 
media;  the  local  newspaper,  Big  Ma- 
ma Rag\  area  newsletters;  NOW;  the 
Colorado  Feminist  Federal  Credit 
Union;  Boulder  Gay  Liberation;  and 
the  feminist  radio  collective.  Com- 
bining the  facts  of  the  case  and  a  brief 
overview  of  Pam,  Ginny  and  Rachele's 
lives  together,  we  made  a  strong  plea 
for  individual  contributions.  We  also 
arranged  for  tax  deductible  donations 
to  be  channeled  through  a  local  foun- 
dation. For  security  purposes  we 
rented  a  post  office  box  but  only  re- 
ceived two  obscene  letters. 

Since  our  case  was  part  of  a  nation- 
al struggle,  we  also  sent  press  releases 
to  all  the  feminist  newspapers,  journals 
and  newsletters  listed  in  the  New  Wo- 
man's Survival  Catalogue.  Our  message 
was  simple— we  need  your  money,  or 
we  will  lose  our  child.  Many  of  the 
presses  picked  up  our  story  and  to  a 
varying  degree  followed  through  with 
updated  reports.  (The  Lesbian  Tide 
was  our  strongest  advocate.) 

During  the  initial  six  months  of 
fundraising  we  received  $4000  in  in- 
dividual contributions,  over  1/3  of 
which  came  from  out  of  state  and  ran- 
ged from  $1  to  $300. 

For  larger  sums  of  money  we  or- 
ganized local  benefits.  These  endea- 
vors were  aimed  at  local  lesbians,  and 


our  goal  was  to  provide  good  enter- 
tainment as  well  as  a  forum  for  our  po- 
litical message. 

When  organizing  a  benefit,  our 
first  concern  was  to  minimize  out 
of  pocket  expenses.  We  avoided  any 
person  or  group  that  required  sub- 
stantial travel  reimbursement.  For 
example,  when  Rita  Mae  Brown 
agreed  to  a  benefit  poetry  reading, 
we  set  the  date  to  coincide  with  a 
Denver  appearance  that  was  paying 
her  expenses.  One  of  our  most  success- 
ful benefits  in  terms  of  money,  atten- 
dance and  energy  was  a  festival  of  Jan 
Oxenberg's  lesbian  films  which  had 
never  been  shown  in  Denver.  Our 
only  costs  were  film  rental,  minimal 
publicity  and  popcorn.  We  never 
even  considered  producing  a  music 
concert,  because  the  cost  of  renting 
equipment,  lights,  sound  systems,  etc. 
was  exhorbitant. 

We  found  a  local  church  with  a 
large  hall  that  became  our  lesbian 
feminist  entertainment  center.  The 
church  donated  the  use  of  their  facil- 
ities, which  saved  us  the  expense  of 
renting  chairs,  projectors  and  micro- 
phones; providing  janitorial  cleanup; 
obtaining  punchbowls,  coffee  pots  and 
kitchen  utensils;  and  included  a  sophis- 
ticated pre-school  and  nursery  room 
to  use  for  free  child  care  at  the  events. 
Other  savings  came  through  discounts 
arranged  with  politically  conscious 
vendors  since  the  events  were  bene- 
fits. We  received  free  cups,  keg  tap 
discounts,  donated  beer  and  10% 
reductions  on  printing. 

Publicity  is  a  necessary  cost  for 
any  event,  and  we  budgeted  expenses 


70/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  FiSht  Back 


for  it.  But  we  also  discovered  that  the 
lesbian  information  network  is  effec- 
tive and  can  best  be  reached  by  word 
of  mouth.  So,  every  Friday  and  Satur- 
day night  for  two  weeks  preceeding 
an  event,  we  leafleted  the  cars  parked 
outside  women's  bars.  All  feminist 
and  women's  organizations  and  busi- 
nesses received  a  poster.  We  kept  ac- 
curate records  of  all  individual  con- 
tributors and  mailed  those  in  Colorado 
a  flyer  advertising  our  benefits.  We  per- 
sonally notified  at  least  one  member 
of  each  woman's  group  in  town  and 
asked  her  to  spread  the  word.  We 
mailed  publicity  packets  to  contact 
points  throughout  the  state  and  no- 
tified politically  sympathetic  groups 
like  SWP  and  gay  male  groups  of 
our  activities. 

Our  benefits  became  synonomous 
with  good  entertainment  and  we 
reached  a  point  where  a  RYDF  event 
became  an  event  the  community  did 
not  want  to  miss.  Eventually  we  could 
simply  repeat  our  successful  formula 
for  each  event. 

Feminists  usually  have  difficulty 
setting  ticket  prices.  We  would  set 
the  price  based  on  the  maximum  we 
thought  the  event  was  worth,  how 
much  our  expenses  were  and  what  we 
thought  women  could  afford.  We  al- 
ways offered  advance  ticket  sales.  The 
security  of  a  reserved  seat  encourages 
people  to  plan  ahead,  and  advance 
sales  gave  us  an  idea  of  how  the  event 
was  selling,  providing  the  opportunity 
to  increase  our  publicity  efforts  when 
necessary. 

We  organized  a  mini-speakers  bu- 
reau which  provided  the  additional  ad- 


vantage of  political  consciousness 
raising.  Through  the  bureau,  we  spoke 
to  various  groups  and  classes  about 
the  issue  of  lesbian  mother  custody 
battles,  making  sure  one  of  the  mo- 
thers was  always  present.  After  analy- 
sis and  questions,  we  asked  for  dona- 
tions which  yielded  up  to  $100  in 
personal  contributions  at  each  event. 

As  the  legal  expenses  of  the  case  es- 
calated, we  needed  large  sums  for 
specific  expenses,  such  as  a  $400  tran- 
script of  an  earlier  hearing.  We  then 
launched  a  personal  telephone  so- 
licitation campaign,  with  each  of  us 
calling  ten  women  who  had  not  yet 
made  an  individual  contribution  (sepa- 
rate from  attending  benefits)  and  who 
we  thought  could  afford  a  $50  dona- 
tion. We  not  only  requested  a  dona- 
tion but  also  asked  when  we  could  ex- 
pect the  check  and  followed  the  call 
with  a  postcard  reminder  if  the  pro- 
mised date  was  past  due.  In  this  way, 
we  raised  $1  200  in  one  week. 

After  the  final  hearing  we  were  still 
over  $3000  in  debt.  We  had  won 
the  case  and  now  needed  to  pay  out- 
standing fees  to  attorneys  and  psy- 
chologists, and  one  large  personal 
loan.  Feeling  that  we  had  saturated 
our  previous  individual  contributors, 
we  changed  our  target  group  to  gay 
men  and  academic  women.  We  con- 
sidered approaching  liberal  women, 
but  the  difficulty  of  finding  a  liberal 
entertainer  who  would  identify  with 
the  lesbian  mother  struggle  quickly 
ended  that  idea. 

In  attempting  to  reach  the  gay  male 
market,  we  contacted  a  group  of  fem- 
inist identified  gay  men  and  suggested 


Organizers'  Dialogue/71 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


a  disco,  live  band  and  optional  dinner 
dance  at  a  downtown  hotel.  We  planned 
the  event  to  coincide  with  a  Metro 
Community  Church  national  conven- 
tion that  brought  3,000  gays  to  Den- 
ver. The  dance  failed.  We  managed 
to  break  even,  but  we  learned  that 
gay  men  really  have  little  interest 
in  supporting  feminist  activities.  The 
limited  number  of  political  gay  men, 
although  supportive  are  not  a  suf- 
ficient financial  resource.  Even  though 
we  went  to  the  MCC  convention  site 
and  passed  out  flyers,  the  MCC  people 
were  not  responsive.  Our  local  wo- 
men's community  did   turn  out,  and 


we  essentially  threw  a  huge  party  for 
400  or  so  of  our  friends. 

We  finally  decided  to  put  all  our 
energy  into  one  big  benefit  that  would 
attract  many  women  and  make  a  lot 
of  money.  Adrienne  Rich  agreed  to 
come  to  Denver  and  give  a  poetry 
reading/workshop.  We  allocated  a 
great  deal  of  expense  money  for  a 
more  formal  church  auditorium,  some 
of  her  travelling  expenses  and  a  slick 
poster.  We  used  access  and  benefit 
angles  whenever  possible  and  put  to- 
gether a  sophisticated  publicity  cam- 
paign; each  university  English  depart- 
ment   received    a    press    packet.    We 


12/Quest 


Lesbian  Mothers  Fight  Back 


charged  $5  a  person  and  offered  a 
free  wine  reception  following  the 
event  where  Rich  autographed  her 
books  which  were  on  sale  at  tables 
staffed  by  the  local  feminist  book- 
stores. The  Rich  benefit  was  a  huge 
success  both  politically  and  finan- 
cially. We  netted  over  $1 500. 

Summary 

Local  lesbian  communities  can  dup- 
licate the  fundraising  successes  of  the 
RYDF  by  adopting  several  basic 
approaches: 

1)  Work  together,  but  be  willing 
to  divide  tasks  based  on  skills  and 
willingness.  Most  women  are  uncom- 
fortable about  asking  their  peers  (let 
alone  strangers)  for  money,  so  recon- 
sider the  assumption  that  every  wo- 
man can  learn  and  do  everything  if 
only  given  the  space  to  learn.  Share 
knowledge,  but  make  sure  each  wo- 
man genuinely  likes  her  task(s). 

2)  Make  sure  each  woman  knows 
she  has  a  deadline  and  will  be  held 
accountable  to  it.  Each  project  needs 
someone  responsible  for  overall  coor- 
dination so  that  the  job  gets  done  on 
time  and  well. 

3)  Make  sure  each  woman  is  pro- 
perly trained.  Nothing  produces  burn- 
out or  frustration  faster  than  giving 
a  woman  who  wants  to  help  an  open- 
ended  task  which  she  is  not  sure  how 
to  do.  Or  worse,  she  tries  to  get  it 
done,  fails,  and  realizes  her  approach 
has  been  tried  before,  didn't  work, 
and  no  one  in  the  core  group  had 
communicated  the  appropriate  infor- 
mation. 


4)  When  deciding  who  or  what  to 
offer  for  special  promotions,  make 
sure  the  person  or  event  has  not  been 
overexposed  in  your  community.  One 
reason  Adrienne  Rich,  Rita  Mae 
Brown,  and  the  Jan  Oxenberg  films 
drew  as  well  as  they  did  was  because 
they  had  never  been  to  Denver  be- 
fore. When  trying  something  new, 
make  certain  it  is  not  too  expensive, 
given  the  projected  income  from 
the  event  and  can  be  easily  pro- 
moted. A  suggested  guideline  for 
determining  how  much  you  can  pay 
entertainers  is  to  never  let  opera- 
ting expenses  (which  include  publicity, 
rentals,  refreshments  and  fees)  exceed 
20%  of  estimated  income. 

5)  Talented  local  women  can 
often  offer  a  wonderful  evening  of 
music,  poetry  and  comedy.  How- 
ever the  audience  will  be  limited 
to  your  own  community  and  those 
familiar  with  the  entertainers.  Bring- 
ing a  relatively  unknown  new  group 
or  person  to  your  town,  for  instance,  a 
new  Olivia  recording  artist,  presents 
that  same  problem.  The  success  of 
such  a  concert  rests  primarily  on  the 
local  production  company's  previously 
established  reputation  and  achieve- 
ments with  other  concerts. 

6)  Always,  plan  out  a  written 
budget  at  the  initial  stages  of  organiz- 
ing an  event.  Well  thought-out  ex- 
penses, fees,  and  ticket  prices  will 
make  all  the  difference  in  evaluating 
the  net  worth  and  required  efforts  for 
the  benefit. 

Although  suggestions  may  seem 
ruthlessly  efficient,  even  harsh,  they 
are  effective.     By  applying  the  basics 


Organizers'  Dialogue/73 


ORGANIZERS'     DIALOGUE 


of  marketing  to  your  lesbian  mother 
custody  case  (or  other  lesbian  fund- 
raising  needs),  you  can  raise  money 
and  political  consciousness. 

RACHELE  YASEEN  DEFENSE  FUND 
FINANCIAL  REPORT 

INCOME 


Individual  Donations  5,652.00 

Benefits 

Rita  Mae  Brown  ticket  sales 

1,100.00 
Rita  Mae  Brown  auction 
(same  event)  1 ,1  38.50 

Jan  Oxenberg  films  600.00 

Adrienne  Rich  1,800.00 

Others  (gay  dance,  out  of  state 
events,  passing  hat)  3,000.00 


TOTAL 

13,290.50 

EXPENSES 

Attorneys 

4,713.32 

Psychologists 

1,120.00 

Air  Fares 

3,713.32 

Telephone 

1,628.24 

Postage 

229.62 

Printing 

611.98 

Miscellaneous 

(benefit  expenses) 

1,107.67 

TOTAL 

13,124.15 

Julie  Fitz-Randolph  has  worked  for 
twelve  years  in  public  relations  and 
professional  fundraising.  A  co-founder 
of  the  Colorado  Feminist  Federal 
Credit  Union,  she  is  also  active  in  the 
gay  rights  struggle. 


The  revolutionary 

press  is  a 

oowerful 

weapon 

of  the 

people 


is  the 

people's 

choice 


—Lenin 


America's  #1  independent  Marxist 
newsweekly  provides  US  labor, 
antiracist,  women's  and  antirepression 
coverage  Plus  reports  and  analysis  on 
Africa  and  the  third  world  that  just  can't 
be  beat. 

Special  trial  oficr 
6  weeks  -  $1 


enclose 

(  >  $1  -  6  wk   tnai 
(  )  $17  -  1  year 
(  )  $10  -  6  months 


Name  _ 
Address 
City  


Add  SS  PEP  YEAP 
for  Canada  and 
abroad 


State  _ 

Guardian    Dept   *(V      33  W 


.    Zip  

NYC   10011 


74/Quest 


rJninrR  wi/Dom 

A  Journal  of  Words  and  Pictures  for 
the  Lesbian  Imagination  in  All  Women 


ONE  YEAR  (4  issues)  $7.50 
TWO  YEARS   (8   issues)   $13.00 
SAMPLE   ISSUE   $2.50   +  500  postage 
(All  copies  mailed  in  plain  envelope.) 


[new  address]        Box  30541 

Lincoln,  Nebraska  68503 


^gj^g^^ggg^^gjjg^^jg 


Jjg^^Jjg^c^JJg^cggggj^^i 


I 


o 


->    THAN  A 


6      ^         J&X     S0UND 
*S>  /////Me<>     ■     C0MPANY 


#^    k>n     &    Vs  |202-332-4?~ 


WOMAN  SOUND 


*Vtoj^V°!V  a"  F^35  NEW  HAMPSHIRE  AVE  NW  #104  WASH.  D.C.  20009 

^>V°-'  l— — 


P9>c 


^ 


^>^o^V 


A< 


■jb 


\<\V 


r 


*k  Wj*  *kWj*  *lilUljJft  c^j*  AfeWJE 


»«H«)«€r»cH«)«<2r> 


Organizers'  Dialogue/75 


Mercenary 

PROSTITUTION 

In  Ancient  Greece 


By  WENDY  WELLS 

graphic  by  Scarlet  Cheng 

Now  we  have  courtesans  for  the 
sake  of  pleasure,  but  concubines  for 
the  sake  of  daily  cohabitation  and 
wives  for  the  purpose  of  having  chil- 
dren legitimately  and  of  having  a  faith- 
ful guardian  of  all  our  household 
affairs. 

Atheneaus,  The  Banquet  of  the 
Learned. 

Mercenary  prostitution-the  selling 
of  a  woman's  body— originated  in  anci- 
ent Athens  in  approximately  594  BC 
as  a  government-run  enterprise  to  fi- 
nance the  building  of  the  Greek  mili- 
tary. Before  that  time,  prostitution 
existed  under  the  guise  of  hospitality- 
giving  a  wife  or  daughter  to  a  house 
guest-and  "religious"  services  to  Aph- 
rodite. 

Historians  have  examined  prostitu- 
tion either  as  a  nefarious  evil  perpetu- 
ated by  evil  women,  or  as  a  healthy 
outlet  for  healthy  males.  Some  con- 
sidered Greek  temple  prostitution  to 
have  been  a  religious  service  and  the 
prostitutes  held  in  the  temples  for  life 
"invested  with  a  sacred  character," 
and  "was  probably  long  regarded  by 
the  laity  as  an  exercise  of  more  than 


common  virtue. ..."  Cecil  Hay  ward, 
author  of  one  of  the  largest  works  on 
prostitution,  called  it  one  of  "provi- 
dence's arms  against  immorality"  and 

claims  "the  real  motive  of  the  custom 

9 

was  devotion  rather  than  economy." 
Others  consider  temple  prostitution 
and  the  auctioning  of  female  flute- 
players  after  a  banquet  part  of  the 
"charming  erotic  romances"  of  the 
upper  classes. 

While  women  prostituting  them- 
selves in  temples  in  the  service  of  reli- 
gion may  strike  twentieth  century 
(male)  historians  as  a  privileged  and 
holy  activity,  it  is  more  realistically 
seen  as  women  sacrificing  themselves 
to  a  teaching  that  women  are  incapa- 
ble of  intellectual/spiritual  love,  fit 
only  for  sex.  Solon  simply  stripped 
off  the  facade  of  religion  and  continu- 
ed prostitution  as  a  purely  secular  sale 
of  women. 

The  first  Athenian  brothels  were 
staffed  by  Asian  slaves,  prisoners  of 
war  and  women  cast  out  of  their  fami- 
lies who  were  kidnapped  or  bought 
from  slave  traders— historians  call  it 
"recruited"— then  "educated  in  erot- 
ic cajolery."  None  of  the  slaves 
(deikteriades)  were  allowed  on  the 
street  during  the  day,  nor  could  they 
attend  religious  ceremonies  or  enter 
temples;   all   were   forced   to   wear  a 


76/Quest,  vol.  V.  no.  1 ,  summer  1979 


special  multi-colored  garment  invented 
by  Solon  and  dye  their  hair  with  saf- 
fron to  "attract  attention  of  the  guard- 
ians of  the  law. "4  They  could  not  le- 
gally refuse  a  customer.  The  deikteri- 
ades  were  denied  even  those  few  rights 
available  to  Greek  matrons:  their  sons 
were  absolved  from  the  duty  to  sup- 
port them  and  were  not  given  citizen- 
ship themselves  until  they  performed 
an  unspecified  act  of  bravery;  they 
could  not  inherit,  associate  with  other 
youths  or  address  an  assembly. 

The  brothels  were  operated  by 
government-licensed  pornobosceions 
who  also  lost  their  rights  as  citizens, 
though  many  registered  under  assumed 
names  to  evade  the  cost  of  this  law. 
The  proceeds  from  the  entrance/sexual 
fees  went  to  the  government  through  a 
series  of  tax  collectors. 

Though  the  door  to  the  brothel 
was  always  open,  business  did  not  be- 
gin until  after  4  p.m.  "so  as  not  to 
keep  young  men  away  from  their  exer- 
cises. "5  While  a  man  who  entered  the 
brothel  was  safe  from  police,  creditors 
and  his  wife,  the  deikteriades  were  vir- 
tual prisoners;  the  women  were  con- 
fined to  the  brothels  and  were  requir- 
ed to  obtain  a  formal  license  before 
leaving  the  city  and  had  to  offer  "ac- 
ceptable guarantees"  of  return. 

The  brothels  served  many  purposes. 
They  made  Athens  an  attractive  city 
for  sailors  as  the  temples  of  Venus 
(Aphrodite)  and  the  state-owned 
brothels  were  situated  in  ports  and 
near  gambling  districts  to  service  them. 
In  addition,  the  establishment  of 
brothels  served  to  decrease  unrest  due 
to  class  inequalities:  concubines  had 
long  been  a  sign  of  wealth,  but  the 
price  of  a  deikteriade  was  extremely 
low.  They  provided  all  men— not  just 
men  of  wealth— with  sexual  gratifica- 


tion on  demand,  free  from  the  fear  of 
creating  heirs,  or  worse  still,  daughters. 

The  law  establishing  the  brothels 
was  part  of  a  group  of  statutes  limiting 
displays  of  wealth.  These  limitations 
applied  exclusively  to  women,  how- 
ever. According  to  Pomeroy,  trous- 
seau were  limited  to  three  dresses  and 
some  paraphernalia  of  little  value.  The 
food  and  drink  of  Athenian  citizen 
women,  their  walks,  and  their  numbers 
in  attendance  at  funerals  (one  of  the 
few  occasions  women  were  allowed 
out  of  the  house)  were  all  regulated. 

While  prostitution  was  encouraged, 
adultery  by  women  was  severely  pun- 
ished; the  laws  against  adultery  were 
more  stringent  than  those  against  rape 
because,  while  a  raped  woman  may 
conceive  an  illegitimate  heir  to  her 
husband's  or  father's  wealth,  she  re- 
tains her  loyalty  to  the  clan;  the  adul- 
tress,  on  the  other  hand,  had  presum- 
ably transferred  her  loyalty  from  her 
husband's  to  her  lover's  clan.  The 
woman  was  denied  her  civil  rights  for 
the  rest  of  her  life,  dragged  to  the  mar- 
ket place  and  exposed,  then  sent 
through  the  city  on  an  ass  and  re- 
exposed  at  the  end  of  the  journey  or 
led  through  the  city,  bound,  for  three 
days,  or  displayed  for  eleven  days  in 
the  marketplace  in  a  transparent  vest. 

The  brothels  were  used  to  combat 
any  challenge  homosexuality  might  of- 
fer to  the  patriarchy  and  the  military 
hierarchy.  Homosexuality  (but  not 
lesbianism)  was  seen  as  a  particular 
threat  by  Greek  tyrants  not  because  of 
opposition  to  sexual  relations  between 
men,  but  for  political  reasons: 
"the  vigorous  disposition  of  youths, 
and  the  confidence  engendered  by 
their  association  with  each  other,  has 
often  led  to  the  overthrow  of  tyran- 
nies.   For  in  the  presence  of  his  favor- 


Mercenary    Prostitution   in   Ancient  Greece/77 


ite  a  man  could  choose  to  do  anything 
rather  than  get  the  character  of  a  cow- 
ard. .  .  .  Owing  to  favoritism  of  this 
kind,  the  tyrants  (for  friendships  of 
this  sort  are  very  adverse  to  their  inter- 
ests) altogether  forbade  the  fashion  of 
making  favorites  of  boys  and  wholly 
abolished  it.  And  some  of  them  even 
burnt  down  and  razed  to  the  ground 
the  palaestrae  considering  them  for- 
tresses hostile  to  their  own  citadels.  '6 

Solon  prohibited  male  prostitution, 
for  similar  reasons:  the  fear  that  "any- 
one who  sells  his  own  body  for  money 
will  also  lightly  sacrifice  the  common 
interests  of  the  state. "7  Homosexual- 
ity per  se  was  encouraged  as  long  as, 
first,  it  was  contained  within  the  upper 
classes  so  as  not  to  threaten  the  hier- 
archy and  second,  it  supplemented, 
but  didn't  supplant,  heterosexual  mar- 
riage. Solon  was  heralded  as  the  "savi- 
or of  the  state"  for  his  reforms,  in- 
cluding setting  up  the  brothels.  He 
was  praised  by  his  contemporaries  as  a 
benefactor,  a  man  who  "averted  great 
mischief  and  inevitable  disorder. "8 

"You  did  well  for  every  man,  O 
Solon! 

for  they  do  say  you  were  the  first 
to  see 

The  justice  of  a  public-spirited 
measure.  .  .  "  9 

The  deikteriades  were  only  one 
of  three  classes  of  prostitutes.  The 
other  two  were  the  auletrides  or  flute- 
players  and  dancers,  and  the  hetairai, 
recognized  for  their  intelligence  and 
wit,  who  enjoyed  greater  freedom. 
The  auletrides  performed  at  banquets 
and  other  festive  occasions.  They 
were  accomplished  dancers,  tumblers 
and  gymnasts,  and  their  performances 
were  such  important  parts  of  any  fes- 
tivity that  men  often  competed  to  hire 
the  most  talented,  best-known  artists. 


The  women  were  usually  slaves 
brought  to  Athens  from  Asia  and  were 
frequently  auctioned  off  to  the  male 
guests  after  their  performance.  While 
they  were  sometimes  free  to  choose 
their  customers,  mass  rape  and  beat- 
ings occurred  as  well.  Basserman  re- 
lates an  incident: 

.  .  .  enraged  revellers,  disappointed  in 
their  expectations,  fell  upon  the  flute- 
players  with  their  fists,  tore  the  costly 
flimsy  robes  from  their  bodies  and 
smashed  their  instruments.'^®  Aule- 
trides had  more  independence  than  the 
deikteriades:  they  lived  where  they 
chose,  were  better  paid  and  were 
free  to  have  long  affairs. 

The  third  group,  the  hetairai,  had 
the  most  exalted  positions  and  the 
most  freedom.  They  were  intelligent, 
witty,  articulate  and  educated.  They 
were  the  only  women  in  Athenian  so- 
ciety allowed  to  manage  their  own  fi- 
nancial affairs.  They  were  free  to  at- 
tend public  events,  to  speak  with 
whomever  and  whenever  they  pleased, 
and  to  share  in  the  intellectual  activi- 
ties of  Greece.  The  hetairai  were  ac- 
complished conversationalists,  herbal- 
ists, midwives,  the  mothers  and  lovers 
of  kings  and  statesmen.  They  com- 
manded enough  money  for  their  sexu- 
al services  to  keep  themselves  and  oth- 
er prostitutes  in  their  homes,  erect 
monuments  to  the  gods  and  their  na- 
tive cities. 

The  outstanding  example  of  the 
free  and  intellectually  gifted  hetairai 
was  Aspasia,  a  woman  born  in  Miletus 
and  brought  to  Athens  during  the  time 
of  Socrates.  Brilliant,  she  entertained 
large  groups  with  her  philosophical 
teachings.  She  became  the  mistress 
and  eventually  the  wife  of  Pericles. 
Contemporary  rumors  attribute  the 
famous  funeral   speech   of  Pericles  to 


18/Quest 


vspasia.  Plutarch  notes  that  she  was 
a  wise  woman  and  had  a  great  under- 
tanding  in  matters  of  state  and  gov- 
rnment.  .  .  .  Socrates  himself  went  to 


see  her  sometimes  with  his  friends;  and 
those  that  used  her  company  also 
brought  their  wives  with  them  many 
times  to  hear  her  talk."1 1    Her  house- 


Mercenary  Prostitution/79 


hold,  which  was  a  meeting  place  for 
married  women,  included  a  "gynae- 
cum"  for  prostitutes  learning  litera- 
ture, philosophy  and  etiquette. 

The  freedom  of  the  hetairai  and  the 
auletrides  contrasted  sharply  with  the 
seclusion  of  the  Greek  matron.  The 
domestic  lives  of  Athenian  matrons 
was  dismal.  The  homes  they  kept 
were  dark,  damp  and  unhealthy;  mid- 
dle and  upper  class  women  lived  in  the 
interior  of  the  house,  allowed  out  only 
for  religious  or  funeral  ceremonies. 
Working  class  women  mingled  in  the 
market  places  and  at  the  wells.  Wom- 
en were  kept  in  the  women's  quarters, 
away  from  the  windows  and  doors, 
were  dismissed  from  the  room  when 
guests  visited,  and  were  not  allowed  to 
take  part  in  conversations  in  their  own 
homes.  The  Greek  word  for  woman 
literally  meant  "bearer  of  children"; 
the  state  was  interested  in  young  war- 
riors and  the  husband  in  heirs.  Many 
female  infants  were  exposed  along 
with  weak  and  deformed  babies.  An 
Athenian  girl  was  taught  only  weav- 
ing, sewing  and  cooking;  she  married 
the  man  of  her  father's  choice  with 
the  dowry  going  from  the  father  to  the 
husband  for  her  maintenance.  If 
found  to  be  unchaste,  her  father  or 
brother  could  sell  her  to  a  brothel  and, 
if  found  sterile,  her  husband  could  give 
her  to  a  friend.  When  her  husband 
died  she  returned  to  her  father's  house 
while  all  her  husband's  property  went 
to  male  relatives.  She  remained  a 
minor  her  entire  life .1 2 

The  prostitute  and  the  wife  alike 
were  subject  to  the  patriarchy.  Unlike 
the  wife,  however,  the  prostitute  oper- 
ated outside  the  nuclear  family;  her 
freedom  was  directly  related  to  the 
distance  she  could  put  between  herself 
and    domestication.       As   Simone   de 

80/Quest 


Beauvoir  finds: 

"The  status  of  the  prostitute,  de- 
pends upon  the  position  of  the  wife 
and  involves  society's  attitude  towards 
chastity,  adultery,  virginity  and  bi- 
sexual ity.  Every  woman's  sexuality 
has  historically  been  tied  to  that  of  her 
sisters  and  dictated  in  large  part  by 
men.  Prostitutes  have  not  been,  as 
some  claim,  the  group  being  sacrificed 
for  "purity"  and  "chastity"  of  "virtu- 
ous women";  their  position  does  not 
usually  change  inversely— but  direct- 
ly—with that  of  married  women. 
When  men  have  oppressed  women  in 
the  family  by  insisting  on  chastity  and 
monogamy,  severely  punishing  adul- 
tery, they  also  have  oppressed  another 
group  of  women  by  treating  them  as 
bodies  for  hire.  "1 3 

Footnotes 

1  Frazer,  Sir  F.G.,  The  Golden  Bough,  Pt. 
IV,  Adonis,  Book  I,  Chapter  III. 

2  Hayward,  C,  Dictionary  of  Courtesans, 
University  Books,  New  Hyde  Park,  New 
York,  1962,  p.  5. 

3  Basserman,  Lujo,  The  Oldest  Profession: 
A  History  of  Prostitution,  Arthur  Barker 
Ltd.,  London,  p.  xi. 

4  Basserman,  p.  xi. 

5  Licht,  Hans,  Sexual  Life  in  Ancient 
Greece,  George  Routledge  and  Sons,  Ltd., 
1932,  p.  335. 

6  Athenaeus,  Banquet  of  the  Learned, 
Section  78,  Chapter  13. 

7  Licht,  p.  436-7. 

8  Basserman,  p.  9. 

9  Athenaeus. 

10  Basserman,  p.  9. 

1 1  Plutarch,  Life  of  Pericles. 

12  de  Beauvoir,  Simone,  The  Second  Sex, 
Vintage,  New  York,  1974,  p.  103. 

13  de  Beauvoir,  p.  102. 

Wendy  Wells  is  a  freelance  writer  and 
journalist  presently  living  in  Europe. 


B 


FEMINIST 
STUDIES 


Volume  S.  Number  I         Februuy  1979 


Subscriptions 

Three  issues  annually 
lndividuals-$10 
Libraries  and  Institutions- 


$16 


Add  postage  for  delivery  outside 

the  United  States: 

Surface-$1.50 

Air  Mail-$7 

Make    checks    payable     in    U.S. 

currency 


Single  issue  rate 
lndividuals-$4 
Libraries  and  Institutions- 


SB 


VOLUME  5,  NUMBER  1:  A  SPECIAL  ISSUE 
Papers  from  the  International  Conference 
"Women  and  Power:  Dimensions  of  Women's 
Historical  Experience."  An  Introduction  by 
History  Editors  Mary  P.  Ryan/Judith  R.  Wal* 
kowitz.  Rayna  Rapp/Ellen  Ross/Renate  Bri- 
denthal,  Examining  Family  History.  Barbara 
Taylor,  Socialism,  Feminism,  and  Sexual 
Antagonism  in  the  London  Tailoring  Trade 
in  the  Early  1830's.  Mary  P.  Ryan,  The  Power 
of  Women's  Networks.  John  P.  Gillis,  Servants, 
Sexual  Relations  and  the  Risks  of  Illegitimacy 
in  London,  1801-1900.  Elizabeth  Fee/Michael 
Wallace,  The  History  and  Politics  of  Birth  Con- 
trol. Leonore  Davidoff,  Sex  and  Class  in  Vic- 
torian England.  Margaret  Darrow,  French 
Noblewomen  and  the  New  Domesticity,  1750- 
1850.  Joan  Kelly,  The  Doubled  Vision  of 
Feminist  Theory:  A  Postscript  to  the  Con- 
ference. 

FORTHCOMING:   SPECIAL  SYMPOSIA 

?  Protective  Legislation  and  the  Politics  of 
Women's  Equality 

?    The  Intersection  of  Racism  and  Sexism 

?    Women's  Culture,  Women's  Sphere 

?  In  Commemoration  of  the  30th  Anniversary 
of  the  publication  of  Simone  de  Beauvoir's 
The  Second  Sex 


Mail  orders  to: 

Managing  Editor 
FEMINIST  STUDIES 
Women's  Studies  Program 
University  of  Maryland 
College  Park,  MD  20742 


?    Feminism  and  Anarchism 


For  information  on  submission  of  papers,  con- 
tact the  managing  editor's  office 


Mercenary  Prostitution/81 


WAITR.ESSING:  Taking 
Control  Of  Our  Work 


Special  thanks  to  Ellen  Wade,  Nan- 
cy Felton,  Cheryl  Schaffer,  Karen 
Kalustian,  Sherry  Woods  and  Dune, 
members  of  the  former  Job  Action 
Center  for  Waitresses,  where  many  of 
these  ideas  were  worked  out  and  dis- 
cussed. 

By  SUSAN  WOODS 

graphics  by  Claudia  Vess 

Women  experience  wage  labor  not 
simply  as  workers  but  as  women  work- 
ers. This  means  that  wage  labor  poses 
special  contradicitions  for  women  that 
it  does  not  pose  for  men.  Those  who 
try  to  understand  women's  experience 
in  work  from  a  strict  class  analysis  are 
making  a  mistake.  Women's  partici- 
pation in  wage  labor  is  conditioned  by 
the  structure  of  the  nuclear  family  and 
the  heterosexual  stereotypes  of 
"masculine"  and  "feminine."  We  are 
the  secretaries,  the  school  teachers,  the 
nurses,  the  maids  characteristically 
female  jobs.  And  whether  we-  work 
for  wages  or  not,  we  are  responsible 
for  the  cooking  and  the  cleaning  or  for 
finding  another  woman  to  do  the 
work.  Although  wage  labor  can  allow 
us  a  degree  of  economic  independence, 
the  sense  of  independence  it  supports 
is  countered  by  the  submissive  and  vul- 
nerable roles  we  are  expected  to  play 


on  the  job.  Worse,  our  ability  to  get 
and  keep  our  jobs  often  depends  on 
exactly  how  well  we  can  fill  the  "fem- 
inine" role. 

This  paper  examines  these  contra- 
dictions in  the  context  of  a  specific 
woman's  job,  waitressing,  and  com- 
bines an  account  of  the  economic 
relations  of  restaurant  work  with  an 
awareness  of  the  sexual  relations  of 
the  job.  But  an  analysis  of  the  every- 
day links  between  capitalism  and  patri- 
archy loses  value  if  we  do  not  focus  on 
practical  tactics  and  strategies  for 
change  —  in  this  case,  waitresses' 
potential  to  organize  and  take  control 
of  their  work  situation.  My  analysis 
depends  on  a  theoretical  framework 
which  defines  patriarchy  as  the  un- 
equal distribution  of  power  by  sex  and 
the  process  by  which  that  power  is 
exercised.  The  basis  of  this  power  is 
male  control  of  women's  sexuality  and 
reproduction.  Patriarchy  is  separate 
from,  but  interdependent  with,  the 
class  antagonism  in  capitalism;  it  is  not 
a  by-product. 

Patriarchy  creates  a  culture  consis- 
tent with  male  domination;  a  culture 
which  assumes  a  heterosexual  norm 
and  institutionalizes  that  assumption 
into  the  structures  through  which  all 
of  us,  poor  or  rich,  black  or  white, 
straight  or  gay,  man  or  woman,  must 


82/Quest,  vol.  V.  no.  1 ,  summer,  1979 


operate.  At  the  level  of  women's 
daily  lives,  this  culture  defines  who  we 
can  be  and  denies  us  the  right  to  be 
otherwise.*  It  assigns  women  an  infer- 
ior position  compared  to  men,  divides 
activities  into  masculine  and  feminine 
counterparts  and  requires  that  women 
seek  approval  from  men  for  our  activi- 
ties into  masculine  and  feminine 
counterparts  and  requires  that  women 
seek  approval  from  men  for  our 
activities. 

Failure  to  recognize  its  importance 
reduces  the  impact  of  the  feminist 
challenge  to  patriarchy  and  limits  the 
kinds  of  changes  that  can  be  made. 

At  the  base  of  the  theoretical  frame- 
work used  here  is  the  concept  that  sexu- 
ality is  political,  not  merely  a  personal 
preference.  Heterosexuality  and  all  its 
various  expressions  from  dress  and 
body  posture  to  sexual  segregation  in 
work,  legitimizes  male  superiority.    A 


Thanks    to    Jean    Goss    Holty    for   this 
clear  statement. 


system  of  social  benefits  —  hetero- 
sexual privilege  —  encourages  its  ac- 
ceptance. So  long  as  women  remain 
dependent  on  men  for  their  sexuality, 
they  will  have  an  incentive  to  incor- 
porate their  demands  for  change  into 
the  broader  framework  of  hetero- 
sexual culture.  Thus  their  challenge 
to  partriarchy  is  diverted  J 

The  material  for  this  paper  is  based 
on  direct  waitressing  experience,  on 
political  work  with  a  feminist  group 
which,  for  three  years,  provided  re- 
sources and  support  for  the  organizing 
efforts  of  local  waitresses,  and  on 
talks  with  waitresses  working  in  full- 
meal  restaurants  in  the  semi-rural 
western  Massachusetts  area  where 
social  attitudes  are  fairly  conservative 
and  where  there  is  little  strong  pro- 
union  sentiment.  The  restaurants 
range  from  inexpensive  to  moderately 
expensive  with  few  restaurants  em- 
ploying waiters  exclusively.  Most  of 
the  cooks  are  male  and  the  restaurants 
serve  mostly  white  customers. 


Waitressing:    Taking   Control   of   Our  Work/83 


Waitressing  As  Women's  Work 

It  Is  no  surprise  that  waitressing  is 
a  woman's  job.  There  is  nothing  extra- 
ordinary about  women  serving  food. 
But  the  similarity  is  deeper:  the  posi- 
tion of  a  waitress  in  the  restaurant 
does  not  differ  radically  from  the  posi- 
tion of  a  woman  within  a  heterosexual 
family.  In  the  restaurant  men  are  the 
producers  and  decision-makers;  wom- 
en facilitate  their  decisions.  (In  1973, 
two-fifths  of  all  women  workers  were 
employed  as  either  secretary,  sales- 
woman, bookkeeper,  maid,  elementary 
school  teacher,  typist,  cashier,  sewing 
machine  operator,  registered  nurse  or 
waitress. )2  And  the  demands  put  on 
the  waitresses'  part  in  food  service  are 
an  extension  of  the  wife's  nurturing 
role  in  the  home. 

Waitressing  is  hard  work,  both 
physically  and  mentally.  It  involves 
much  lifting  and  carrying  of  heavy 
trays.  Plates  loaded  with  food  are  not 
light.  Good  service  is  a  skill  requiring 
a  high  degree  of  mental  concentration 
and  the  coordination  of  several  activi- 
ties at  once.  During  meal  rushes,  the 
waitress  works  under  intense  pressure. 
She  must  act  quickly  and  make  con- 
stant judgments  in  her  service  strategy. 
The  popular  notion  that  just  anyone 
can  wait  on  tables  is,  in  reality,  simply 
not  true.  Waitressing  requires  a  parti- 
cular kind  of  skill. 

The  special  problems  wage  labor 
poses  for  women  are  all  here'.  The 
waitress  must  cultivate  a  balance  be- 
tween being  feminine  and  tough.  A 
good  waitress  who  is  confident  in  her 
abilities  must  be  willing  to  defer  to  the 
male  cook  or  adapt  to  his  sexual  abuse 
(more  often  verbal  than  physical)  so 
that  "things  go  smoothly."  To  earn 
good  tips  she  must  convince  the  cus- 


tomers she  is  self-denying  and  ready 
to  serve.  She  must  continue  to  smile 
when  their  tone  of  voice  implies  she  is 
empty-headed  (what  do  they  really 
know  about  her  other  than  that  she 
works  at  an  "unskilled  women's  job"?). 
Moreover,  attractiveness  may  be  a 
major  consideration  in  hiring.  It  de- 
finitely influences  the  size  of  the  tip. 
The  ideal  of  blue-eyed  blond  is  the 
standard  against  which  all  American 
women  are  measured,  and  waitresses 
are  no  exception.  Both  the  racism  in- 
herent in  this  ideal  and  the  sexism  of 
requiring  that  women  make  some  at- 
tempt to  be  physically  attractive  to 
men  pervades  restaurant  work.  Still, 
the  waitress  is  expected  to  feel  com- 
plimented when  their  comments  imply 
she  is  the  object  of  their  sexual  fanta- 
sies. Oppressive  as  these  conditions 
are,  they  are  no  more  than  the  normal 
expectations  of  female  behavior  in 
heterosexual  culture. 

The  Labor  Process 

Women's  domestic  labor  is  not 
given  an  exchange  value  in  money 
terms  and,  as  a  consequence,  it  is  sel- 
dom recognized  as  work.  The  devalua- 
tion of  our  labor  in  the  family  (along 
with  our  inferior  sexual  position)  both 
creates  and  substantiates  the  devalua- 
tion of  our  capabilities  as  thinking, 
creative  persons.  This  devaluation  in 
turn  carries  over  to  the  area  of  wage 
labor,  where  women  are  concentrated 
in  a  relatively  small  number  of  jobs. 

Because  domestic  labor  is  not  sub- 
ject to  the  same  process  of  manage- 
ment, control,  rationalization  and  the 
drive  for  efficiency  as  is  wage  labor 
under  capitalist  production,  woman's 
alienation  from  her  labor  in  the  home 
differs  from  that  of  the  wage  laborer. 


84 1  Quest 


Unlike  the  assembly  line  worker,  she 
has  the  limited  control  of  her  immedi- 
ate work  process  (though  not  of  the 
work  as  a  whole)  and  is  able  to  choose 
the  methods  and  timing  that  she  likes 
best. 

With  respect  to  the  standards  for 
good  service  and  control  of  the  work 
process,  the  position  of  the  waitress  is 
similar  to  that  of  the  woman  in  the 
home.  Once  the  specifications  of  her 
job  have  been  set  out,  the  waitress  is 
free  to  develop  her  own  method  for 
taking  orders,  carrying  food  and  set- 
ting tables.  For  example,  with  lesbian 
women,  whose  sexuality  does  not 
necessarily  impose  a  contradiction 
between  competence  and  womanli- 
ness, waitress  work  forces  them  to 
assume  a  cultural  disguise  by  requiring 
that  they  act  out  a  heterosexual 
"female  role"  to  earn  their  living.  If 
they  were  out  at  work,  they  would  not 
be  good  waitresses;  a  large  part  of 
what  is  considered  "the  service"  would 
be  missing.  Like  other  jobs  which  are 
classified  as  "female,"  waitress  work 
would  be  essentially  different  if 
patriarchally-defined  sexuality  were 
not  overtly  incorporated  into  it. 

The  similarity  does  not  hold  for  tra- 
ditionally female  sectors  of  manufac- 
turing such  as  textiles.  In  clerical 
work,  the  situation  is  changing.  The 
secretary  has  often  been  called  the 
housewife  of  the  office.  She  is  ex- 
pected to  make  coffee,  to  remember 
birthdays  and  to  know  where  every- 
thing is.  In  short,  "the  office  couldn't 
run  without  her."  But  the  trend  is  in 
the  opposite  direction.  Increasingly, 
office  work  is  being  rationalized  ac- 
cording to  the  principles  of  scienti- 
fic management  first  used  in  industry. 
In  large  firms  especially,  clerical  work 
is    subjected     to    time     and    motion 


studies  and  subdivided  into  specialized 
tasks  that  are  coordinated  with  the  use 
of  advanced  office  equipment.  The  in- 
dividual secretary  loses  a  comprehen- 
sive sense  of  her  work  as  well  as  any 
decision-making  power.  As  this  pro- 
cess continues,  the  office  becomes 
more  like  the  factory  and  the  condi- 
tions of  the  secretary's  alienation  be- 
come more  like  those  of  the  worker  in 
advanced  capitalism  rather  than  those 
of  the  woman  in  the  home.**  Al- 
though the  secretary's  experience  in 
wage  labor  remains  a  combination  of 
sexual  and  economic  factors,  the  intro- 
duction of  modern  office  management 
shifts  the  specific  nature  of  the  com- 
bination.*** 

In  the  case  of  waitressing,  the  work 
process  retains  a  strong  patriarchal  in- 
fluence because  the  wage-tip  system 
places  only  a  portion  of  the  waitress's 
labor  in  the  category  of  surplus  value 
production  (work  that  creates  profits 
for  the  owners).  Because  the  tip  is 
paid  directly  to  the  waitress,  it  does 
not  affect  the  profits  of  management. 
This  leaves  it  up  to  the  waitress  to 
choose  how  much  she  is  willing  to  do 
to  earn  a  good  tip.  As  we  will  see 
below,  this  sets  up  a  contradiction  be- 
tween  the   discretion   the   waitress  is 

**  For  a  good  description  of  this  process 
see  chapter  fifteen  of  Harry  Braverman, 
Labor  and  Monopoly  Capital  (New  York: 
Monthly  Review  Press,  1974). 
***  The  reported  resistance  to  the  ration- 
alization of  secretarial  work  demonstrates 
the  strength  of  the  sexual  dynamic.  Cor- 
porations like  ITT  and  IBM  have  found  that 
male  executives  are  reluctant  to  replace 
their  secretaries  with  impersonal  steno- 
graphic dictating  machines.  They  prefer  a 
secretary  who  can  look  after  their  personal 
needs.  See:  Rosalyn  Baxandall,  et.  a/., 
"The  Working  Class  Has  Two  Sexes," 
Monthly  Review,  Vol.  28,  No.  3  (July- 
August  1976),  p.  4. 


Waitressing/85 


allowed  in  determining  her  work 
process  and  the  categorizing  of  her 
labor  as  simply  women's  work.  The 
former  gives  her  a  sense  of  indepen- 
dence and  self-reliance  while  the 
latter  de-emphasizes  her  skills  and 
devalues  her  capabilities. 

The  Wage-Tip  System 

A  waitress  is  accountable  to  the 
restaurant  management  for  her  wage, 
but  she  deals  directly  with  the  cus- 
tomer for  the  tip.  Thus  customers 
assume  a  dual  role.  They  are  the 
customers  to  the  restaurant  but, 
through  the  tip,  they  pay  the  waitress 
directly  for  her  labor.  This  affects 
the  waitress's  attitude  towards  both 
them  and  the  restaurant. 

The  tip  is  the  major  portion  of  a 
waitress's  income  and  is  often  twice  as 
large  as  the  paid  wage.  Because  it  falls 
outside  surplus  value  (profits)  produc- 
tion, the  management  has  a  very  dif- 
ferent interest  in  waitress's  earnings 
than  would  be  the  case  if  the  waitress 
sold  all  of  her  labor  power  directly 
to  management.! 

The  wage  for  waitress  work  has 
been  historically  determined  by  the 
conflict  between  labor's  interest  in 
higher  wages  and  capital's  interest  in 
higher  profits.    Most  waitresses  are  un- 


t  The  growth  of  corporate  chain  restaur- 
ants is  a  movement  toward  a  change  in  this 
direction.  These  restaurants  are  beginning 
to  apply  efficiency  studies  to  meal  service 
and  to  divide  it  into  specialized  sections. 
The  tip  cannot  then  be  claimed  by  any  one 
waitress  and  the  management  takes  control 
of  its  distribution.  The  continuation  of  this 
trend  is  likely  to  lead  to  the  elimination  of 
the  wage-tip  system,  as  has  been  done  in  the 
fast  food  business,  as  well  as  change  the 
labor  process  so  that  management  specifies 
more  aspects  of  the  service. 


unionized,  so  their  wage  is  rarely 
higher  than  the  minimum.  The  usual 
wage  is  the  legal  minimum  minus  the 
deduction  allowed  for  the  tip.  This  is 
the  tip  credit,  which  under  Federal  law 
is  45%  of  the  minimum  wage.  This 
makes  the  effective  wage  $1.60  per 
hour.  (Many  states  have  similar  laws. 
Where  they  conflict  with  Federal 
law,  the  one  requiring  a  higher  wage 
payment  takes  precedence.)  This  wage 
remains  the  same  regardless  of  the 
number  of  meals  served  or  the  rate  of 
customer  turnover.  Thus  the  wage  is 
usually  as  low  as  possible  and  does  not 
vary  with  the  level  of  productivity. 

As  a  result  of  the  wage-tip  system, 
the  waitress  cushions  restaurant  losses. 
During  slow  periods,  in-between  meals 
or  late  at  night,  the  waitress  sets  up 
tables,  cleans  and  performs  mainten- 
ance tasks  at  the  reduced  minimum 
wage.  When  business  is  slow,  there  is 
no  compensation  for  the  loss  of  tips, 
even  though  the  waitress  may  not 
earn  enough  to  bring  her  daily  average 
up  to  the  full  minimum  wage  ($2.90 
per  hour). tt  In  addition,  the  common 
practice  is  to  put  the  responsibility 
for  "walk-outs"  on  the  waitress.  If  a 
customer  leaves  without  paying,  the 
waitress  is  forced  to  cover  the  bill 
from  her  pocket  or  lose  her  job. 
Have  you  ever  seen  a  waitress  running 
out  of  the  restaurant  after  a  customer? 

At  this  stage  of  the  development  of 
capitalism,  the  tip  is  a  very  odd  form 
of  labor  payment.  It  is  one  of  the  rare 
cases  where  no  agreement  about  the 


tt  The  commonly  violated  law  requires 
payment  of  the  minimum  wage  on  the  basis 
of  the  weekly  hours  average.  Thus  the 
management  is  not  allowed  to  claim  the  full 
tip  credit  if  the  weekly  average  of  wages  and 
tips  falls  below  the  legal  minimum  wage. 


86/Quest 


work  to  be  done  nor  the  rate  of  pay 
is  made  before  the  work  is  finished 
and  consumed. 

While  the  tipping  system  is  institu- 
tionalized, it  is  supported  by  strong 
cultural  attitudes  and  misconceptions. 
It  is  considered  an  important  right  of 
the  customer  to  use  his/her  discre- 
tion in  determining  the  amount  of  the 
tip.  Thus  the  tip  is  regarded  as  a  gift,  a 
custom,  a  little  something  extra  left 
to  show  the  approval  for  good  service. 
(According  to  social  etiquette,  it 
should  be  based  on  a  percentage  of  the 
total  bill,  usually  between  10  and  20 
percent.)  In  reality,  the  tip  is  not 
extra  but  the  major  portion  of  a 
waitress's  earnings.  It  serves  as  pay- 
ment for  a  service.  In  most  other  con- 
texts, a  customer  chooses  whether  or 
not  to  buy  a  product  or  service  for  the 
price  at  which  it  is  offered.  You  don't 
eat  a  steak  dinner,  for  example,  and 
then  offer  $1.25  at  the  cash  register. 
But  with  the  tip,  the  price  of  the 
waitress's  labor  is  not  marked.  She 
does  not  charge  a  fee  for  service.  A 
customer  can  consume  her  service  and 
pay  nothing. 

The  tip  is  presumed  to  be  based  on 
the  quality  of  the  service.  However, 
the  customer's  assessment  of  the  ser- 
vice often  reflects  other  factors  that 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  waitress's 
part  in  the  distribution  of  restaurant 
food.  These  include  the  cleanliness  of 
the  restaurant  —  how  often  is  the 
management  willing  to  pay  for  clean 
tablecloths?  -  and  the  actual  quality 
of  the  food  —  does  the  management 
substitute  langustinos  for  lobster  in 
the  lobster  salad  sandwich?  Waitresses 
working  in  a  higher-priced  restaurant 
usually  receive  a  higher  percentage 
tip  than  those  working  in  a  less  expen- 
sive restaurant. 


Sexuality  is  important  here  because 
the  approval  or  disapproval  expressed 
in  the  tip  is  often  sexual.  The  dimen- 
sions of  this  evaluation  vary  for  male 
and  female  customers  and  the  evalua- 
tion is  a  combination  of  the  physical  — 
the  appreciation  of  a  beautiful  woman 
—  and  of  the  social  —  the  appreciation 
of  the  appropriate  touch  of  sexual  in- 
nuendo. 

The  size  of  the  tip  may  have  little 
to  do  with  the  waitress  but  rather  re- 
flects the  customer's  need  to  exercise 
class  or  male  privilege.  The  customer 
who  wants  to  feel  powerful  leaves  a 
big  tip.  In  the  situation  where  the 
waitress  has  flirted  with  the  male  cus- 
tomer, he  can  claim  control  of  the  en- 
counter by  paying  with  a  generous 
tip.  With  heterosexual  couples,  the 
man  can  antagonize  the  woman  by 
leaving  a  big  tip  or  demonstrate  his 
loyalty  by  leaving  a  modest  tip.  There 
are  many  scenarios. 

All  of  these  factors  put  the  waitress 
in  a  vulnerable  position  by  making  her 
earnings  independent  of  the  real 
quality  of  her  service.  To  be  success- 
ful she  must  adapt  her  performance  to 
the  particular  tastes  and  moods  of  the 
customers.  But  for  many  waitresses 
it  is  exactly  this  aspect  of  the  tipping 
system  which  seems  attractive.  While 
she  works  for  the  boss  for  her  wage, 
she  works  for  herself  for  the  tip.  And 
with  the  tip,  anything  is  possible.  It  is 
a  challenge.  A  pretty  smile,  a  hand  on 
the  shoulder,  the  proper  deference,  a 
sympathetic  ear  to  the  customer  with 
troubles,  all  of  these  can  affect  the  size 
of  the  tip.  Because  the  results  of  dif- 
ferent attitudes  toward  the  customers 
are  so  direct  and  clear,  a  waitress  can 
feel  as  if  she  has  "control"  over  her 
earnings.  But  the  "control"  is  not  a 
very  significant  type  of  control.     In 


Waitressing/87 


reality,  the  waitress's  alternatives  are 
limited  to  whether  or  not  she  plays 
out  the  role  expected  of  her.  It  is 
like  the  "control"  a  factory  worker 
has  over  her/his  work  life:  "If  you 
don't  like  the  job,  quit!" 

A  more  genuine  control  would  be 
achieved  if  the  waitress  were  guaran- 
teed payment  for  her  labor  at  a  good 
rate,  if  she  were  not  forced  to  absorb 
restaurant  losses,  and  if  she  were  able 
to  disassociate  sexuality  and  subser- 
vience from  quality  food  service.  Be- 
cause none  of  these  are  achieved  under 
the  tipping  system,  a  change  to  a 
straight  wage  or  a  standard  service 
charge  of  15  or  20  percent  would 
eliminate  these  conditions.  However, 
without  a  strong  union  to  negotiate 
a  straight  wage  or  to  protect  waitress's 
tips,  a  shift  from  the  present  wage-tip 
system  would  lower  actual  earnings  in 
many  cases.  These  changes  require 
organization  and  collective  action. 

The  present  wage-tip  system  oper- 
ates to  make  organizing  more  diffi- 
cult. Although  waitresses  usually 
identify  collectively  as  "the  girls," 
the  individual  rewards  of  the  tipping 
system  divide  waitresses  and  put  them 
in  conflict/competition  with  each 
other.  On  the  floor,  they  compete  for 
the  high-tipping  customers.  And  in 
the  kitchen,  they  compete  to  get  their 
orders  filled  quickly  by  the  cook.  If 
a  woman  takes  the  time  to  help 
another,  her  service  to  her  own  cus- 
tomers many  suffer.  One  waitress 
may  ignore  the  common  jobs  like  re- 
stocking the  silver  or  making  the  cof- 
fee in  order  to  concentrate  on  her  own 
customers.  This  causes  resentment 
from  the  other  waitresses.  Moreover, 
the  tip  becomes  a  measure  of  one 
woman's  success  compared  with 
another's.    Thus  each  waitress's  inter- 


est in  receiving  a  good  tip  conflicts 
with  the  possibility  of  creating  a 
united  front  for  their  common  struggle 
with  management  and  for  their  dealing 
with  male  restaurant  workers. 


On  the  other  hand,  there  is  one  tip- 
ping practice  which  has  the  opposite 
effect.  This  is  the  practice  of  pooling 
tips.  Here  the  tips  are  collected  and 
divided  equally  at  the  end  of  the  shift. 
The  effect  is  that  waitresses  work  as  a 
team.  This  system  gives  waitresses 
more  leeway  to  help  each  other  out. 
It  also  allows  the  waitress  more  room 
to  assert  herself  with  the  obnoxious 
customer  because  her  loss  in  tips  is 
shared. 

The  pooling  of  tips  can  create  a 
greater  potential  for  organizing  than 
work  under  the  individual  wage-tip 
system.  It  strengthens  group  identity 
and  puts  the  waitresses  in  a  position 
to  actually  work  together  rather 
than   simply  on   the  same  shift.     But 


88/Quest 


the  pooling  of  tips  is  easily  broken 
down  if  waitresses  have  conflicting 
attitudes  toward  the  customers  or  if 
some  fail  to  do  a  fair  share  of  the  col- 
lective tasks.  When  whole  shifts  pool 
tips,  it  is  often  an  arrangement  im- 
posed by  management.  When  tip- 
pooling  is  initiated  by  waitresses  it 
more  often  involves  groups  of  two  or 
three  women  working  cooperatively. 
Here  the  practice  of  pooling  tips 
seems  to  be  based  more  on  friendship, 
however,  than  on  a  recognition  of  class 
interest.  By  countering  the  individual- 
ism of  tips  and  by  making  clear  wait- 
ress's responsibility  to  one  another, 
the  pooling  of  tips  can  be  a  useful 
experience  from  which  to  begin  an 
organizing  drive. 

Organizing  Needs 

The  need  for  union  organization  is 
clear;  like  all  wage  labor  under  capital- 
ism, waitresses  are  oppressed  and  econ- 
omically exploited.  Waitresses  need  to 
secure  better  wages,  cost  of  living 
adjustments  and  benefits  such  as  sick 
leave,  maternity  leave,  paid  vacations, 
health  insurance  and  pension  plans. 
Within  the  restaurant,  the  power  of 
the  management  is  absolute  and  arbi- 
trary. Thus,  there  is  a  need  for  clearly 
stated  job  descriptions  as  well  as 
regular  discipline  and  grievance  proce- 
dures to  handle  disputes  with  the 
management.  For  work  assignments 
to  be  equitable  and  coordinated  to 
different  women's  needs,  waitresses 
should  have  group  control  of  sched- 
uling and  station  assignment.  Finally, 
waitresses  need  protection  againt  dis- 
crimination on  the  basis  of  age,  sex, 
race,  religion,  and  sexual  preference. 

And  like  all  women  under  patri- 
archy, women  workers  are  oppressed 


and  sexually  exploited.  Thus,  wait- 
resses need  the  right  to  defend  them- 
selves against  the  obnoxious  customer. 
The  wage  tip  system  must  be  changed 
so  that  waitresses  are  paid  for  their 
labor  rather  than  for  their  sexuality. 
The  sexual  segregation  of  jobs  within 
the  restaurant  needs  to  be  ended.  This 
requires  that  the  hierarchy  of  restaur- 
ant workers,  which  combines  sexual, 
racial  and  technical  status,  must  be 
broken  down. 

Obstacles  to  Organizing 

Waitresses  are  constantly  confront- 
ed by  a  range  of  attitudes  —  racist, 
sexist  and  cultural  —  that  work  to 
convince  them  that  their  position  is 
not  really  so  bad,  to  misguide  their 
frustrations  and  to  take  the  pressure 
off  management.  Waitress  organizing 
depends  on  breaking  through  these 
misconceptions. 

Racism  in  the  restaurant  is  one 
means  of  political  control.  The  myth 
of  white  superiority  and  its  structures 
of  exploitation  and  oppression  are 
fitted  into  the  organization  of  restaur- 
ant work.  In  semi-rural  western  Massa- 
chusetts, waitressing  is  usually  re- 
stricted to  white  women,  especially 
in  restaurants  that  serve  mostly  white 
customers.  The  lower  status  jobs  of 
cleaning,  busgirl/boy  and  dishwashing 
are  then  available  to  Third  World 
workers  in  some  restaurants.  These 
racial  divisions  are  made  more  com- 
plicated by  the  division  between  kitch- 
en workers  and  "floor"  workers. 
Managers,  bartenders  and  cooks  have 
status  over  the  waitresses,  who  have 
status  over  dishwashers,  busgirls/boys 
and  cleaners.  The  latter,  however,  an- 
swer to  the  management  or  the  kitch- 
en, instead  of  to  the  waitresses. 


Waitressing/89 


As  can  be  imagined  from  the  over- 
lapping of  restaurant  status,  race  and 
sex,  there  is  plenty  of  room  for  con- 
flict. For  example,  consider  the  case 
of  a  conflict  between  a  waitress  and  a 
patronizing  cook.  If  the  waitress  is 
white  and  the  cook  is  black,  she, 
feeling  secure  in  her  racial  position, 
can  confront  the  maleness  of  the  cook 
by  attacking  his  color.  This  does  not 
deal  with  her  racism  nor  with  his 
sexism  but  twists  these  antagonisms 
to  the  benefit  of  management.  The  re- 
sult is  that  the  problems  at  work  be- 
come problems  with  other  workers 
rather  than  problems  with  manage- 
ment or  with  the  organization  of  work 
itself. 

Thus  it  is  necessary  that  restaur- 
ant organizing  provide  a  mechanism 
for  confronting  the  conflicts  between 
workers  themselves.  To  do  this, 
restaurant  organizing  cannot  focus 
only  on  waitresses  but  has  to  include 
all  types  of  restaurant  workers.  The 
correction  for  the  bad  working  condi- 
tions of  waitresses  is  not  to  secure  for 
them  a  higher  place  in  the  restaurant 
hierarchy,  but  to  confront  the  divi- 
sions of  race,  sex  and  restaurant  status 
which  produce  conflict  between  work- 
ers and  keep  them  from  realizing  their 
common  interests  against  manage- 
ment. 

A  waitress  finds  herself  in  a  trap 
similar  to  that  of  a  woman  who  gains 
status  from  her  marriage  to .  a  pro- 
fessional man;  her  status  is  dependent 
on  her  vulnerability  to  him.  For  the 
waitress,  status  depends  on  the  size  of 
her  tips,  which  depends  on  the  appar- 
ent quality  of  her  service.  For  this  she 
must  have  the  cooperation  of  the 
kitchen  workers.  Thus,  if  there  is 
conflict  with  the  cook  and  he  refuses 
to  fix  her  orders  quickly,  the  conflict 


shows  up  as  poor  service  and  costs 
the  waitress  her  tip.  To  be  success- 
ful, the  waitress  must  be  accommo- 
dating. In  this  sense,  her  status  de- 
pends on  her  lack  of  control. 

Although  the  tendency  for  res- 
taurant work  to  reinforce  patriarchal 
values  is  strong,  there  are  ways  in 
which  it  encourages  the  development 
of  a  woman/worker's  consciousness. 
Waitressing  breaks  the  isolation  of 
women  in  nuclear  families.  During 
meal  rushes,  waitresses  work  in  a 
situation  where  they  are  forced  to 
rely  on  other  women.  Often  wait- 
resses develop  relationships  of  mutual 
respect  and  partnership,  especially 
when  tips  are  pooled.  These  friend- 
ships are  important  because  they  are 
not  related  to  a  waitress's  relation- 
ships with  men.  Through  these  friend- 
ships, women  gain  an  identity  that  is 
additional  to,  and  separate  from,  their 
family  lives.  In  organizing,  it  is  this 
identity,  as  contrasted  to  the  sense  of 
individual  control  in  the  wage-tip  sys- 
tem, that  must  be  stressed. 

During  coffee  breaks  or  slow  per- 
iods, waitresses  have  the  chance  to  sit 
around  and  talk  about  their  work. 
In  addition,  the  culture  of  the  res- 
taurant encourages  women  to  go  out 
after  work  rather  than  go  straight 
home.  By  having  a  drink  together 
somewhere,  they  are  able  to  be  on  the 
other  side  of  the  customer/waitress 
situation  they  have  endured  at  work. 
While  this  may  smooth  their  dissatis- 
factions with  work,  it  also  develops  a 
sense  of  their  common  situation 
which,  if  turned  around,  is  important 
for  organizing. 

Economic  independence  makes 
women  less  vulnerable  to  male  control,, 
This  is  often  viewed  as  a  necessary 
condition    for    the    development    of 


90/Quest 


Waitressing/91 


women's  self-confidence.  In  spite  of 
the  similarity  between  domestic  and 
waitress  work,  waitressing  does  give 
women  a  sense  of  economic  self-suffic- 
iency. This  sense  is  emphasized  be- 
cause the  waitress  always  leaves  work 
with  cash  money  in  her  pockets. 

Waitress  Organizing  As 
Feminist  Organizing 

The  issues  that  provoke  waitresses 
to  organize  range  from  traditionally- 
defined  workers'  issues  —  such  as  lack 
of  benefits  or  job  security  —  to  issues 
that  relate  specifically  to  waitresses' 
positions  as  women  —  as  when  man- 
agement insults  "the  girls"  in  front  of 
the  customers,  fails  to  side  with  the 
waitress  in  a  dispute  with  an  obnox- 
ious customer,  or  discriminates  among 
the  waitresses  on  the  basis  of  looks  or 
age.  Whether  the  complaint  is  more  of  a 
worker's  issue  or  more  of  a  woman's 
issue,  the  two  cannot  be  considered 
as  distinct.  Women's  experience  on 
the  job  is  a  combination  of  their  class 
and  sexual  position.  Likewise,  the 
reality  that  waitresses  receive  few 
health  insurance  or  retirement  plan 
benefits  reflects  their  dual  status.  A 
high  priority  has  never  been  put  on 
organizing  waitresses  to  receive  those 
benefits  which  are  supposed  to  be 
secured  for  the  nuclear  family  through 
the     husband's     work,    especially     if 

ttt  Thus  it  is  argued  that  the  mechan- 
isms which  have  developed  in  advanced  capi- 
talism to  maintain  the  population,  and 
which  are  secured  for  the  work  force 
through  a  union  contract,  are  not  necessary 
for  women  workers.  This  of  course  is  false. 
A  second  group  of  factors  influencing  the 
low  priority  put  on  organizing  waitresses 
relates  to  the  competitive  structure  of  the 
industry,  the  extent  to  which  increased 
labor  costs  can  be  passed  on  in  higher 
prices,  the  relatively  short  time  for  training 

92/Quest 


women  work  for  social  reasons,  to  get 
out  of  the  house,  or  if  the  money  they 
earn  is  extra  family  income,  not  part 
of  survival  .ttt 

The  myth  that  women  are  second- 
ary workers  affects  not  only  the  con- 
ditions of  women's  jobs  but  also  the 
attitudes  concerning  women's  rights  as 
workers.  To  gain  support,  women 
must  justify  to  the  public  and  to  their 
families  their  needs  for  higher  wages, 
more  benefits  and  better  working  con- 
ditions. In  our  heterosexual  culture, 
men  become  threatened  when  women 
step  out  of  their  passive,  submissive 
roles.  Thus  husbands  may  be  unwill- 
ing to  tolerate  the  disruptions  to  fam- 
ily life  that  come  with  an  organizing 
drive.  Similarly,  the  public  may  be 
more  willing  to  cross  restaurant  picket 
lines  filled  mostly  by  women,  regard- 
ing them  as  a  curiosity. 

In  addition,  if  the  organizing  drive 
is  to  be  democratic,  waitresses  must 
confront  the  patriarchal  structure  of 
some  union  procedures. 

Unions  have  always  referred  to  the 
"family  of  workers";  the  similarity  is 
one  of  process  as  well.  In  the  family, 
the  father  makes  decisions  that  are 
supposed  to  be  in  the  interests  of  fam- 
ily members'  well-being,  as  he  defines 
those  interests.  To  make  these  deci- 
sions he  draws  on  his  knowledge  of  the 
world  and  his  experience.  Other  fam- 
ily members  defer  to  his  understanding 

new  workers  and  the  high  turnover  rate.  Be- 
cause management  has  not  confronted  a  re- 
bellious work  force,  it  has  not  had  to  rely 
on  union  bureaucracy  to  discipline  its  work 
force.  Capital's  interest  here  tends  to  em- 
phasize low  wages  much  more  than  uninter- 
rupted production  at  controlled  labor  costs. 
Restaurant  work  is  not  like  the  steel  indus- 
try. For  a  description  of  the  latter,  see 
chapter  four  in  Stanley  Aronowitz,  False 
Promises  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill  Book 
Company,  1973). 


. 


and  recognize  his  authority.  Because 
they  do  not  learn  to  take  responsibili- 
ty, they  become  dependent  on  him. 
He,  in  turn,  has  control  and  can  secure 
privileges  for  himelf,  like  being  waited 
on  at  home. 

Union  organizers  and  business 
agents  can  behave  in  much  the  same 
way  with  respect  to  the  rank  and  file. 
They  make  strategy  decisions  and 
carry  out  the  negotiations  in  what  are 
conceived  to  be  the  best  interests  of 
the  rank  and  file.  If  the  union  is  like  a 
family,  they  are  the  fathers.  The  pro- 
cedure is  to  set  up  a  hierarchy  of 
leadership  and  maintain  a  monopoly 
on  legal  information,  tactics  and  long 
range  strategy.  Instead  of  a  process 
designed  to  educate  the  rank  and  file 
so  that  they  could  participate  in  nego- 
tiations and  be  able  to  make  tactical 
decisions  independently,  this  process 
tends  to  create  a  dependence  of  the 
rank  and  file  on  the  union  officials, 


whose  goals  may  not  be  the  same  as 
theirs. 

These  remarks  are  not  intended  to 
skip  over  the  organizational  problems 
that  arise  with  a  more  participatory, 
less  hierarchical  process.  Rather  they 
are  designed  to  point  out  the  contra- 
diction between  a  union  drive  that  is 
tightly  controlled  from  the  center  and 
the  attainment  of  some  degree  of 
workers'  control.  For  women  workers 
this  type  of  organizing  process  takes 
on  a  special  significance  since  it  tends 
to  reinforce  our  experience  in  family 
life  and  to  block  our  struggle  for  self- 
determination.  Where  the  rank  and 
file  are  mostly  women,  and  the  union 
leadership  male,  this  becomes  an  ex- 
tension of  the  female's  assumed  de- 
pendence on   the  male  in  the  family. 

An  alternative  process  does  not 
imply  that  decision-making  responsibi- 
lity not  be  delegated  to  specific  groups 
nor  that  individuals  not  assume  leader- 


Waitressing/93 


ship  roles.  But  instead  it  requires  that 
positions  be  rotated,  that  decisions  be 
justified  and  tactics  reviewed,  and  that 
information  and  organizational  skills 
be  shared.  With  a  non-patriarchal  pro- 
cess, successful  organizing  will  depend 
heavily  on  discussion,  shared  commit- 
ment and  responsible  membership. 
The  relatively  small  size  of  restaurant 
shops  makes  these  techniques  more  pos- 
sible.*! Such  a  process  is  especially 
important  for  women  to  get  us  out  of 
a  traditionally  submissive,  deferring 
position  but  at  the  same  time  to  pre- 
vent us  from  assuming  a  male  role 
vis-a-vis  each  other. 

Conclusion 

In  the  case  of  waitressing,  an  under- 
standing of  the  dynamics  of  the  job 
requires  the  integration  of  economic 
and  sexual  factors.  In  waitress  work, 
the  strong  sense  of  individual  control 
and  opportunity  of  the  wage-tip  sys- 
tem is  in  clear  contradiction  to  wait- 
tresses'  need  to  organize  collectively. 
Moreover,  the  patriarchal  structure  of 
the  job  supports  this  contradiction. 
By  forcing  the  waitress  into  a  female 
role,  in  terms  of  the  type  of  work  per- 
formed as  well  as  the  heterosexual 
culture  of  the  restaurant,  it  reinforces 
the  waitress's  expectation  that  her  ex- 
perience at  work  is  appropriate  and  in- 
evitable for  members  of  her  sex. 

It  is  here  that  a  consciousness  of 
sexual  oppression  can  be  the  impor- 
tant factor  to  tip  the  balance  of  the 
contradiction.     When   waitresses  con- 


front their  devalued  and  patronized 
status  as  "the  girls,  "  they  expose  the 
sexual  restrictions  to  their  sense  of 
control  and  opportunity  and  move 
themselves  closer  to  a  position  where 
their  discontent  is  ready  to  be  formu- 
lated as  concrete  grievances. 

Successful  organizing  can  secure 
higher  wages,  job  security  and  im- 
proved benefits.  But  an  organizing 
drive  that  fails  to  take  into  account 
the  particular  working  conditions 
faced  by  waitresses  as  women  may 
modify  the  terms  of  wage-labor  but 
fall  short  of  progress  toward  the  im- 
portant issues  of  worker  self-determi- 
nation and  control.  This  is  because  in 
female  jobs,  like  waitressing,  control 
over  working  conditions  is  mixed  with 
control  over  the  sexual  conditions  of 
work.  Our  struggle  as  women  to  re- 
define and  control  our  choices  in  the 
home  and  personal  life  is  part  of  our 
struggle  at  work.  If  the  experience  of 
waitressing  combines  the  forces  of  pa- 
triarchy and  capitalism,  so  must  our 
analysis  and  tactics. 

*T*         *T*        •!*         nr 

Susan  Woods  is  a  feminist  con- 
cerned with  working  women's  issues 
and  the  economy.  She  is  a  former 
member  of  the  Job  Action  Center  for 
Waitresses  in  the  Northhampton, 
Massachusetts  area,  and  is  currently 
teaching  a  course  on  women's  labor 
and  the  economy. 

Footnotes 


*^For  an  account  of  the  early  organizing 
experience  of  the  Independent  Restaurant 
Workers  Union  in  Boston,  see  June  Gross 
and  Judith  Hoffman,  "Turning  the  Tables," 
Second  Wave,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  2. 


1  See:  Charlotte  Bunch,  "Not  for  Lesbians 
Only,"  Quest,  Vol.  II,  No.  2  (Fall  1975)  pp. 
50-56. 

2  See:  Women's  Bureau,  US  Department 
of  Labor,  1975  Handbook  on  Women  Work- 
ers, Bulletin  297  (1975),  p.  91. 


94/Quest 


New  poems  from 
the  author  of 
for  colored  girls... 


by  NTOZAKE  SHANGE 

Passionate,  daring,  a  brilliant 
talent,  Ms.  Shange  dazzled  audi- 
ences and  readers  with  for  col- 
ored girls.  This  new  collection  of 
poems— personal,  painful,  joyful, 
alive— show  why  The  New  York 
Times  said:  "Miss  Shange  writes 
with  such  exquisite  care  and 
beauty  that  anyone  can  relate  to 
her  message.  $7.95      ^jy-^p,^ 


Waitressing/95 


We  would  like  to  thank  all  the  people  listed  below  who  contributed 
to  Quest  from  December  4,  1 978  to  September  8,  1 979 : 


Judy  Pigg  Behrendt 
Janet  Calven 
Gracia  Clark 
Committee  for  Justice 
Gayle  Deann  Crawford 
Alice  Echols 
Karen  Fields 
Ann  Erica  Gordon 
Emmy  Hixson-Triplett 
Helen  Levin 
Charlotte  Mills 


Jan  C.  Perkins 

Sigrid  Rocht 

Constance  J.  Samaras 

Eleanor  Self 

Bette  J.  Skandalis 

Katharine  Wiegelt 

Sharon  Ann  Williams 

Emmet  G.  Woods 

Women's    Division,   Board   of   Global 

Ministries 
Helen  K.  Young 


r 1  r 

If   you    would   like   to   subscribe   or  j          If   you    would   like    to   subscribe   or 
[make    a    contribution     to    Quest:    a\   !  make    a    contribution     to    Quest:    a 
i  feminist  quarterly,   please  fill  out  the!   i  feminist  quarterly,   please  fill  out  the 
j  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money  i   j  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money 
j  order  to:                                                          i    j  order  to: 
J  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly                           J  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
•P.O.  Box  8843                                                    [P.O.  Box  8843 
|  Washington,  D.C.  20003                               j  Washington,  D.C.  20003 

G  $9.00/year  for  individuals                          D  $9.00/year  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals        i    ]      □  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

J      □  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor!          □  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor 

□  $10.00/year     for    Canada     and!          D  $10.00/year     for    Canada     and 
Mexico                                                                 Mexico 

□  $25.00/year  for  institutions                        □  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

D  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur- 1    |      □  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur- 
face                                            (                          face 
1=1  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air    !          a  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air 

□  $3.35/single  issues                                        □  $3.35/single  issues 

D  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal                 D  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 
j  Name                                                                 i  Name 

j  Address                                                      j    J  Address 

Zip                                                                       Zip 

l _ 4       1 

96/Quest 


While  we  will  continue  to  solicit  copy  around  themes,  the  section  will 
be  smaller:  3  to  4  articles  instead  of  8  or  9.  We  intend  to  make  space  for 
articles  which  fit  neither  the  theme  nor  the  department  formats,  in  hopes 
that  our  copy  will  more  accurately  reflect  the  issues  and  topics  we  have 
chosen  as  priorities:  such  as  racism,  international  feminism,  environ- 
mental and  technological  concerns,  economics  and  money,  and  the  health 
of  the  autonomous  feminist  movement. 

We  have  decided  not  to  publish  an  "Individual  and  Revolution"  issue. 
While  we  received  many  interesting  pieces  for  this  issue,  it  never  quite  fit 
together.  We  will,  instead,  attempt  to  develop  some  of  the  ideas  earmark- 
ed for  that  issue  and  publish  pieces  in  future  issues.  We  also  will  be  pub- 
lishing an  issue  on  "Women  and  Energy." 

We  are  very  excited  about  our  new  group,  and  about  our  ideas.  We 
hope  you  will  write  and  let  us  know  what  you  think  —  we  need  your  feed- 
back so  that  we  can  produce  the  kind  of  journal  you  need. 


Non-Profit  Org. 

U.S.  POSTAGE 

PAID 

Permit   45679 

Washington,    D.C. 


Future  Issues 

STRUCTURES  FOR  LIVING 


The  family:  its  health,  possibilities  and  limitations  —  has  become  an  issue 
of  intense  political  dispute.  The  right  blames  feminism  for  the  "decline"  of 
the  family;  Marxists  blame  Capitalism.  Some  suggest  a  "national  family 
policy";  others  that  the  "helping  professions"  should  leave  the  family 
alone.  The  family  is  seen  as  a  haven  from  a  heartless  world,  as  a  suffocating 
neurosis-inducing  cage;  or  as  the  basis  for  women's  oppression  and  the  root 
of  patriarchy.  This  issue  of  Quest  will  focus  on  the  family  and  the  disputes 
surrounding  it. 


MOVEMENT  BUILDING 


How  deliberate  and  self-aware  are  you  —  are  all  of  us  —  in  building  a  move- 
ment for  change?  What  have  been  our  most  effective  movement-building 
techniques,  and  why?  What  can  we  learn  from  other  movements?  Quest  in 
this  issue  seeks  to  explore  the  underlying  philosophies,  the  strategies  and  the 
mechanics  of  building  a  movement  —  both  what  we  have  done  and  what  we 
might  be  doing.  We  invite  articles  from  women  inside  and  outside  the  femi- 
nist movement.  Our  search  for  ideas  is  not  confined  to  our  own  history. 


WOMEN  AND   ENERGY 


This  issue  will  examine  why  ecology,  the  environment,  nuclear  power  and 
appropriate  technology  are  feminist  issues.  How  can  women  as  producers, 
as  designers,  as  consumers  influence  new  technologies?  What  are  the  points 
of  access  for  women  for  use,  development  and  control  of  alternate  technolo- 
gies? How  do  we  demythologize  technology  and  move  towards  control  of 
such  technologies?  What  will  an  environmental/feminist  Utopia  look  like?  We 
welcome  articles  from  women  who  are  scientists,  grass-roots  organizers  on 
safe  energy  issues,  women  in  government,  in  public  interest  organizations,  in 
environmental  and  energy  education,  researchers,  and  hands-on  appropriate 
technologists  and  futurists. 


