QUEST      K 

a  feminist  quarterly 


A  View  from  China 


Structures  for  Living 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua53wash 


QUEST 

a  iemiiusif;  quarterly 


Vol.  V,  No.  3 


Structures  for  Living 


Contents 


Introduction  3 

Letters  10 

The  Che-Lumumba  School:  Creating  a  Revolutionary  Family 
Community 

by  Ann  Ferguson  13 

Ruminations  of  a  Feminist  in  China  27 

by  Vera  Schwarcz 
Motherwork  and  Working  Mothers  41 

by  Natalie).  Sokoloff 
Gender  Politics  of  Infancy  53 

by  Sandra  Harding 
Mother/Daughter  Roles  in  the  Feminist  Movement  71 

by  Mickey  Spencer,  Bridget  Wynne,  Polly  Taylor  and  Julie  Gale 
Media  &  Culture  81 

The  Incredible  Case  of  the  Stack  o'Prints  Mutilation 

by  D.A.  Clarke 


©  Copyright  1981  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without 
permission  is  strictly  prohibited.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  is  a  tax  exempt,  non-profit 
organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843, 
Washington,  DC  20003. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals;  $10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico; 
$11  00/year  overseas  surface,  $14.50/year  overseas  air;  $25.00/year  to  institutions,  $3.35  for  all 
single  issues.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request.  Foreign  bookstores  and 
bookstores  in  New  York,  Chicago  and  Atlanta  should  order  directly  from  Quest  All  other 
bookstores  may  order  directly  from  Carrier  Pigeon,  75  Kneeland  St.,  Rm.  309,  Boston,  MA 
02111. 
ISSN  0098-955  X 


Editorial  Staff 


Joan  Twiggs,  Managing  Editor* 
Sarah  Begus,  Wordwatch 
Lynn  Gorchov,  Circulation 
Lisa  Hoogstra,  Back  Issues* 
Marilyn  Lerch,  Copy  Coordinator 
Jackie  MacMillan,  Copy  Outreach 
Sara  Shepard,  Design* 
IsabelleThabault,  Distribution 
Tracy  Thiele,  Promotion 
Gerri  Traina,  Copy  Intake* 
*Steering  Committee 

Associates  and  Development 
Committee 

DeloresCole,  Financial  Coordinator 
Jane  Flax,  Development  Committee 
Prudence  MacKinney,  Development 

Committee 
Avise  Nissen,  Associate 
Helen  Young,  Development  Committee 
Karen  Stuhldreher,  Associate 
Mary  Edsall,  Associate 

Artists 

Phyllis  Lau  (calligraphy  and  translation),  Pp. 

28,  32,  33  &  39 

Jacqui  Linnard,  Pp.  55,  57,  62,  and  67 

Sarna  Marcus,  Pp.  16,  21  and  25 

Debbie  Salzer,  Pp.  45  and  50 

Sara  Shepard,  cover 


Contributing  Editors 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Brenda  Eichelberger 

Alexa  Freeman 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Jayne  Loader,  Media  and  Culture 

Arleen  Rogan 

Lucia  Valeska 

Many  of  our  Contributing  Editors  have  made 
on-going  contributions  to  the  work  of  Quest. 
In  this  issue,  we  would  like  to  acknowledge 
their  past  work  and  to  thank  them  for  their 
continued  association  with  the  journal. 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  political  analysis 
and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading  to 
new  directions  for  the  women's  movement,  possibly  including  such  concrete  forms 
as  regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization,  or  a  political  party.  We, 
the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the  movement  several  years  and  have 
reached  a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been 
through  various  ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that  our 
overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle  brought  us?  Closer 
to  the  end  of  the  exploitation  and  violence  against  women?  Closer  to  self- 
determination  for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect 
that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of 
seeking. 


The  new  right,  with  its  "pro-family/'  anti-feminist  ideology, 

has  recently  gained  political  clout  through  its  victories  in  the 

November  elections.  Abortion,  gay  and  lesbian  rights,  child  care 

programs  and  battered  women's  shelters  have  come  under 

attack  as  threats  to  the  family.  In  the  coming  months,  we  expect 

to  see  a  legislative  onslaught  against  feminist  gains  of  the  last 

decade.  The  repressive  Federal  Family  Protection  Act(S.-1808)*, 

for  example,  is  presently  being  reviewed  in  Senate  committee, 

and  the  proposed  Constitutional  anti-abortion  amendment  will 

be  put  before  Congress  imminently. 

Under  the  guise  of  balancing  the  national  budget,  attempts 

will  be  made  to  cut  social  welfare  services.  Poor  women  will  bear 

the  brunt  of  those  cuts,  while  defense  spending  swells  to  even 

greater  inflationary  levels.  Because  of  wage  discrepancies, 

families  dependent  on  the  earnings  of  a  single  woman  are  now 

six  times  as  likely  to  be  in  poverty  as  those  dependent  on  a  man. 

The  vast  majority  of  welfare  recipients  is  women,  and  the 

federal  Aid  to»Families  with  Dependent  Children  (AFDC) 

minimum  for  a  family  of  four  was  raised  last  spring  to  $4,650. 

Married  women  face  economic  pressure  to  be  in  the  workforce 

and  increasing  social  pressure  to  remain  at  home. 

Issues  concerning  the  family  have  necessarily  taken  on  new 

immediacy  for  feminists.  We  are  faced  with  the  task  of  trying  to 

define  and  unite  around  a  program  of  demands  that  will 

objectively  combat  the  strength  of  the  new  right,  as  well  as  the 

agendas  of  the  mainstream  government  and  multinational 

corporations. 

This  issue  of  Quest  is  not  primarily  strategy-oriented,  nor  does 

it  adequately  reflect  the  urgency  we  all  feel  in  response  to  the 

November  elections.  The  issue  does  contain  articles  which 

contribute  significantly  to  the  ongoing  development  of  a 

feminist  theory  of  the  family.  While  feminist  perspectives  on  the 

family  vary,  the  family  and  issues  surrounding  it  continue  to 

inform  a  large  part  of  our  theory  and  activist  work.  Now,  more 

*  A  copy  of  this  bill  can  be  obtained  by  writing  to  its  sponsor,  Senator  Paul 

Laxalt,  U.S.  Congress,  Washington,  DC. 


Introduction/3 


than  ever,  we  need  to  understand  the  complexity  of  the  family, 
its  functions  and  the  forces  that  shape  it.  The  family 
encompasses  a  wide  range  of  issues  and  concerns.  Theorists  have 
pointed  out  that  the  family  is  an  intersection  of  the  major 
spheres  of  social  life:  production,  reproduction,  sexuality  and 
gender  formation.  It  is  within  the  family  that  values,  attitudes 
and  belief  systems  are  transmitted  from  one  generationto  the  next. 

The  family  is  not  monolithic;  there  is  no  one  structure  or 
pattern  of  relationships  to  which  families  conform.  Our  language 
and  thinking  about  families,  however,  imply  that  there  is.  The 
myth  of  the  ideal  family,  or  in  Sandra  Harding's  words,  the 
"standard  two  parent  heterosexual  family,"  remains  firmly 
imbedded  in  contemporary  Western  ideology.  This  myth,  which 
is  now  being  revitalized  by  the  new  right,  is  a  powerful  source  of 
our  oppression  as  women.  To  understand  the  strength  of  this 
ideal,  we  must  examine  its  historical  origins  and 
structural  —  economic,  political  and 
psychological  —  underpinnings. 

All  of  the  articles  in  this  issue  grapple,  in  one  way  or  another, 
with  this  ideal  of  the  family.  Ann  Ferguson,  for  example,  begins 
her  analysis  of  an  alternative  family  community  with  an 
examination  of  the  contradictions  posed  by  the  standard  model 
of  the  family.  She  goes  on  to  look  at  the  internal  and  external 
pressures  generated  by  the  conflict  between  the  family 
community  she  writes  about  and  the  larger  society  and  ideology 
within  which  it  exists. 

Writing  about  a  post-revolutionary  China,  Vera  Schwarcz 
recognizes  the  tension  between  revolutionary  and  reactionary 
ideology,  and  the  tenacity  and  rootedness  of  old  structures  of 
family  and  kinship  in  the  face  of  new  social  and  economic 
conditions.  Though  the  Revolution  of  1 949  and  the  Cultural 
Revolution  are  now  over,  Schwarcz  indicates  that  the  larger 
struggle  —  the  working  out  in  policy  and  day-to-day  life  of  social 
and  economic  problems  —  continues  in  China.  With  Ferguson 
she  shares  a  sense  of  the  ongoing  and  complex  nature  of  change 
and  revolution. 


4/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


Unifying  the  articles  in  this  issue  is  the  recognition  that  social 

change,  if  it  is  to  be  truly  progressive,  must  occur  on  a  number 

of  levels.  Families  are  not  merely  social  units;  they  are  the  seat  of 

interpersonal  relations  and  of  some  of  our  most  firmly  held 

beliefs  about  society  and  social  relations.  Objective  changes  in 

the  economy  or  society  must  therefore  be  accompanied  by  what 

Schwarcz  terms  "revolution  in  the  heart/' 

Sandra  Harding  explicates  the  need  for  this  inner  revolution. 

Speculating  on  what  it  is  that  has  made  our  social  institutions 

and  beliefs  so  resistant  to  our  attempts  to  change  them,  Harding 

examines  an  area  of  social  life  long  neglected  by  social 

theorists  —  the  social  life  of  infants.  Drawing  on  the  work  of 

Nancy  Chodorow,  Dorothy  Dinnerstein  and  Jane  Flax,  she 

argues  persuasively  that  male  children  learn  patterns  and 

behaviors  of  domination  in  infancy,  through  the  experience  of 

separation  and  individuation  from  their  mothers.  Because  women 

are  devalued  within  patriarchal  cultures,  male  children  learn,  in 

this  process  of  separation,  to  preserve  their  individual  integrity 

through  denial  (and  later,  domination)  of  this  first  and  powerful 

"other."  This  "self-dominating-other"  construct,  Harding  argues, 

structures  both  male  personalities  and  the  institutions  and  beliefs 

which  men  create  and  participate  in  as  adults.  Men  thus  have  a 

psychic,  as  well  as  an  economic  and  political  investment  in  those 

institutions  and  beliefs  —  an  investment  which  informs  their 

resistance  to  change. 

Mickey  Spencer,  Bridget  Wynne,  Julie  Gale  and  Polly  Taylor 

explore  dynamics  among  adult  women  that  are  based  on 

women's  experience  as  mothers  and  daughters.  In  our  early 

relationships  with  our  mothers,  we  internalize  images  and 

expectations  of  ourselves  and  other  women  which  later  recur  in 

our  relationships  with  our  own  daughters.  This  pattern  of 

expectations,  the  authors  argue,  in  turn,  structures  both  the 

organizations  we  create  and  participate  in  as  feminists,  and  our 

relationships  with  adult  women  within  and  outside  those 

organizations. 

In  providing  a  structural  analysis  of  women's  work  and  its 


lntroduction/5 


place  within  a  capitalist  economy,  Natalie  Sokoloff  explores 
another  level  on  which  social  change  must  occur.  She  examines 
the  connections  between  women's  roles  within  families  — 
specifically  our  roles  as  mothers  — and  the  ways  we  are  treated 
in  the  labor  market.  Regardless  of  whether  women  actually  are 
mothers,  she  writes/'women  —  all  women  — are  treated  as 
mothers  — former,  actual  or  potential."  She  maintains  that 
changes  in  the  workforce— both  in  the  conceptualization  of 
women's  work  and  in  the  way  that  work  is  structured  —  must  be 
accompanied  by  changes  in  the  conceptualization  and  division 
of  labor  within  the  family. 

Despite  the  range  of  analyses  presented  in  this  issue,  a  number  of 
questions  are  not  addressed.  An  analysis  of  the  role  of  public 
policy  and  its  impact  on  the  family  is  notably  lacking. 
Similarly,  there  is  no  examination  of  the  current  backlash 
against  encroachment  by  government,  media  and  schools  into 
areas  formerly  considered  family  territory.  Aside  from  Ann 
Ferguson's  article  on  the  Che  Lumumba  School  —  an  alternative 
school  community  comprised  primarily  of  Third  World 
families  —  there  is  no  analysis  of  families  which  are  not  part  of 
the  dominant  culture  —  black  and  Latino  families,  or  gay/lesbian 
families.  Also  missing  from  this  issue  are  analyses  of  a  number  of 
issues  that  have  been  the  focus  of  feminist  organizing  activities 
over  the  past  few  years:  battered  women,  child  custody  and, 
more  recently,  incest. 

Our  concern  with  the  family  does  not  end  with  this  issue  of 
Quest  Though  future  themes  do  not  deal  specifically  with  this 
topic,  we  hope  to  continue  publishing  articles  on  the  family, 
particularly  articles  dealing  with  issues  and  questions  we  were 
not  able  to  explore  here.  We  welcome  the  submission  of 
unsolicited  manuscripts  from  our  readers,  as  well  as  general 
comments  and  criticisms  of  this  issue,  or  critiques  of  specific 
articles.  Please  address  all  comments  or  manuscripts  to:  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly;  P.O.  Box  8843;  Washington,  D.C. 

With  "Media  and  Culture"  we  continue  our  policy  of 
publishing  feature  articles.  D.A.  Clarke's  essay  describes  and 
analyzes  Deborah  Spray's  action  against  a  series  of  photographs 


6/Quest 


entitled  "The  Incredible  Case  of  the  Stack  (/Wheats  Murders." 

Clarke  not  only  looks  at  the  nature  of  art,  its  tradition  of  being 

defined  by  men,  and  its  essential  objectif ication  of  women  as 

models  and  "objects  of  beauty,"  but  juxtaposes  this  tradition 

with  that  of  pornography.  She  argues  that  the  series  of  prints 

depicting  women  who  have  been  murdered  cannot  be  defended 

on  the  grounds  of  aesthetics  — of  an  art  divorced  from  political 

reality  and  interpretation.  Clarke  goes  on  to  examine  the 

controversy  surrounding  Spray's  action  and  addresses  the 

charges  of  censorship  which  the  action  elicited.  She  concludes 

that  Spray's  action  was  not  censorship  but  "rather  an  invitation 

for  us  to  examine,  rigourously,  the  ethics  of  a  male-dominated  art 

and  its  aesthetics,  as  well  as  our  own  values,  priorities  and 

assumptions."  From  this  frame  of  reference  she  argues  that 

Clarke's  action  was  antithetical  to  the  spirit  of  censorship— a 

spirit  which  honors  repression,  secrecy  and  silence. 

)M,LH 


If  you  would  like  to  subscribe  or  make  a  contribution  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  please  fill  out  the  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money 
order  to: 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
P.O.  Box  8843,  Dept.  A 
Washington,  DC  20003 

□  $9.00/year  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

□  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor 

□  $10.00/year  for  Canada  and  Mexico 

□  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

□  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  surface 

□  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air 

□  $3.35/single  issues 

□  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 


Name. 


Address. 


Zip 


Introduction/7 


In  Memorium 


We  are  saddened  and  outraged  at  the  loss  of  Yulanda  Ward,  a  Washington,  D.C. 
activist,  who  was  murdered  on  November  2,  1980.  At  22,  Yulanda  was  already  an 
effective  community  leader  with  strong  ties  in  the  black,  feminist  and  left 
communities.  She  had  taken  a  one-year  leave  from  Howard  University  to  devote 
herself  fulltime  to  activist  work.  She  was  co-chair  of  the  City  wide  Housing 
Coalition,  a  member  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Rape  Crisis  Center,  and  a 
member  of  the  student  arm  of  the  Black  United  Front. 

Yulanda' s  political  activity  was  both  locally  and  nationally  oriented.  She  worked 
closely  with  D.C.  tenants  organizations  and  was  instrumental  in  forming  the 
Grassroots  Unity  Conference,  a  national  coalition  fighting  " spatial 
d&aornceMration"  programs.  These  programs,  spearheaded  by  HUD,  are  geared 
toward  systematically  dispersing  inner  city  populations  by  forcing  them  out  of  their 
neighborhoods  into  isolated  suburban  areas. 

Through  the  Black  United  Front,  Yulanda  was  working  with  other  students  to 
create  a  strong  black  student  movement.  In  this  context  she  was  recently  part  of  a 
group  opposing  Pepsi  Cola's  funding  of  Black  College  Day.  Pepsi  has  large  financial 
investments  in  South  Africa. 

As  a  member  of  the  Rape  Crisis  Center,  Yulanda  helped  organize  the  first 
National  Conference  on  Third  World  Women  and  Violence.  She  was  actively 
involved  in  fundraising  efforts  at  the  Center  and  was  planning  a  local  media  project 
on  black  women  and  feminism. 

At  publication  date,  the  information  we  have  points  toward  a  political 
assassination.  In  our  judgment,  Yulanda  Ward's  murder  is  a  symptom  of  right  wing 
ascendancy  in  this  country  and  a  warning  to  feminists  and  left  groups  that  we  are 
rapidly  approaching  another  period  of  severe  repression. 


8/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


Yulanda  had  received  threatening  phone  calls,  insisting  that  she  should  stop  her 
activist  work  and  return  to  school.  At  around  2  a.m.  on  Sunday,  'November  2,  she 
and  three  young  male  acquaintances  were  accosted  by  four  armed  men.  Yulanda 
was  isolated  from  the  others.  Her  companions  were  frisked  and  robbed  but  not 
physically  harmed.  Yulanda  was  not  robbed  but  was  shot  in  the  back  of  the  head. 

During  the  incident  there  was  no  resistance  by  Yulanda  or  her  companions  which 
might  have  precipitated  the  shooting.  It  has  been  alleged  that  the  weapons  used  were 
not  those  typically  used  in  street  crimes* 

Quest  is  part  of  a  broad  coalition  of  progressive  individuals  and  groups  which  is 
demanding  a  thorough,  independent  investigation  of  Yulanda' 's  murder. 

Yulanda  was  a  leader  who  motivated  others  with  her  enthusiasm,  energy  and 
political  wisdom.  She  was  a  tireless  worker  fully  committed  to  the  struggle  for 
radical  change.  We  deeply  regret  her  loss  and  rededicate  ourselves  to  continuing  her 
struggle,  our  struggle. 

To  send  much  needed  funds  or  to  request  more  information,  write: 

Yulanda  Ward  Memorial  Fund 

Rape  Crisis  Center 

P.O.  Box  21005 

Washington,  D.C.  20009 


*Two  men  were  apprehended  within  twenty-four  hours  of  the  murder,  but  they  do  not  meet 
the  descriptions  given  by  the  victims.  At  a  Rape  Crisis  Center  press  conference,  the  chief  of 
homocide  and  a  representative  from  the  mayor's  office  maintained  the  position  that  robbery 
was  the  motive. 


Ward/9 


Letters 


Dear  Quest 

Ann  Markusen's  "Who  Were  Your 
Grandmothers,  John  Hanson?"  is 
making  the  rounds  of  the  North 
Dakota  Humanities  Council,  the 
funding  agency  for  "Northern 
Lights,"  and  I  can't  tell  you  how 
grateful  I  (and  others)  are  for  the 
piece.  My  only  suggestion  is  that  the 
argument  ought  to  be  addressed  not 
only  to  the  film  industry,  but  also  to 
funding  agencies  like  state 
Humanities  Councils  which,  while 
purporting  to  offer  new 
opportunities  for  the  examination 
and  dissemination  of  culture,  or 
however  you  want  to  define  their 
good  intentions,  in  fact  too  often 
perpetuate  the  old  systems  and 
stereotypes.  Or  at  least  so  it  seems 
to  me  in  regard  to  our  state  NEH 
affiliate,  which  has  the  reputation 
for  being  one  of  the  most  active  in 
the  country,  partly  on  the  strength  of 
having  produced  "Northern  Lights." 

Since  "Northern  Lights,"  Hanson 
and  Nilsson  have  done  two  more 
films  on  Henry  Martinson,  "Rebel 
Earth"  and  "Survivor,"  also  with 
Humanities  Council  funding.  "Rebel 
Earth"  is  supposed  to  emphasize  the 
history  of  labor  in  the  state,  and 
"Survivor"  is  a  sort  of  biographical 


essay,  but  both  are  still  of  the  bar- 
room/tractor wheel  variety.  No  one 
would  suppose  that  sensible  women 
have  ever  set  foot  in  the  region. 

Last  May  there  was  a  showing  of 
the  two  films  for  a  gathering  of  state 
Council  humanists,  and  afterwards  a 
panel  discussion  with  invitations  to 
the  audience  for  comments.  All  was 
self-congratulatory.  I  said  I  thought 
the  films  were  good  examples  of  the 
long  tradition  in  American  arts  of 
the  male  myth:  growing  up  alone 
and  conquering  all  by  wit  and  hard 
work,  etc.  Then  I  made  a  few  brief 
and  superficial  remarks  about  the 
absence  of  women  (and  for  that 
matter,  laboring  people  and  just 
about  anybody  except  the 
filmmakers),  rather  along  the  lines  of 
Ann  Markusen's  article.  I  was  booed, 
audibly,  by  this  gathering  of  state 
humanists,  and  Hanson,  on  the 
stage,  pushed  away  the  air  in  front 
of  him  with  his  arms.  So  I  think  it  is 
more  than  the  film  industry  one  is  up 
against. 

In  fairness,  the  episode  may  have 
had  some  salutory  long-range 
effects  for  the  North  Dakota 
Humanities  Council.  Its  director, 
Everett  Albers,  is  trying  to  involve 
more  women  in  programs,  and  more 
concerns  of  women  in  the  content  of 
programs,  although  results  remain  to 
be  seen.  Anyway,  I  thought  you 
might  like  a  brief  report,  however 
jaundiced,  on  the  local  scene;  and  I 
wanted  to  thank  you  and  Ann 
Markusen  for  the  article. 

Elizabeth  Hampsten 
Grand  Forks,  ND 


10/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


To  the  Editor: 

Congratulations  to  Kay  Whitlock 
for  writing  and  to  Quest  for 
publishing  the  article  "Power 
Brokerage  and  Single  Issue  Politics 
in  NOW"  (Special  Issue).  With 
insight  and  courage,  Kay  has 
described  the  cramped  and  craven 
style  of  NOW's  current  leadership 
and  outlined  its  damaging 
consequences.  Her  analysis  is 
consistently  on  target. 

I  am  sadly  convinced  that  only 
the  defeat  of  the  ERA  will  open 
NOW's  policies,  particularly  its  ERA 
strategy,  for  examination. 

In  the  meantime,  bright  and 
decent  people  will  continue  to  leave 
NOW  and  the  movement  will  search 
for  creative  organizational 
leadership  somewhere  else.  One  can 
only  hope,  for  the  sake  of  all  NOW's 
causes,  that  it  will  surface  in  time  to 
save  them. 

Zelle  W.  Andrews 
Alexandria,  VA 

P.S.  I  have  been  a  NOW  member 
since  1970,  co-founder  of  one 
chapter,  president  of  another,  past 
New  York  state  NOW  president,  and, 
until  May  of  this  year,  a  national 
board  member. 


To  the  Editors: 

Los  Angeles  1979  was  my  first 
national  NOW  conference.  Booked 
in  the  $75  per  night  luxury 
Bonaventure,  it  did  not  take  me  long 


to  realize  that  these  white,  middle 
class,  straight  ladies  did  not  have  my 
best  interest  at  heart.  Not 
NOW... not  later! 

E.C.White 
Seattle 


Women  of  Quest: 

I  received  your  note  telling  me 
that  Quest  does  not  publish  poetry 
any  more.  I  am  angry,  upset, 
saddened,  confused,  not  only  about 
Quests  decision,  but  about  the 
decision  of  other  women's  journals 
not  to  publish  poetry,  or  to  assign  it 
a  low  priority,  such  as  the  statement 
which  appeared  in  Chrysalis  a 
couple  of  issues  back  which 
exhorted  women  to  stop  writing 
poems  and  to  write  analysis. 

I  do  not  underestimate  theory  or 
analysis:  I  do  not  undervalue  good 
strong  prose  writing  or  fiction:  but 
nothing  can  reach  inside  a  person 
and  touch  them  and  change  them 
more  than  a  good  strong  poem.  All 
of  the  other  forms  of  writing  mostly 
dictate  to  the  reader,  set  up 
structures  around  the  reader,  while 
the  poem  goes  inside  and  becomes 
the  person,  and  becomes  the 
changes  that  the  person  needs  to 
make  to  empower  herself. 

Poetry  is  dangerous,  anarchic, 
empowering  to  people  and 
especially  to  women.  I  ask  you  to 
reconsider  your  decision  not  to 
publish  poems. 

If  there  is  no  space  for  an  art  to 
reach  an  audience,  the  artists  do 


Letters/1 1 


something  else,  the  words  will  never 
get  written,  the  poets  will  return  to 
their  closets  and  put  on  some  other 
disguise  and  the  linear,  mechanistic 
world  which  Descartes  supplied  the 
killing  engine  for  will  move  that 
much  closer  to  disintegrating  itself 
and  the  rest  of  us  with  it. 

Martha  Courtot 
Santa  Rosa,  CA 


Editors'  remarks:  Quest  has  decided 
not  to  print  poetry.  Our  decision  was 
not  based  on  any  disregard  for 
poetry  or  its  power;  but,  rather,  was 
based  on  taking  stock  of  staff  time, 
energy,  and  talents.  We  have  few 
women,  little  money  and  a  great 
deal  of  work  to  do  even  after 
electing  to  leave  this  one  thing 
undone.  It  was  not  a  choice  we 
enjoyed  making. 

None  of  this  however,  negates  the 
hard  truth  in  Ms.  Courtot's  letter. 


12/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


The 

Che-Lumumba 

School: 

Creating  a  Revolutionary 
Family  Community 


by  Ann  Ferguson 

Most  of  us  have  so  completely 
absorbed  the  ideal  of  the  patriarchal 
nuclear  family  —  breadwinning 
husband,  housewife,  mom  and 
children  —  that  it  comes  as  a  shock 
to  discover  that  only  1 5.9  percent  of 
families  in  the  U.S.  meet  the 
description.1  This  gap  between 
reality  and  the  ideal  creates  a  crisis 
in  values  for  most  people.  The  needs 
for  love,  security  and  mutual  aid  in 
raising  children  that  the  family  used 
to  meet  are  no  longer  being  met.  We 
need  to  understand  the  causes  of 
this  crisis  in  order  to  explore 
possibilities  for  alternative 
structures  for  living,  loving  and 
parenting.  The  kind  of  structures  I 
mean  are  not  of  the  Utopian  sort, 
suggested  by  writers  like  Firestone, 
Piercy  or  Marx,  which  cannot  be 
achieved  until  after  a  socialist- 
feminist  revolution.  Instead.  I  will 


present  some  goals  and  ideas  for 
creating  what  I  call  "revolutionary 
family-communities/'2  communities 
that  people  can  begin  to  set  up  right 
now.  These  communities  will  create 
a  base  for  expressing  in  embryo 
some  new  egalitarian  values  of 
loving  and  parenting.  Furthermore, 
they  will  at  the  same  time  provide  us 
with  the  material  support  needed  to 
continue  to  challenge  the  combined 
domination  system  of  capitalist 
patriarchy. 

There  is  a  conceptual 
inconsistency  in  the  historically 
developed  ideal  of  the  American 
family  based  on  the  principles  of 
romantic  love,  male/female 
complementarity  and  possessive 
parenthood.  Romantic  love  and  its 
implicit  values  of  freedom  and 
equality  between  partners  is  based 
on  an  Individualist  world  view  which 
assumes  that  humans  are  capable  of 
self-development  through  education 


The  Che-Lumumba  School;  Creating  a  Revolutionary  Family  community/1 3 


and  voluntary  choice.  Thus, 
individuals  ought  to  be  free  from 
parental  restrictions  on  potential 
marriage  partners  in  order  to  allow 
for  self-direction  in  matters  of  love. 
But  emphasis  on  self-development 
as  a  priority  is  inconsistent  with  the 
principle  of  complementarity,  a 
principle  based  on  the  Organic 
world  view.3  According  to  this  view, 
which  is  prevalent  in  one  form  or 
another  in  all  traditional  pre- 
capitalist cultures,  biology  creates 
natural  social  functions  for  men  and 
women,  and  parents  and  children. 
Social  health  is  maintained  by  each 
sector  performing  its  natural 
function.  The  concepts  of  individual 
choice  and  self-development  are 
alien  to  this  whole  approach. 
Individual  deviations  from  natural 
sex  roles  can  only  be  seen  as 
unnatural  disorder:  lesbian  and 
homosexual  relationships,  or  any 
kind  of  reversal  in  female  and  male 
roles  in  marriage  or  parenting  is  a 
cancer  within  the  functioning 
organism  of  the  body  politic. 

The  internal  inconsistency  in 
these  principles  might  have  gone 
unnoticed  had  not  a  more  serious 
disparity  between  reality  and  the 
principle  of  complementarity  arisen: 
the  breakdown  of  the  public-private 
split  which  placed  men  as 
breadwinners  and  women  as 
homemakers.  Because  of  economic 
pressures  on  families,  half  of  all 
married  women  are  now  working  in 
wage  labor.  Furthermore,  a 
complicated  set  of  pressures  has 
made  marriages  increasingly 


unstable:  a  fact  which  makes  it  more 
likely  that  women  will  challenge  the 
stereotypical  complementary  "wife- 
and-mother"  role.4 

The  third  principle,  that  of 
possessive  parenthood,  maintains 
that  children  are  the  private 
property  of  their  parents.  Thus, 
parents  have  exclusive  rights  to 
mold  their  "products"  as  they  see  fit. 
But  there  is  today  a  disparity 
between  the  ideal  of  possessive 
parenthood  and  the  reality  under 
which  most  families  operate.  The 
existence  of  public  schools  has 
created  a  socializing  arena  which 
has  increasingly  usurped  control 
over  children's  development  from 
parents.  Low  income  families  face  a 
whole  network  of  social  workers, 
counselors  and  therapists  who  can 
intervene  if  children  do  badly  at 
school  or  run  afoul  of  the  law.5  The 
woman  who  puts  all  her  energy  into 
possessive  motherhood  finds  herself 
constantly  overshadowed  by  the 
school.  Families  who  find  their 
values  at  odds  with  public  school 
values  are  pressed  to  seek 
community  networks  with  other 
families  who  feel  the  same  way. 
Such  pressures  can  lead  to  networks 
on  the  Right  as  well  as  the  Left: 
racist  parents  can  oppose  bussing 
and  integrationist  values  of  public 
schools,  while  anarchist  parents  may 
deplore  authoritarian  learning 
techniques.  Parents  who  wish  to 
oppose  public  school  control  over 
their  children's  values  have  no 
option  but  to  organize  with  other 
parents  in  some  kind  of  collective 


14/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


resistance  network.  Such  a  strategy 
already  requires  some  modification 
of  the  Individualist  notion  that 
children  should  be  the  products  of 
their  parents,  for  the  resistance 
community  now  becomes  not  only 
the  mediator  but  increasingly  the 
molder  of  the  values  of  those  within 
it,  both  parents  and  children. 

The  problems  outlined  above 
suggest  not  only  that  the  nineteenth 
century  ideal  of  the  family  has 
become  outmoded  for  many 
Americans,  but  also  that  there  is  a 
large  group  of  people,  larger  than 
but  including  feminists,  who  are  in 
immediate  need  of  alternate  models 
for  love  and  parenting  relationships. 
Many  people  today  are  living 
alternative  family  structures  out  of 
circumstances  of  necessity.  These 
arrangements  may  avoid  some  of 
the  problems  of  patriarchal 
households.  Nonetheless,  they  often 
have  serious  problems  of  their  own. 
In  the  next  section  I  shall  outline  an 
alternative  ideal  of  the  family  and  in 
the  subsequent  section  I  will  present 
a  case  study  of  the  Che-Lumumba 
School  community  which 
demonstrates  ways  in  which  some  of 
the  problems  of  alternative  families 
can  be  solved. 

The  Ideal  of  a  Revolutionary 
Socialist-Feminist  Family 
Community 

My  model  of  a  revolutionary 
family  community  is  a  number  of 
families  and/or  individuals  who  may 
live  separately  but  who  are  united  in 


a  working  network  which  constitutes 
for  them  a  self-conscious  resistance 
community:  a  community  which 
deliberately  creates  values  which 
run  counter  to  the  dominant  values 
of  capitalist  patriarchal  culture.  The 
community  aims  to  provide  a 
supportive  structure  for  its  children 
to  learn  revolutionary  values  and  for 
its  adults  to  eliminate  habits  and 
personality  traits  imposed  by  the 
dominant  culture. 

The  overarching  goal  of  the 
revolutionary  family-community  I 
propose  is  equality:  that  is,  members 
should  be  economically,  socially, 
psychologically  and  politically  equal 
to  the  maximum  extent  possible. 
Different  networks  of  families  will 
have  to  develop  practical 
procedures  for  equalizing  members, 
and  these  procedures  will  vary 
depending  on  the  extent  of 
members'  resources,  the  nature  of 
their  commitment  to  each  other  and 
the  composition  of  the  group. 

Here  are  some  basic  goals  for  a 
socialist-feminist  revolutionary 
family-community. 

1.  To  eliminate  childrearing 
inequalities  between  men  and 
women  in  order  to  provide  the 
structural  base  for  men  and  women 
to  be  equal  nurturers  to  the  children 
and  to  each  other  as  well  as  equally 
autonomous.  This  means 
challenging  the  male-as- 
autonomous,  female-as-nurturer 
dichotomy. 

2.  To  challenge  the  sexual 
division  of  labor.  This  involves 
reorganizing  not  only  childrearing 


Che-Lumumba  School/1 5 


and  other  family  maintenance  tasks 
(cooking,  car  and  house  repair,  etc.) 
but  also  whatever  aspects  of  public 
life  the  family-community  can 
control. 

3.  To  break  down  the  possessive 
privacy  of  the  two  primary  sets  of 
relationships  in  the  American 
patriarchal  family:  the  couple  and 
the  parent-child  relationship.  People 
in  a  revolutionary  family-community 
have  a  joint  responsibility  both  to 
build  revolutionary  values  in  their 
own  couple  and  parent-child 
relationships,  and  also  to  share  in 
responsibility  for  aiding  all  the 
couples  and  children  in  the 
community  in  these  tasks.  Other 
biological  and  social  parents  in  the 
community  must  be  seen  as  having 
rights  and  responsibilities  in  the 
upbringing  and  value  formation  of 
all  the  children.  People  must 
understand  that  unresolved  conflicts 
in  love  relationships  and  in  parent- 
child  relationships  divide  and 
weaken  the  community  as  well. 
Thus,  members  have  a  commitment 
to  the  health  and  close  ties  of  the 
community  that  is  equal  to  their 
commitment  to  lover  and  children 
or  parents. 

4.  To  equalize  power  as  far  as 
possible  between  parents  and 
children  and,  in  general,  between 
adults  and  children.  There  may 
indeed  be  biological  limits  to  this 
process:  from  what  we  know  about 
human  development  it  would  seem 
that  children  need  to  identify  with 
adults  to  develop  their  core  identity 
and  values.  Nonetheless,  there  are 


16/Quest 


structures  which  can  give  children 
more  power  and  choice  in  the  role- 
modeling  process  such  as  peer 
group  collective  learning  situations, 
alternate  social  mothers  and  fathers, 
and  a  role  in  the  decision-making 
and  productive  life  of  the 
community  commensurate  with 
abilities  and  age. 

5.  To  eliminate  the  base  for 
heterosexism  in  society  which  along 
with  patriarchy  and  capitalism 
contributes  to  women's  oppression. 
This  means  openly  allowing  gay 
persons,  including  gay  mothers  and 
fathers,  into  the  revolutionary 
family-community.  Single  gay 
people  should  have  the  opportunity 
to  have  warm,  loving  roles  as  social 
parents,  and  thus  break  down  the 
unique  social  privileges  of  access  to 
a  parent-child  relationship  now 
limited  to  biological  parents. 

6.  To  breakdown  elitist  attitudes 
about  the  superiority  of  mental  and 
professional  work  to  manual  work. 

7.  To  deal  with  racism  and 
classism. 

8.  To  introduce  economic  sharing 
in  the  family-community  which 
allows  members  to  develop  a  sense 
of  commitment  to  each  other. 

In  what  follows,  I  shall  present  the 
outlines  of  one  specific 
revolutionary  family-community 
that  I  am  a  member  of,  the  Che- 
Lumumba  School  community.  I 
shall  indicate  the  ways  in  which  our 
community  has  successfully 
struggled  to  achieve  some  of  the 
goals  outlined  and  the  problems  that 
remain.  Others  hopefully  will  be 


able  to  take  what  lessons  are 
relevant  and  modify  them  to  suit 
their  own  potential  family- 
community. 

The  Che-Lumumba  School 
Revolutionary  Family- 
Community 

The  Che-Lumumba  School 
is  an  alternative  school  for  children 
from  the  ages  of  six  to  twelve.  It  has 
a  political  philosophy  that  involves 
active  advocacy  of  Third  World 
liberation  struggles  from  a  generally 
progressive  or  socialist  viewpoint.  It 
is  a  parent-teacher  cooperatively-run 
school.  The  parents  are  students, 
teachers  and  community  people 
connected  to  the  Third  World 
community  in  Amherst  and  centered 
around  the  University  of 
Massachusetts.  There  are  also  non- 
parent  student  and  community 
volunteers  who  help  with  the 
teaching.  The  number  of  children  in 
the  school  during  its  eight-year 
existence  has  varied  from  two  to 
thirteen  and  is  presently  seven.  The 
parents  hire  a  head  teacher  every 
year  whom  they  pay  with  tuition 
money,  based  on  what  people  can 
afford  to  pay,  and  money  from 
benefits  organized  by  parents. 

Initially  the  school  was  started  by 
several  black  nationalist  parents 
who  were  graduate  students  at  the 
School  of  Education.  These  parents 
wished  to  provide  an  Afro-American 
self-defined  education  for  their 
children  as  an  alternative  to  the 
cultural  whitewash  and  implicit 


Che-Lumumba  School/1 7 


racism  of  the  public  schools.  The 
school  subsequently  broadened  its 
base  to  include  Hispanic  parents 
and  Third  World  members,  then 
white  parents  with  Third  World 
children  and,  finally,  a  limited 
number  of  white  children.  The 
confusion  over  the  political  line  of 
the  school  caused  a  succession  of 
tensions  which  will  be  discussed 
later. 

The  political  philosophy  of  the 
Che-Lumumba  school  currently 
emphasizes  pride  in  traditional  Third 
World  cultures  at  the  same  time  that 
it  is  dedicated  to  fight  racism,  sexism 
and  classism  by  making  the  children 
aware  of  how  the  dominant  culture 
is  controlled  in  the  interests  of  white 
male  capitalists.  The  school 
represents  a  coalition  of  political 
interests  rather  than  a  unified  set  of 
priorities. 

Alternative  Family  Structures: 
Special  Problems  of  Che- 
Lumumba  School  Parents6 

The  Che-Lumumba  School 
throughout  its  history  has  included  a 
variety  of  alternate  family  structures 
and  has  needed  to  deal  with  their 
representative  problems.  I  will 
sketch  four  types  of  families  to  show 
how  the  school  community  has  been 
able  to  provide  solutions  to  some  of 
these  problems. 

Case  1:  The  Single  Parent  Family. 

Mary  is  a  dancer  who  is  trying  to 
finish  her  college  degree.  She  is  on 
welfare  and  her  daughter,  Tanya,  is 
nine  years  old.  Tanya  does  not  know 


her  father.  Mary  and  Tanya  are  part 
of  the  6.2  percent  of  American 
households  composed  of  single 
mothers  and  children.  Most  of  them, 
like  Mary,  are  poor.  Most  are  also  on 
welfare  because  it  is  usually 
impossible  for  one  parent  to  be  both 
full-time  breadwinner  and  mother. 

The  Mary-Tanya  family  shows  the 
bad  effects  of  the  sexual  division  of 
labor  in  child-rearing  on  single 
parent  families.  Tanya's  father  felt 
no  responsibility  to  nurture,  so  Mary 
was  left  with  all  the  work.  Mary  is 
torn,  as  are  most  women,  between 
her  role  as  mother  and  her  interest  in 
autonomy  —  in  her  case  the  desire  is 
take  herself  seriously  as  an  artist.  In 
a  social  world  where  couples  are  the 
norm,  Mary  is  out  of  place.  She 
spends  too  much  time  with  Tanya. 
As  a  consequence,  they  have  more 
than  the  average  mother-daughter 
separation  problems.7  Tanya  is  a 
tomboy,  while  Mary  is  feminine. 
Both  feel  the  other  is  rejecting  her 
because  of  this  difference. 

joining  the  school  has  allowed 
them  both  more  freedom  and 
autonomy.  The  existence  of  other 
adults  who  feel  an  ongoing 
commitment  to  her  has  allowed 
Tanya  more  individuality.  She  has 
found  other  nurturant  role  models 
who  share  her  priorities  including 
male  university  student  volunteers, 
while  Mary  has  found  a  social 
daughter  in  another  Che-Lumumba 
student  who  is  more  like  her  in 
disposition.  This  has  allowed  both  of 
them  not  to  center  so  many 


18/Quest 


judgments,  expectations  and 
demands  on  each  other.  Mary  has 
also  been  able  to  get  some 
important  material  help  from  the 
group.  Childcare  exchanges  allow 
her  the  possibility  of  a  more 
satisfactory  private  life  than  she 
previously  had. 

Case  2:  The  Social  Parent  Family. 
Tomas  and  Maria  are  lovers,  and 
Roberto  is  Maria's  child.  In  a  similar 
situation  for  a  lesbian  couple, 
Michelle,  Clara  and  Sarah  are  a 
family.  Michelle  and  Clara  are 
lovers,  and  Sarah  is  Michelle's 
biological  child.  The  social  parents 
in  question  have  some  similar 
problems  with  their  step-children. 
The  key  issue  is  the  question  of  their 
self-defined  relationship  to  each 
other.  What  role  should  they  play  to 
the  children  and  what  role  will 
each  child  accept?  Neither  of  the 
adults  chose  to  have  the  children 
although  they  chose  to  relate  to 
their  mothers,  and  since  neither  of 
them  is  married  each  lacks  the  social 
legitimacy  marriage  would  give  the 
relationship  with  the  child. 

Clara  faces  an  additional 
problem.  Sarah  already  has  a  mother 
and  Clara  is  not  a  male.  Social 
modes  for  parenting  are  based  on 
heterosexual  relations.  These  in  turn 
are  expected  to  follow  the  principle 
of  complementarity.  Thus,  the 
unconscious  assumption  about 
lesbian  lovers  with  a  shared  child  is 
either  that  the  woman  who  is  not  the 
biological  mother  must  play  no 
significant  parenting  role,  or  that  she 
should  assume  the  "father"  role. 


Clara  is  in  a  bind.  When  she  tried  not 
to  accept  any  special  role  except 
that  of  adult  friend,  she  was  hard 
pressed  to  deal  with  Sarah's 
jealousy.  The  institution  of 
possessive  motherhood  in  the 
context  of  unstable  marriages 
teaches  children  that  the  only 
person  who  will  continue  to  be  there 
for  them  in  the  long  run  is  their 
mother,  in  the  large  majority  of 
cases  their  biological  mother.  This 
situation  gives  them  no  reason  to 
jeopardize  their  emotional  security 
by  broadening  their  love  to  include  a 
mother's  lover  who  may  not  be 
around  next  year.  When  Clara  faced 
this  problem  with  Sarah,  she  tried 
exercising  her  other  option  and 
assumed  a  parent  role.  But  since 
Michelle  was  firmly  fixed  in  the 
nurturant  mother  role,  Clara  found 
herself  drawn  into  the  father 
authority  role,  a  role  Sarah  refused 
to  accept.  Joining  the  school- 
community  showed  Sarah  and  Clara 
that  there  were  many  alternative 
families  with  social  parent-child 
relationships  and  this  made  the 
resolution  of  their  anxiety  about 
each  other  easier  to  handle.  In  the 
case  of  Tomas,  Maria  and  Roberto, 
Roberto  learned  to  accept  Tomas  in 
part  because  he  saw  how  his  peers 
enjoyed  Tomas  and  felt  proud  to 
have  Tomas  as  his  social  father. 
Case  3:  The  Two-Household  Shared 
Child  Family.  Jan  and  Tom  are 
divorced,  have  separate  apartments, 
and  have  joint  custody  of  their 
daughter  Lisa,  age  seven.  Lisa  spends 
equal  time  with  both  parents,  a 


Che-Lumumba  School/1 9 


week  with  Jan,  then  a  week  with 
Tom.  Since  Lisa's  parents  live  close 
to  each  other,  this  arrangement 
allows  them  to  be  members  of  the 
Che-Lumumba  school-community. 

Lisa  initially  had  a  hard  time 
adjusting  to  the  two  household 
family.  The  transition  back  and  forth 
means  sharing  her  life  alternatively 
with  different  people  who  have 
somewhat  different  styles  of 
parenting  and  other  values.  She  is 
jealous  of  her  parents'  lovers. 
Nonetheless,  the  Jan-Lisa-Tom 
family  has  made  good  inroads  into 
the  problem  of  possessive 
parenthood.  Jan  and  Tom  have  each 
had  to  learn  the  skills  involved  in  the 
opposite  sex  role.  The  family  had 
several  severe  problems  when  Lisa 
was  in  public  school.  Since  Lisa  is  an 
adopted  interracial  child  and  her 
parents  are  white,  Lisa  felt  the 
implicit  racism  of  the  public  school 
and  a  real  confusion  and  negative 
self-image  about  her  color,  an  image 
made  worse  by  the  mixed  nature  of 
her  family.  The  public  school 
promoted  the  image  of  the  "good" 
family  as  the  nuclear  one,  so  Lisa's 
family  was  deviant.  Joining  the  Che- 
Lumumba  school-community 
mitigated  the  latter  problem  by 
legitimizing  alternative  families.  It 
eased  the  transition  problem  Lisa 
felt  about  going  back  and  forth  to 
different  households,  since  she  was 
with  both  her  parents  at  school 
functions.  Her  peers  related  to  both 
Jan  and  Tom  and  often  stayed 
overnight  at  both  parents'  houses. 
The  school  helped  to  give  Lisa  a 


strong  positive  Afro-American 
image. 

Case  4:  The  Communal 
Household.  Shanti  and  her  brother, 
Ishtar,  live  with  their  parents,  Naomi 
and  Seth,  in  a  communal  household. 
The  other  members  of  the  commune 
are  more  transient  than  Shanti  and 
Ishtar's  family,who  are  the  core  unit 
of  the  household.  All  share  similar 
left  and  feminist  political  values 
and  work  to  break  down  the  sexual 
division  of  labor  around  childcare 
and  house  maintenance. 

The  major  problem  Shanti  and 
Ishtar  had  before  their  family  joined 
the  Che-Lumumba  school  was  the 
lack  of  regular  organized  collective 
problem  solving  procedures  in  their 
commune.  As  a  result,  the  commune 
tended  to  emphasize  the  needs  of 
the  adults  rather  than  the  children, 
and  the  children  responded  by 
acting  out  frustrations  and  creating 
a  social  problem  for  the  commune. 
The  collective  decision-making 
structure  of  the  school-community 
which  builds  in  separate  children's 
meetings  and  joint  parent-children 
meetings  has  taught  both  the 
children  and  adults  in  the  commune 
how  to  insist  on  regular  house 
meetings,  how  to  express  their  needs 
and  how  to  give  and  accept 
constructive  criticism.  As  a  result, 
the  children  are  now  getting  their 
needs  met.  The  adults  in  the 
commune  who  are  not  the 
biological  parents  have  been  more 
open  about  their  frustrations  and 
confusions  in  dealing  with  children 
who  are  not  theirs.  Consequently, 


20/Quest 


the  commune  is  functioning  much 
more  smoothly. 

Working  Structure  of  the 
School  and  Socialist-Feminist 
Values 

The  following  agreements  are  key 
to  the  organizational  structure  of 
the  school: 

Agreement  1:  The  parents  are  in 
control  of  all  decisions  as  to  content 
and  form  of  the  educational  process. 

Agreement  2:  The  children  also 
have  some  weight  in  policy-making. 
There  are  regular  joint  children- 
parents'  meetings  in  which  the 
children  say  what  they  like  and  don't 
like  about  the  school  and  parents 
discuss  values  with  the  children. 

Agreement  3:  All  parents  must  do 
productive  work  involved  with  the 
continued  existence  and  program  of 
the  school.  Parents  can  either  teach 
in  the  school  an  hour  or  two  a  week 
or  serve  on  a  committee. 

What  these  agreements  do  in 
practice  is  the  following:  since  both 
fathers  and  mothers  are  involved  in 
teaching  and  since  the  school  is  like 
a  supportive  childrearing 
community  (school  meetings  are  bi- 
weekly with  children  attending  and 
potluck  suppers),  the  child  rearing 
inequalities  between  women  and 
men  are  lessened.  Children  see  men 
taking  care  of  babies  and  nurturing 
children,  and  they  see  women  in 
positions  of  authority.  The  children 
have  supportive  alternate  role 
models  in  other  parents  of  the  same 
sex  that  they  relate  to  regularly, 
which  encourages  the  chances  for 


Che-Lumumba  School/21 


autonomous  development  of  strong 
personalities  in  boys  and  girls.  The 
volunteer  single  student  workers  at 
the  school  are  as  involved  in  the 
decision-making  and  in  the  general 
community  as  the  parents  and 
children,  so  the  children  can  see  that 
one  can  be  single  and  yet  contribute 
to  social  parenting. 

The  destructive  possessiveness  of 
the  parent-child  relationship,  typical 
of  most  nuclear  families,  is  being 
challenged  by  the  school,  although 
this  is  a  difficult  area  for  everyone. 
The  members  are  sensitive  to 
criticisms  about  how  they  bring  up 
their  children.  But  everyone  agrees 
that  even  simple  family  problems 
are  also  school  and  community 
problems.  If  Malik,  reaching 
puberty,  is  obsessed  with  sexual 
interests  and  talks  about  this  to  the 
younger  girls,  Tanya  gets  upset, 
because  her  mother  is  very 
protective  and  has  told  her  nothing 
about  sex.  It  then  takes  a  school 
meeting  to  decide  parental  policy 
on  the  degree  of  sex  education  and 
discussion  of  sex  that  should  take 
place  in  the  school. 

Two  specific  organizational  forms 
help  parents  deal  with  conflicts  in 
values  between  school-community 
expressed  principles  and  actual 
family  practice.  One  is  the  regular 
school  meeting  where  time  is  always 
set  aside  to  discuss  one  or  two . 
children  in  depth,  so  that  over  a 
three  or  four  month  period  all  the 
children  are  discussed.  The  second  is 
that  there  are  regular  joint  parent- 
children's  meetings  to  discuss 


general  problems  noticed  by  anyone 
in  either  the  children's  or  the 
parents'  attitudes. 

Besides  school  meetings,  parents 
and  children  are  encouraged  to  go 
to  as  many  of  the  social  activities  of 
the  Third  World  and  progressive 
communities  as  possible.  For 
example,  parents  and  children 
attend,  as  a  group,  concerts  by 
Archie  Shepp,  Gil  Scott-Herron, 
Holly  Near,  Grupo  Moncado  of 
Cuba,  and  soon. 

A  strong  emphasis  in  the 
curriculum  is  on  the  history  of 
workers'  struggles  in  this  country  as 
well  as  studies  of  Third  World 
socialist  counties,  problems  of 
imperialism  and  so  on.  Children 
regularly  visit  factories,  support 
strikes  and  march  on  picket  lines.  By 
meeting  and  identifying  with 
workers  in  their  community  on 
strike,  the  children  will  have  grounds 
to  question  the  elitist  assumption 
that  intellectual  labor  is  superior  to 
manual  labor. 

Problems  and  Limitations  of 
the  Che-Lumumba  School- 
Community 

Perhaps  the  most  important 
problem  that  the  school-community 
has  faced  in  its  nine-year  history  is  its 
ongoing  economic  crisis.8 
Foundations  are  simply  not 
interested  in  funding  a  radical 
school  with  explicit  socialist,  anti- 
imperialist,  anti-racist  and  anti-sexist 
values.  The  parents  cannot  pay 
tuition.  Most  are  poor  and 
overextended.  The  constant 


22/Quest 


fundraising  of  the  most  labor 
intensive  sort  is  exhausting.  The 
school  constantly  hovers  near 
bankruptcy,  and  the  tension  this 
engenders  exacerbates  political 
disagreements  within  the 
community. 

The  vagueness  of  the  school's 
general  stand  against  racism,  sexism 
and  classism  has  raised  conflicts 
over  relative  priorities  in  attacking 
these  issues.  One  example  of  such  a 
conflict  occurred  around  the  issue 
of  working  class  history  and 
solidarity.  Black  nationalist  parents 
could  agree  that  the  school  should 
oppose  classism.  Nonetheless,  they 
disagreed  with  an  emphasis  on 
working  class  struggles,  particularly 
labor  union  struggles,  on  the 
grounds  that  many  unions  in 
American  history  have  defended 
white  workers'  privileges  at  the 
expense  of  black  workers.  Guilt- 
tripping  was  used  as  a  tactic  to 
attack  white  Marxist  parents' 
positions  on  these  matters. 

A  similar  problem  occurred 
around  the  topic  of  sexism.  Some  of 
the  parents  were  willing  to  agree  to 
the  general  principle  that  the  school 
should  attack  sexism,  but  balked 
when  it  came  to  educating  the 
children  about  nitty  gritty  issues  like 
the  right  of  women  to  reproductive 
freedom.  These  parents  did  not  want 
to  process  questions  of  male 
domination  in  the  group  or  the 
special  problems  faced  by  single 
mothers.  It  was  only  when  the  three 
most  vocal  black  nationalist  parents 
left  the  community  that  this 


problem  was  resolved.  Last  year  the 
older  children  had  an  intensive  sex 
educational  course  where  all  these 
issues  were  discussed. 

Most  of  the  Third  World  women  in 
the  group  do  not  define  themselves 
as  feminist.  They  worry  that  raising 
the  issues  of  sexism  will  weaken 
their  black  or  Hispanic  community 
identification  in  favor  of 
connections  with  the  predominantly 
white  feminist  community.  An 
important  source  of  ambivalence 
about  feminism  is  the  existence  of  a 
strong  lesbian  separatist  community 
in  the  Amherst-Northampton  area,  a 
community  whose  politics  in 
practice  are  seen  to  exclude 
effective  organizing  around  issues  of 
racism,  classism  and  imperalism. 

Another  important  political 
disagreement  has  been  the  analysis 
of  race.  Members  have  felt  a  need  to 
build  a  strong  sense  of  black  pride, 
of  identification  with  African  roots. 
The  problem  is  that  most  of  the 
children  in  the  school  are  brown,  and 
their  parents  white  or  mixed.  The 
separatist  tendencies  of  black 
nationalism  tend  to  put  strains  on 
brown  children  who  identify  with 
both  black  and  white  communities 
and/or  see  themselves  in  the  middle. 

Although  the  group  uses  the 
techniques  of  criticism/self-criticism 
to  deal  with  parent-child 
relationships,  it  has  been  wary  of 
including  discussions  of  the 
problems  of  couples.  In  part  this  is 
because  members  feel  the  right  to 
privacy  in  this  area,  and  in  part 
because  no  one  has  been  brave 


Che-Lumumba  School/23 


enough  to  start  the  process  in  the 
group  by  bringing  up  personal 
issues.  This  indicates  a  general 
problem  for  revolutionary  family- 
communities.  Groups  will  be  loathe 
to  deal  with  ingrained  values  which 
aren't  obviously  connected  to  the 
central  work  around  which  the 
families  are  focused. 

Currently  only  one  parent  in  the 
Che-Lumumba  school-community  is 
gay,  and  that  person  is  a  white 
lesbian  feminist.  The  divisiveness  in 
the  school  around  feminist  issues 
has  made  it  politically  difficult  for 
this  member  to  raise  issues 
concerned  with  heterosexism.  In 
part  this  is  because  her  priority  is 
feminist  issues.  Nonetheless,  she  has 
struggled  privately  with  many  of  the 
members,  including  the  children, 
around  anti-gay  attitudes  as  they 
arise. 

Although  the  school  collects 
tuition  on  a  sliding  scale,  it  has  not 
dealt  with  more  radical  proposals 
for  economic  sharing,  e.g.  collective 
funds  for  clothes,  food,  to  send 
children  to  summer  camp  or  to  help 
subsidize  low  income  members  for 
rent  payments.  Probably  the  major 
drawback  to  the  idea  of  economic 
sharing  in  the  school  is  that  there 
really  isn't  much  surplus  to  share. 
Economic  sharing  remains  an 
important  concept  for  those  family- 
communities  in  which  it  could  make 
a  substantial  difference  to  perceived 
class  inequalities  in  the  group. 

Single  mothers  in  the  school  have 
had  an  especially  difficult  situation. 
They  were  less  likely  to  be  able  to 


attend  as  many  school  functions  as 
other  parents  because  of  their 
"double  shift"  problem. 
Furthermore,  many  were  not  easily 
able  to  fully  reciprocate  shared 
childcare  arrangements  after  school 
because  of  their  demanding 
schedules.  A  higher  proportion  of 
children  from  these  households 
involved  school  discipline  problems, 
particularly  among  the  boys.  At  first 
members  tended  to  scapegoat  these 
parents  because  of  the  extra 
responsibilities  their  membership 
placed  on  the  others.  Recently, 
however,  the  school-community  has 
improved  its  consciousness  by 
becoming  more  aware  of  the  general 
problems  single  mothers  face. 

In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to 
suggest  another  model  of  a 
revolutionary  family-community 
that  could  be  explored  with  differing 
intensities  by  those  who  have  neither 
the  resources  nor  the  core  of 
dedicated  parents  with  common 
values  to  run  an  alternative 
community  school.  This  is  a 
community  created  with  the  help  of 
a  parents'  support  group,  which 
might  start  out  of  a  parent-teacher 
organization,  a  women's  center  or  a 
community  center.  The  parents' 
support  group  might  begin  as  a 
support  group  for  single  parents  or 
for  Third  World  parents  or  for 
lesbian  mothers  or  for  socialist 
parents.  Once  the  group  is  set  up 
and  meets  regularly  in 
consciousness-raising  and  mutual 
support  sessions,  members  of  the 
group  may  coalesce  their  values  and 


24/Quest 


Che-Lumumba  School/25 


decide  on  a  more  permanent 
commitment  to  a  revolutionary 
family-community.  We  need  to 
experiment  in  as  many  ways  as 
possible  and  with  as  many 
communities  as  possible  in  creating 
revolutionary  family-communities, 
structures  we  will  need  for  the  long 
haul  ahead  toward  a  socialist- 
feminist  revolution. 

Acknowledgements.  I  want  to  thank  Keitha 
Fine,  Connie  Kruger  and  Aylette  jenness  for 
their  valuable  editorial  help  and  content 
suggestions.  Thanks  secondly  to  the  Che- 
Lumumba  School  for  the  model  and  for 
providing  an  important  community  for  myself 
and  my  family.  Finally,  thanks  to  the  socialist 
and  feminist  communities  in  Amherst  for 


political  values,  theoretical  frameworks  and 
personal  support. 

Ann  Ferguson  is  a  lesbian  socialist- 
feminist  who  teaches  Philosophy  and 
Women's  Studies  at  the  University  of 
Mass.  She  is  divorced,  has  a  ten  year 
old  interracial  daughter,  and  lives  in  a 
household  with  another  lesbian  and 
her  daughter.  She  has  been  a  member 
•of  the  Che-Lumumba  School 
Collective  for  4  years,  is  a  member  of 
MAP  (Marxist  Activist  Philosophers 
group)  and  a  Socialist-Feminist 
Collective.  She  has  written  several 
articles  on  Capitalism  and  Patriarchy 
and  is  currently  at  work  on  a  book  on 
Women's  Culture. 


Notes 

'All  the  statistics  in  this  article  are  from  the 
U.S.  Statistical  Abstract,  1977  as  quoted  in 
"Who  is  the  Real  Family?",  Ms.,  Aug.  1978. 
The  1 5.9  percent  figure  does  not  include 
couples  who  do  not  have  children  living  with 
them,  or  families  where  the  wife  works  part 
or  full-time  outside  the  home. 

2My  general  concept  of  "revolutionary 
family-community"  is  derived  both  from  the 
examples  of  revolutionary  communes  in  the 
first  part  of  the  Russian  Revolution  (cf .  W. 
Reich,  The  Sexual  Revolution,  Simon  and 
Schuster,  N ..,  1974)  and  from  Gramsci's  idea, 
in  The  Prison  Notebooks,  that  revolutionaries 
should  create  counter  cultural  hegemonic 
structures  to  build  support  for  revolutionary 
consciousness  —  a  cultural 
revolution  —  before  the  economic  and 
political  revolution  could  occur. 

3Mary  Wollstonecraft  calls  attention  to  this 
inconsistency  in  the  Individualist  ideal.  In  A 
Vindication  of  the  Rights  of  Women  she 
argues  for  an  ideal  of  human  nature  for  both 
men  and  women. 


4Ann  Ferguson,  "Women  as  a  New 
Revolutionary  Class  in  the  U.S." 

5Jacques  Donzelot,  The  Policing  of  Families, 
Pantheon,  NY.,  1980;  Mary  Mcintosh,  "The 
State  and  the  Oppression  of  Women"  in  A. 
Kuhn  and  A.  Wolpe,  eds.  Feminism  and 
Materialism,  Routledge  and  Kegan  Paul, 
London,  1978;  and  E.  Wilson,  Women  and  the 
Welfare  State,  Tavistock,  London,  1977. 

6The  cases  that  follow  are  somewhat 
fictionalized  composites  of  the  actual 
families  which  have  been  involved  in  the 
school  and  do  not  represent  any  one  existing 
family. 

7J.  Flax,  "The  Conflict  between  Nurturance 
and  Autonomy  in  Mother/Daughter 
Relationships,"  Feminist  Studies,  V.  4,  No.  2, 
June,  1978. 

8At  present  writing,  September,  1980,  the 
school  faces  a  severe  economic  crisis.  The 
school  cannot  be  run  as  a  full-time 
alternative  this  fall.  It  will  run  as  an  after 
school  program  for  the  children  and  other 
interested  people  this  year  while  funds  are 
being  sought. 


26/Quest 


Ruminations 
of  a  Feminist 

in  China 


Editor's  Introduction 

Those  of  us  who  live  outside  of  the  People's  Republic  of  China  are  curious 
about  the  feelings  and  position  of  women  living  there.  We  are  dubious  of  the 
accounts  presented  by  Western  journalists  and  search  for  someone  who  can 
give  us  a  clearer  picture.  With  this  in  mind,  I  wrote  to  a  friend  living  in  Peking, 
Vera  Schwarcz,  who  had  been  a  professor  of  mine  for  three  years  in  college, 
and  who  was  now  doing  research  at  Peking  University's  Literature 
Department  Through  years  of  work  and  friendship,  Schwarcz  and  I  often 
discussed  feminism  and  revolution,  as  well  as  the  interconnection  between 
personal  and  social  change.  Our  dialogue  grew  through  classes  and  my  senior 
thesis.  Eager  for  it  to  continue,  I  wrote  and  asked  her  to  submit  an  article  on 
women  in  China  for  Quest. 

My  questions  to  her  were  broad  questions  that  sought  to  understand  the 
experience  of  Chinese  women.  I,  like  most  Americans  living  so  far  from  China, 
viewed  her  privileged  stay  in  China  as  an  experience  bestowing  expertise.  In 
this  article,  she  addresses  the  questions  I  raised,  but  states  that  they  are  the 
personal  impressions  of  a  temporary  foreign  resident  in  Peking,  not  those  of 
an  expert:  "many  tales  have  been  spread  about  my  stay  in  China,  my  access 
there,  simply  out  of  fantasy,  unconscious  eagerness  about  all  that  is 
associated  with  that  faraway  place.  Now,  back  home,  I  feel  constantly 
apologetic,  yet  militant  about  the  tiny,  subjective,  tenuous  observations  I've 
brought  home,  rather  than  the  grand  syntheses  and  pontifications  somehow 
expected  after  such  access. " 

Schwarcz  wrote  this  article  during  the  last  of  her  sixteen  hectic  months  in 
Peking.  Her  desire  to  pay  attention  to  Chinese  life  during  that  period 
prevented  her  from  writing  a  more  reflective  piece.  It  is,  in  many  ways,  a 
fragment  of  conversation  about  feminism  and  revolution  between  two 
friends.  Yet,  even  in  those  hurried  days,  she  found  the  time  to  talk  to  many  of 
her  friends  in  China  about  their  lives,  their  hopes  and  their  fears.  In  listening  to 
those  conversations,  we  can  perhaps  begin  to  dispel  our  ignorance  or  our 
assumptions  about  the  lives  of  women  in  China.  L.G. 

Ruminations  of  a  Feminist  in  China/27 


by  Vera  Schwarcz 

Before  I  came  to  China,  I  had 
more  absolute  beliefs  about 
feminism  and  revolution  than  I  do 
now;  I  believed  then  that  what 
mattered  about  revolution  were  the 
big  questions  and  I  expected  to  find 
the  answers  inspiring.  When  I  knew 
less  about  the  concrete  social 
changes  in  the  East,  it  had  been 
easier  to  conjecture  about  necessary 
changes  in  the  West. 

I  was  rivetted  by  symbols  before 
my  arrival.  Three  decades  of 
American  isolation  from  the 
unfolding  process  of  Chinese 
socialism  had  created  a  strange, 
myopic  generation  of  Chinese 
specialists,  myself  included.  We 
focused  on  surface  ripples 
discernablefrom  a 
distance  —  ripples  which  we 
assumed  signaled  huge  changes 
below.  Ignorant  of  the  gritty  present, 
we  became  prophets  of  future 
trends.  Sometimes  we  were  right, 
more  often  wrong.  It  is  not  surprising 
then,  that  our  questions  about 
Chinese  women  floated  somewhere 
in  the  haze  between  bewildering 
changes  in  clothing  fashion  and 
unreliable  labor  statistics. 

A  year  ago,  I  was  more  worried 
about  the  "roles"  and  "functions"  of 
Chinese  women  than  I  am  now.  Like 
many  American  feminists  steeped  in 
the  psychological  jargon  of 
contemporary  culture,  I  had  become 
a  watchdog  of  relationships  — 
constantly  squeezing  meaning  out 
of  anything  "interpersonal."  Thus,  I 


28/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


came  to  China  full  of  big,  loud 
questions  about  women's  self- 
perceptions,  about  their  quest  for 
self-fulfillment.  It  has  taken  me  a 
long  time  to  be  able  to  see  and  to 
read  the  restrained  gestures  through 
which  Chinese  women  show  their 
deeper  feelings.  In  1977,  after  a  17- 
day  visit  to  six  Chinese  cities  with  a 
U.S./China  Friendship  Study  Tour,  I 
went  home  with  a  predictably 
optimistic  slide  show  about  the  lives 
of  Chinese  women.  The  only 
misgivings  I  remember  voicing 
publicly  were  about  the  sexist  rage  I 
had  seen  in  the  cartoons  against  the 
"Gang  of  Four"  —  especially  those 
mocking  Mao  Tse-tung's  wife, 
Chiang  Ch'ing.1 

Now,  after  sixteen  months  of 
living  in  Peking,  after  having 
traveled  through  seventeen 
provinces  from  Mongolia  to 
Sinkiang,  I  have  become  much  more 
tenuous  about  what  I  know  and  can 
say  about  China.  Once  the 
complexity  of  Chinese  life  becomes 
palpable  through  daily  life,  one 
cannot  help  but  be  more  modest 
about  calling  the  shots;  it  is 
becoming  harder  to  make 
generalizations  about  trends  I  sense 
around  me.  Residence  in  China  does 
not  bestow  expertise  about  Chinese 
life.  Too  many  officially  proclaimed 
and  culturally  sanctioned  barriers 
still  exist  between  foreigners  and 
ordinary  Chinese  people  (even 
though  rumors  about  limitations  on 
contacts  between  foreigners  and 
Chinese  have  been  far  worse  than 
the  reality  I  have  known  here).  At 


best,  the  outsider  can  glimpse  the 
inside  workings  of  Chinese  society 
through  friendships  —  intimacies 
which  are  still  risk-laden  for  our 
Chinese  friends.  One's  perceptions, 
therefore,  are  fragmented  and 
subjective.  This  makes  it  difficult  to 
answer  broad  questions  about 
Chinese  women. 

Having  found  no  leak-proof 
generalization,  and  having  been 
chastened  by  the  search  for 
scientific  truth  among  my  Chinese 
friends  who  are  trying  to  get  out  of  a 
decade  of  half  truths  and  idealistic 
distortions,  I  decided  to  share  some 
assorted  impressions.  To  be  simply 
personal,  however,  seems  too 
narrow,  an  evasion  of  such 
encompassing  questions  as,  "What 
can  feminists/socialists  learn  from 
China?"  What  follows  below  are 
some  subjective  reflections  on 
objective  problems.  I  have  grouped 
my  observations  around  four 
themes:  Revolution,  Clothes, 
Courtships  and  Policy.  At  the  end,  I 
have  tried  to  focus  on  what  can  be 
learned  from  China. 

First,  some  words  about  my 
Chinese  friends  (I  am  thinking  here 
only  of  my  closest  friends  among  the 
many  whom  it  has  been  my  good 
fortune  to  be  able  to  meet  this  year). 
They  range  in  age  from  a  26-year-old 
woman  to  an  89-year-old  man.  They 
all  would  consider  themselves 
feminists  and  I  would  have  to  agree. 
But  their  reasons  for  —  and  ways 
of  —  championing  women's 
liberation  took  some  getting  used  to. 


Feminist  in  China/29 


For  example,  it  took  me  many 
months  to  get  over  the  shock 
sparked  by  my  youngest  friend's 
conviction,  spilled  casually  one 
afternoon  over  tea.  A  Communist 
Party  member,  one  of  the  few 
earnest,  confident,  selfless, 
hardworking  youths  I  knew  in  a 
generation  of  "worker-peasant- 
soldier"  students  embittered  by  the 
proclaimed  "failure"  of  the  Cultural 
Revolution,  she  told  me:  "Men  are 
naturally  smarter  than  women,  you 
know.  So  no  matter  how  hard  we 
study,  the  guys  will  do  better  than 
us."  Since  it  seemed  too  rash  to  cut 
off  our  friendship  because  of  this 
gaping  gulf  in  our  views,  I  pressed  on 
for  her  reasons.  She  answered  with  a 
long  discourse  on  the  physical 
differences  between  men  and 
women  and  the  inevitable 
weakening  of  the  intellect  which 
sets  in  with  menstruation,  views 
widely  shared  by  other  educated, 
bright  Chinese  women.  This  idea  of 
"natural  inequality,"  however,  has 
not  prevented  them  from  working 
very  hard. 

Among  my  middle-aged  friends,  I 
was  first  struck  by  their  traditional 
attitude  toward  marriage  and  the 
family.  Members  of  the  radical, 
idealistic  generation,  which  was 
educated  around  1949  and  was 
active  in  the  socialist  construction 
of  the  early  1950s,  they  had  worked, 
loved  and  married  according  to  the 
highest  principles  of  Communism. 
Later,  after  I  heard  the  full  range  of 
their  horror  stories  about  the 
Cultural  Revolution,  I  came  to 


understand  how  tender  and  hard- 
won  was  their  married  quiescence 
after  a  decade  during  which  one 
spouse  or  the  other  was  denounced, 
arrested,  beaten,  sent  to  the 
countryside,  scorned  by  children 
and  colleagues.  Those  couples,  now 
in  their  fifties  and  sixties,  who  stayed 
together  in  the  face  of  pressures  to 
divorce  and  thus  save  the  skin  of  at 
least  one  of  the  partners,  have  today 
a  closeness  and  resiliency  I  have 
come  to  admire. 

Perhaps  the  most  thoroughgoing 
feminist  among  my  friends  is  the  89- 
year-old  philosopher  who  belongs  to 
the  unique  generation  of  "May 
Fourth"  intellectuals  —  a  group  of 
westernizing  patriots  active  around 
Peking  University  in  1919.  They  were 
close  enough  to  the  feudal  past  to 
want  to  lessen  its  grip  on  the 
consciousness  of  men  and  women 
alike.  They  read  Ibsen  boldly,  loved 
widely  and  ended  up  marrying 
tamely.  These  intellectuals  helped 
create  the  mental  preconditions  of  a 
revolution  which  later  denied  the 
usefulness  of  intellectuals.  Now, 
recognized  as  valuable  once  again, 
they  survive  as  awkward  reminders 
of  unfinished  tasks:  a  scientific 
mentality  yet  to  become  pervasive; 
democracy  yet  to  be  implemented 
even  in  matters  of  law; 
emancipation  of  women  that  has  far 
to  go  beyond  the  economic  gains  so 
highly  publicized  these  days. 

Attitudes  Toward  the 
Revolution 

What  improvement  or  worsening 


30/Quest 


in  the  condition  of  women  has 
occurred  as  a  result  of  the 
Revolution?  This  is  the  inevitable, 
big  question  which  feminists  from 
abroad  bring  to  China.  I  have  no 
answer  since  I  still  share  the  doubts 
of  the  questioners.  I  can  only  remind 
American  feminists  that  revolution, 
at  least  in  China,  was  not  a  moment 
in  1949  but  a  process  begun  in  1919. 
Thus,  we  have  yet  to  refine  our 
questions  according  to  the 
complexity  of  the  situation  which 
took  shape  differently  in  the  cities 
and  in  the  countryside,  before  and 
after  liberation.  After  living  in 
Peking  a  year,  I  became  intensely 
aware  that  "revolution"  around 
here,  now,  refers  nearly  always  to 
the  Cultural  Revolution  of  the  1960s. 

There  are  at  least  two  reasons  why 
it  is  difficult  to  think  systematically 
about  the  Cultural  Revolution  these 
days.  First,  it  has  become  quietly 
and  thoroughly  mixed  up  with  the 
1970s  rule  of  the  "Gang  of 
Four"  —  the  condemnations  of  the 
latter  spilling  imperceptibility  over 
the  entire  duration  and  purpose  of 
the  former.  Second,  the  current 
regime  in  China  finds  the  topic  of 
the  Cultural  Revolution  and  the 
legacy  of  Mao  Tse-Tung  too  explo- 
sive a  topic  of  discussion  —  efforts  to 
evaluate  critically  and  thoroughly 
the  Communist  rule  of  the  last  20 
years  have  been  shelved. 

More  proximately,  the  era  of  the 
"Gang  of  Four"  looms  as  a  warning 
about  the  abuse  of  feminism  by 
leftist  ideologues.2  It  is  harder  tiT^r 
sympathize  with  Chiang  Ch'ing  thaifr 


it  was  before  I  came  to  live  in  China. 
Through  my  experiences  here,  I  have 
come  to  believe  that  her  selfish 
pursuit  of  power  corroded  the 
credibility  of  women  demanding 
improvement  in  their  own  positions. 
I  believe  that  she  spoke  for  all  and 
maneuvered  for  herself  —  not  unlike 
careerist  women  espousing  feminist 
ideals  on  the  rush  up  the  corporate 
ladder.  It  should  not  surprise  us  that 
the  slogans  of  equality  fit  so 
comfortably  in  the  mouths  of  those 
who  want  a  bigger  share  of  the  pie 
for  themselves.  It  is  difficult, 
however,  to  call  their  bluff  without 
backing  down  from  the  demands  of 
justice  for  all  women  which  is  at  the 
heart  of  feminism.  Most  Chinese 
women  appear  not  to  have  been 
taken  in  by  Chiang  Ch'ing's  claim  to 
speak  for  them  all.  They  are  relieved 
by  her  demise  but  unsure  of  what  to 
do  or  say  next.  Getting  rid  of  Mao's 
wife  may,  in  retrospect,  appear  as 
the  easy  part.  Assessing  her 
mentality  and  its  impact  will  be  the 
tougher  task.  It  is  necessary  to  ask 
why  she,  who  claimed  to  be  a 
revolutionary  feminist,  lapsed  so 
easily  into  traditional  notions  of 
grandeur  (For  example,  she  closed 
down  one  of  Peking's  largest  parks, 
supposedly  to  ride  her  horses 
undisturbed). 

We  all  need  to  examine  why  the 
feudal  (or  capitalist)  mentality 
surfaces  so  regularly,  so  forcefully, 
among  rebels  against  feudalism  (or 
capitalism).  After  living  in  China,  I 
have  become  more  aware  of  the 
heavy,  mental  baggage  carried 


Feminist  in  China/31 


around  here.  From  afar,  we  have 
lofty  words  about  this  long, 
continuous  civilization.  From  close 
up,  feudalism  is  a  complex  burden. 
Feminists,  like  other  revolutionaries, 
have  to  wrestle  with  its  pervasive 
presence  in  society  and  in 
themselves.  I  can  make  no 
predictions  about  the  outcome  of 
the  struggle.  I  can  only  report  that  it 
has  begun. 

Changing  Dress  Codes 

Does  the  return  of  feminine  dress 
herald  a  return  to  patriarchy?  A  new 
form  of  it?  In  China,  there  is  no 
capitalist  economy  (yet)  which 
pushes  new  clothing  fads  for  its  own 
profit  reasons.  There  is,  however,  a 
mild  "revolution"  in  attire.  After 
thirty  years  of  austerity,  of  blue  and 
grey  pant  suits  necessitated  by 
scarcity  for  two  decades  and  by 
imposed  asceticism  during  the 
Cultural  Revolution,  the  people 
have  been  given  the  go-ahead  to 
prettify  themselves.  "We  all  have  an 
innate  quest  for  the  beautiful,"  a 
friend  said  recently,  "and  we  all 
show  it  in  different  ways.  Little  kids 
no  longer  have  to  look  absolutely 
alike,  each  a  copy  of  the  People's 
Liberation  Army  soldier  in  green 
fatigues  and  red-starred  cap.  Now 
mothers  knit  colorful  socks,  hats, 
sweaters  with  all  kinds  of  patterns. 
Young  girls,  who  were 
indistinguishable  from  boys  before, 
now  wear  flowery  jackets  and  more 
shapely  pants.  Even  I  like  to  put  on  a 
bright  blouse  once  in  a  while  or  wear 
a  flowery  scarf."  The  word  "even"  in 


32/Quest 


my  friend's  description  meant  to 
shyly  mask  the  qualms  and 
pleasures  of  a  woman  in  her  forties. 

From  what  I  see  around  me, 
Chinese  women  are  trying  to  show 
outwardly  their  inward  difference 
from  men.  They  regard  these 
differences  as  natural,  delightful, 
totally  unrelated  to  socially 
perpetuated  inequality.  It  is  worth 
mentioning  the  Communist  Party's 
long  standing  attention  to  the 
different  needs  of  women.  From  a 
theater  director  who  had  been  a 
young  female  activist  in  Yenan  in 
1942,  I  learned  that  their  allowance 
had  been  double  that  of  the  men  to 
cover  their  expenses  for  extra  toilet 
paper  during  menstruation.  Today, 
in  state  enterprises,  I  gather  that 
women  workers  get  one  extra  yuan 
per  month  for  "haircare"  —  to  pay 
for  a  visit  to  a  barber  shop,  which  is 
required  to  keep  up  the  permanent 
waves  now  officially  encouraged. 

Yet  Western  feminists  continue  to 
be  troubled  by  these  womanly 
fashions.  There  is  a  big  difference,  it 
seems  to  me,  in  the  implications  of 
imposed  feminine  dress  before  full 
economic  equality-as  in  the 
West  —  or  after,  as  it  is  being 
voluntarily  tried  now  in  China.  I 
sense  something  proud,  deliberate, 
in  the  flash  of  colored  nylon  artfully 
tied  around  the  necks  of  Chinese 
women  these  days.  These  scarves, 
the  most  pervasive  sign  of  femininity, 
are  a  far  cry  from  the  craze  for 
Western  fashions  I  gather  is  being 
reported  in  the  American  media 
about  Chinese  women.  It  would  be 


Feminist  in  China/33 


hard  to  identify  the  manipulating 
fingers  of  patriarchy,  new  or  old,  in 
the  tentative  ways  my  friends  decide 
to  get  a  hair  permanent,  line  up  at 
stores  for  limited  supplies  of  flowery 
socks,  and  deliberate  for  days  about 
walking  out  in  public  with  their  two- 
inch  "high"  heeled  shoes.  In  the  end, 
there  is  a  quiet  confidence  in 
looking  "nice"  —  in  being  noticed 
approvingly  by  many,  rather  than 
hankering  after  the  undivided 
attention  of  one  man,  the  situation 
with  which  we  are  so  familiar  back 
home. 

Courtship  and  Marriage 

And  yet,  there  are  other,  objective 
pressures  crowding  in  on  women's 
choices  for  self  adornment.  "It  is 
harder  to  find  a  husband  than  to 
become  a  Communist  Party 
member,"  bemoans  the  mother  of 
my  26-year-old,  still  unmarried 
friend.  She  is  speaking  about  the 
plight  of  young  women  in  large 
cities  whose  numbers  have  swelled 
due  to  family  efforts  to  bring  them 
back  from  the  countryside  where 
they  were  sent  during  the  Cultural 
Revolution.  In  Peking,  there  is  now  a 
ratio  of  six  women  to  four  men. 
Being  fewer,  the  young  men  are 
seen,  and  see  themselves,  as 
precious  indeed.  In  a  society  in 
which  the  idea  of  not  getting 
married  hardly  crosses  the  minds  of 
any  young  people  —  or  if  it  does,  it  is 
quickly  banished  by  gossip,  parental 
pressure,  job  discrimination  — this 
ratio  becomes  forbidding.  Young 
women  are  forced  to  compete  with 


each  other,  to  settle  for  what  comes, 
to  work  a  little  harder  at  embodying 
traditional  images  of  girlfriend  and 
wife. 

"There  has  been  a  throwback  to 
the  feudal  saying  that  'a  man  must 
have  talent,  a  women  a  pretty  face/ 
reports  my  friend  who  has  not  yet 
succeeded  in  finding  a  boyfriend.  She 
is  short,  plain  looking  and  too  busy 
with  work  to  spend  time 
bedecking  herself.  A  man  she  was 
introduced  to  recently  made  up  his 
mind  negatively  after  the  first 
meeting.  "There  are  few  guys  around 
these  days  who  will  sit  and  talk  and 
bother  to  find  out  how  you  think,, 
how  you  view  society,  work,"  she 
remarks  good  natu redly.  I,  on  the 
other  hand,  have  become  more 
pessimistic.  I  wonder  if  the  other 
side  of  the  traditional  saying  — that 
'ability  in  women  is  more 
unbecoming  than  lack  of  talent  in 
a  man'  —  has  not  already  come  into 
social  practice.  With  their  field  of 
choice  greatly  expanded,  I  see 
young  men  choosing  women  who 
are  conventionally  pretty,  socially 
unthreatening,  intellectually  less 
demanding. 

The  story  told  from  the  men's 
side,  however,  sounds  very  different. 
They  complain  that  present 
marriage  arrangements  have 
become  feudal  and  materialistic 
again,  with  brides  demanding 
specific,  elaborate  conditions: 
apartment,  sofa,  lounge  chairs, 
television,  young  parents  and  no 
siblings  so  as  to  have  less  to  take 
care  of  later  on.  At  a  recent 


34/Quest 


photography  exhibit,  a  large  crowd 
gathered  around  a  blow-up  of  a 
pretty  woman's  face,  her  sweet, 
sensual  smile  floating  over  a  plush, 
modernized  bedroom,  television, 
refrigerator,  bicycle,  tape  recorder, 
foreign  watch,  etc.  It  looked  like  a 
skillful  advertisement  in  capitalist 
society  and  was  entitled  "I  love 
you/'  Talking  to  one  of  the  artists, 
following  up  on  popular  jokes  about 
rapacious  brides,  I  came  to 
understand  a  little  better  the 
underside  of  pressures  which  men 
confront  in  a  society  which  still 
views  them  as  providers.  To  win  and 
keep  the  affection  of  young  (urban) 
women  these  days,  men  feel 
compelled  to  give  things  beyond 
their  means.  "Soon  the  government 
won't  have  to  make  rules  about  late 
marriage,"  complains  a  young  friend 
of  mine,  (according  to  current  law 
men  cannot  get  married  before  26 
and  women  before  25)  "guys  will  be 
saving  money  until  they're  30  before 
they  can  satisfy  the  girl's  demands." 
So  why  are  young  women  asking 
for  so  many  things  these  days,  I 
asked  my  women  friends.  Older 
ones  answered  with  a  tirade  against 
the  surprising  relapse  in  social 
consciousness:  before,  the  parents 
auctioned  off  daughters  for  material 
rewards;  today,  young  women 
themselves  are  making  emotional 
affairs  into  business  transactions. 
Why  do  they  hanker  for  things  so 
badly,  I  press  on?  Because  of  the 
trauma  of  the  Cultural  Revolution, 
answered  my  least  dogmatic  friend, 
who  has  a  daughter  in  her  late 


twenties,  and  who  is  grappling  to 
understand  her  daughter's  icy, 
calculating  approach  to  love  and 
marriage.  She  tells  me:  "Young 
women  have  not  been  only 
materially  deprived,  like  the  rest  of 
the  nation.  In  addition,  they  went 
through  a  decade  in  which  all 
support  was  torn  down  —  family, 
school,  work  unit.  They  (especially 
educated  youths  sent  down  to  the 
countryside),  were  left  exposed, 
vulnerable,  fending  for  themselves. 
The  weakest  were  done  in  (pushed 
around,  raped,  killed)  by  some 
ruthless  cadres.  The  toughest  among 
them  survived  by  learning  to  barter 
for  their  security." 

It  is  difficult  to  analyze  just  yet 
this  historically  engendered  retreat 
into  materialism  and  family.  It  is 
harder  still  to  explain  this  quest 
when  the  economic  and  legal 
foundations  for  women's 
independence  have  been 
institutionalized  so  firmly.  The  mind, 
as  Mao  Tse-tung  warned,  changes 
much  more  slowly  than  matter.  He 
did  notforsee,  however,  how  quickly 
the  mind  could  regress  when  the 
heart  is  injured.  China,  today, 
beneath  the  cheerful  posters,  which 
promote  modernization  and  urge 
the  end  of  leftist  dogmatism,  is  a 
shocked  and  pained  nation. 
Publicly,  the  disillusionment  goes 
largely  unmentioned;  privately,  it  is 
buried  in  the  haste  of  building  safe 
arrangements  for  when  disaster 
might  strike  again.  My  friends  here, 
women  and  men  alike,  hope  for  the 
best  — for  China's  rapid,  peaceful 


Feminist  in  China/35 


advancement  —  and  prepare  for  the 
worst,  another  round  of  dogmatic 
authoritarianism.  "Speak  bitterness" 
sessions,  once  used  to  stir  up 
consciousness  about  the  bad  old 
days  so  as  to  taste  more  gratefully 
the  fruits  of  new  life  under 
socialism,  are  not  encouraged  today. 
The  bad,  old  days  are  seen  as  not  so 
long  ago.  Expressions  of  negativity, 
criticism  of  all  sorts,  are  actively 
discouraged  by  a  regime  which 
emphasizes  stability  and  unity. 
Women,  along  with  all  others  such 
as  dissident  writers  and  contentious 
workers,  are  learning  to  keep  their 
peace,  not  so  much  because  they 
are  kept  down,  but  because  there 
seems  to  be  little  point  in  bucking 
the  huge  structure  of  feudalism.  The 
more  its  shadow  is  cast  over  the 
bureaucracy  (in  the  form  of  rampant 
privilege  and  corruption)  and  over 
the  family  (in  terms  of  the  drudgery 
of  women's  labor  and  their  expected 
self-sacrifice),  the  less  it  is  seen  as 
shakeable.  "A  legacy  which  is  more 
than  a  thousand  years  old  cannot  be 
changed  overnight,"  muses  an 
intellectual  who  has  given  up 
counting  the  nights,  since  he 
believes  that  thirty  years  of 
Communist  rule  have  done  little  to 
change  feudal  mentality. 

Encouragement  of  One-Child 
Families 

And  yet  the  foundations  of 
China's  feudal  mentality  might  be 
shaken  sooner  than  expected.  The 
recently  announced  policy  to  limit 
families  to  one  child  is  an 


unprecedented  measure  in  world 
history,  with  radical  implications  for 
social  life  here.  At  first  advertised 
with  material  incentives  — longer 
maternity  leave,  monthly  bonus, 
free  schooling,  housing 
advantages  —  this  policy  was  meant 
to  encourage  one-child  families. 
Now,  it  is  quickly  turning  out  to  be, 
in  certain  cities  at  least,  a  law 
against  having  a  second  child.  On 
the  face  of  it,  the  policy  seems 
draconian:  it  depends  on  harsh 
measures  such  as  forced  abortions 
beyond  the  third  month  and  allows 
the  state  unprecedented 
interference  in  private  life  (each 
work  supervisor  or  team  leader  is 
supposed  to  keep  the  menstruation 
charts  of  women  who  must  report 
their  first  and  last  date  of  each 
period). 

Underneath  the  drastic 
regulations,  however,  lies  a  more 
compassionate  reality,  as  I  was  able 
to  observe  in  a  local  health  center 
(the  neighborhood  clinic  in  charge  of 
population  control  procedures). 
During  my  weekly  wait  for  back 
massage  treatments,  I  had  witnessed 
many  birth  permission  requests. 
Once,  a  young  man  came  in  to  ask  if 
he  and  his  wife  could  have  a  second 
child  and  received  a  long  lecture 
when  it  was  discovered  that  his  first 
child  was  a  girl;  he  was  thus  showing 
a  feudal  preference  for  sons.  In  the 
end  he  was  signed  up,  provided  that 
they  waited  another  eleven  months 
until  they  had  met  the  old  legal 
requirement  of  four  years  separation 
between  two  children.  Another  time, 


36/Quest 


a  young  woman  in  her  fourth  month 
of  pregnancy  came  in  asking  for  a 
belated  "one-child  certificate"  (the 
card  which  ensures  that  the  family 
will  receive  appropriate  privileges). 
She  had  been  demobilized  from  the 
army  recently  and  had  been  unable 


to  get  the  certificate  from  the  work 
unit  in  charge  of  this  matter.  After  a 
long  harrangue  on  the  importance  of 
following  official  procedures,  about 
the  selfish  foolishness  of  seeing 
pregnancy  as  a  private  matter, 
she  was  given  the  I.D.  anyway. 


e?L*->Vl 


days     <*V     p^K»*vfcj     Vrtiwt^iry    '     w*.   w-enf-  J 


Feminist  in  China/37 


The  new  policy  limiting  families 
arose  out  of  China's  desperate 
struggle  against  overpopulation.  Not 
until  I  came  to  China  was  I  able  to 
fully  appreciate  how  heavy  a  chain 
of  numbers  — 1  billion  — can  weigh 
on  a  nation  trying  to  extricate  itself 
out  of  poverty  and  backwardness, 
and  how  great  the  leap  in 
production  must  be  in  order  to 
achieve  a  minimum  improvement  in 
living  standards.  Out  of  this  absolute 
necessity,  however,  seems  to  have 
grown  the  possibility  of  more  choice 
and  freedom  for  women.  Daughters- 
in-law,  who  might  not  have  been 
able  to  resist  family  pressure  to 
produce  several  children,  now  find 
welcome  refuge  in  the  strictness  of 
the  law.  Wives,  who  were  made  to 
feel  ashamed  if  their  first  child  was  a 
girl,  can  now  reject  their  husbands' 
demands  for  a  son  with  the 
confidence  of  the  policy  behind 
them.  These  optimistic  trends, 
however,  must  be  judged  in  the 
context  of  rumors  filtering  in  from 
the  countryside  that  female 
infanticide  is  on  the  rise  again  in  a 
setting  in  which  male  labor  power  is 
still  the  family's  best  insurance 
against  poverty  and  old  age. 

The  changes  in  family  life, 
women's  roles  and  personal 
relations  which  will  result  from  the 
new  policy  are  impossible  to 
anticipate  now.  We  can  only  guess 
about  the  opportunities  of 
fulfillment  for  both  parents  at  a  time 
when  their  material  and  emotional 
resources  are  no  longer  drained  by 
large  families.  We  must,  at  the  same 


time,  consider  the  future  burden  of 
four  aged  parents  on  two  offspring, 
whereas  now  the  responsibilities  of 
filiality  are  shared  by  several 
children  in  turn.  Most  unfathomable 
of  all,  is  a  Chinese  society  stripped 
of  its  affective  paradigm:  the  large 
family.  I,  for  one,  cannot  imagine 
the  warmth  and  caring  around  me, 
without  seeing  my  friends  as  siblings 
among  several  brothers  and  sisters, 
who  have  been  learning  to  adjust  to 
each  other's  needs  for  many 
generations. 

What  can  feminists/socialists 
learn  from  the  experiences  of 
Chinese  women?  Very  little,  if  by 
"learn"  we  mean  something  like  the 
Chinese  expression,  hsue-hsi  —  to 
emulate.  China  is  too  different,  too 
poor  and  too  backward  to  provide 
guidelines  for  our  tasks  in  the  United 
States.  Quite  a  bit  however,  if  we 
take  time  to  analyze  the  twists  and 
turns  of  the  Chinese  revolution;  if  we 
bother  to  look  for  something  other 
than  an  inspirational  epic  with  a 
straight  story  line.  By  learning  to  see 
and  accept  the  setbacks  in  China's 
road  to  socialism,  we  might  be 
better  prepared  to  accept  the  ones 
that  could  face  us  in  our  own  efforts. 
Feminists,  who  have  emphasized 
psychological  emancipation,  must 
be  prepared  to  pay  the  costs  of 
overlooking  the  reordering  of 
economic  relations,  which  must 
precede  any  meaningful  talk  of 
freedom.  As  the  Chinese  writer,  Lu 
Hsun  (Lu  Xun),  warned:  Ibsen's  Nora 
can  sound  mighty  noble  when  she 
rejects  her  religiously  ordained 


38/Quest 


duties  as  wife  and  mother  and  look 
very  pitiful  when  she  has  to  become 
a  whore  to  feed  herself.3  Socialists, 
who  have  dwelt  on  the  politics  of 
economic  equality  and  upon  the 
power  of  labor  to  save  women  from 
social  oppression,  have  a  sobering 
lesson  to  learn  from  the  enduring 
influence  of  feudalism  in 
contemporary  Chinese  life. 
Visionaries  of  all  sorts  must  reckon 
with  the  fact  that  the  last,  the 
toughest  obstacle  of  all,  is 
internalized  oppression.  After 
tearing  down  the  structures  which 
maim  us  we  will  still  find  in 
ourselves  both  master  and  slave.  The 
earlier  we  begin  the  revolution  of 
the  heart,  the  more  secure  will  be 
our  victories  in  the  social  realm. 
Throughout  the  long,  long  road 
ahead,  we  have  much  to  learn  from 
the  common  decency  and  human 
forbearance  with  which  Chinese 
women  and  men  continue  to  live 
and  struggle  with  each  other. 


Vera  Schwarcz  recently  completed 
a  16-month  stay  in  the  People's 
Republic  of  China  as  one  of  the  first 
seven  exchange  scholars  sponsored 
by  the  Committee  for  Scholarly 
Communications  with  the  PRC 
(National  Academy  of  Sciences). 
While  in  China  she  did  research  at 
Peking  University  for  an  upcoming 
book  on  the  May  Fourth  Movement 
of  1919:  Intellectuals  and 
Revolution  in  Modern  China.  She  is 
an  assistant  professor  of  history  at 
Wesleyan  University. 


Feminist  in  China/39 


Notes 

'Editor's  note:  Since  it  is  more  familiar  to 
American  readers,  the  Wade-Giles  system  for 
romanizing  Chinese  names  has  been  used, 
rather  than  the  newer  pin-yin  system. 
Editor's  note:  According  to  the  author,  many 
outspoken,  progressive  women  were  active 
in  the  Anti-Confucian  Campaign  (a  campaign 
in  the  early  1970s  which  criticized 
the  feudal  legacy  of  Confucian  ideology). 
Since  Mao's  death,  the  campaign  has  been 


attacked  as  an  attempt  by  the  "Gang  of 
Four"  to  push  through  an  ultra-leftist  political 
program.  Those  women  active  in  the 
campaign  were  scarred  by  this  change  of 
events.  As  a  result,  the  current  resistance 
against  the  feudal  mentality  has  been 
considerably  dampened. 

3See  Lu  Xun,  "What  Happens  After  Nora 
Leaves  Home,"  in  Silent  China:  Selected 
Writings  of  Lu  Xun,  ed.  and  trans,  by  Gladys 
Yang  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press, 
1973),  pp.  148-154. 


40/Quest 


Motherwort 

and 

Working  Mothers 

by  Natalie  J.  Sokoloff 

The  material  and  ideological  oppression  of  women  is  supported  by  the 
structure  of  the  work  women  do  with  and  through  their  bodies  and  their 
labor  —  bearing  and  rearing  children  in  society.  Motherhood  can  be 
understood  as  an  institutionally  organized  experience.1  It  is  neither  the 
bearing  nor  the  rearing  of  children  that  is  oppressive;  rather,  it  is  the 
institution  of  motherhood  as  organized  by  and  for  patriarchy  in  U.S. 
capitalism  that  makes  women  into  mothers  as  we  know  them.  It  is  therefore 
understandable  when  many  women  say  they  want  to  be  or  like  being 
mothers,  but  vehemently  dislike  the  institution  of  motherhood  as  it  is 
organized  in  our  soceity. 

The  Historical  Development  of  Motherhood  as  an  Institution 

The  responsibility  of  women  as  full-time  wives/mothers/homemakers  is  a 
uniquely  twentieth  century  idea  for  the  masses  of  women  in  the  U.S.  The 
effort  by  male  owners  of  industry,  male  workers,  and  male-dominated 
unions  in  the  19th  and  20th  centuries  to  make  market  work  "men's  work" 
and  the  unwaged  sphere  of  home  work  "women's  work"  was  manifest  in  the 
development  of  protective  legislation,  child  labor  laws,  intensified 
segregation  of  the  labor  force,  and  the  creation  of  the  family  wage.2  Prior  to 
the  institutionalization  of  the  family  wage  for  men  engaged  in  wage  labor, 
"public  opinion  expected  women  and  children  to  earn  at  least  sufficiently 
for  their  own  maintenance,  and  men's  wages  were  based  on  the  assumption 
that  they  did  so."3  The  family  wage  was  supposed  to  change  this  by 
providing  a  man  with  a  "wage  sufficient  to  allow  the  women  to  stay  home, 


The  article  is  adapted  from  Between  Money  and  Love:  The  Dialectics  of 
Women's  Home  and  Market  Work,  by  Natalie  J.  Sokoloff,  (New  York: 
Praeger    Special  Studies,  1980). 


Motherwork  and  Working  Mothers/41 


raise  children  and  maintain  the  family,  rather  than  having  all  members  of  the 
family  out  at  work."4 

The  historically  evolved  definition  of  the  personal  world  of  the  home  as 
women's  arena  and  of  the  social,  powerful  world  outside  as  men's,  allowed 
for  the  construction  of  the  institution  of  motherhood  as  we  understand  it 
today.  The  ideological  underpinning  for  this  belief  is  the  identity  of  women 
with  their  "natural"  role  in  the  family.  Most  of  all,  it  was  a  woman's  role  as 
childrearer  that  put  her,  and  kept  her,  in  the  home.  This  new  ideology 
emphasized  her  biological  features  — womb  and  breast  —  and  allegedly 
innate  maternal  instincts  for  the  social  role  of  mothering. 

Changes  in  the  role  of  women  as  full-time  mothers  occurred  "under  the 
guise  of  a  policy  toward  children."5  Culminating  in  the  progressive  era  (1900- 
191 7)  and  the  "doctrine  of  the  tender  years"  (in  the  1920's),  the  full-time 
work  of  motherhood  and  homemaking  was  assigned  to  women. 

Children,  no  longer  productive  members  of  their  families,  as  in 
agricultural  times  or  the  very  early  industrial  labor  market,  had  become  an 
economic  burden  to  their  parents.  Someone  had  to  take  care  of  them.  The 
capitalist  mode  of  production  needed  a  healthy,  well-disciplined  and  well- 
trained  current  and  future  labor  force.  In  addition,  in  the  19th  century,  men 
did  not  want  to  compete  with  the  masses  of  women  and  children  working  in 
the  market.  At  the  same  time,  women  at  home  provided  men  with  someone 
to  take  care  of  their  household  needs  to  make  sure  they  were  able  to  return 
to  their  jobs  the  next  day.  The  family  wage  helped  ensure  it  would  be 
women  who  continued  to  perform  these  tasks. 

Making  motherhood,  domesticity,  and  subservience  to  men  acceptable  to 
women  is  a  major  development  that  took  place  in  the  1 9th  century.  Women 
did  not  simply  give  up  their  function  of  producing  domestic  goods.  They  had 
to  be  convinced  of  the  importance  of  their  new  role  as  producers  of  use- 
values,  rather  than  exchange  values  (the  mark  of  worth  in  capitalism).  The 
elements  of  this  new  ideology  that  had  to  be  asserted  as  "natural"  were(1) 
children  require  full-time,  undivided  adult  attention;  (2)  women  are  specially 
endowed  to  provide  this  care,  and  care  for  the  homes  their  husbands  need  to 
ensure  the  reproduction  of  their  labor  power;  and  (3)  domesticity  not  only 
shields  women  from  the  evils  of  the  outside  world,  but  also  brings  them 
certain  rewards  of  status  which  are  mediated  through  their  families. 

This  all  depended  on  a  new  conception  of  human  nature,  where  Puritan 
parents  were  previously  told  that  their  children  were  fundamentally  sinful, 
19th  century  philosophy  told  mothers  that  their  babies  were  innocent  and 
pure.6  They  had  to  be  shielded  from  the  corrupting  influences  of  the  outside 
world.  As  a  palliative,  women  were  told  that  without  ever  leaving  home, 
they  could  exert  a  powerful  influence  over  society  through  their  sons. 
Through  this  new  role,  which  nature  allegedly  equipped  only  them  to 

42/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


handle,  women  could  reform  the  whole  of  society.  Thus,  the  idea  that 
children  were  innocent  and  malleable  helped  to  explain  and  justify  women's 
confinement  to  the  home. 

In  addition,  women's  relegation  to  the  home  in  industrial  capitalism  also 
was  supposed  to  lead  to  an  elevation  of  maternal  qualities  since  they  served 
as  nurturant  supporters  and  moral  models  for  both  children  and  husbands. 

The  ideal  of  full-time  motherhood  was  clearly  class  and  strata  based.  In 
the  late  19th  and  early  20th  centuries,  the  ideal  woman's  role  became 
exemplified  by  the  wives  and  daughters  of  entrepreneurs  and  merchant 
capitalists  of  the  northeastern  U.S.  In  fact,  the  cult  of  true 
womanhood  —  idleness,  leisure,  frailty,  conspicuous  and  preferably  wasteful 
consumption  —  depended  on  the  hard  labor  of  many  immigrant 
and  slave  women  who  staffed  households,  acted  as  wet  nurses  and  nannies 
for  children  of  the  rich,  and  were  personal  maids  of  these  ladies  of  leisure. 
Moreover,  this  cult  of  true  womanhood  not  only  depended  on  the  bye  work 
and  factory  work  of  those  miserably  poor  women  who  helped  produce  the 
goods  bought  for  these  fashionable  homes,  but  also  was  totally  contradicted 
by  the  way  poor  working  women  were  treated  by  the  factory  owners:  their 
female  biology  —  menstruation,  childbirth,  and  nursing  —  were  completely 
ignored  by  the  factory  owners.7 

Over  the  course  of  the  20th  century,  however,  the  mark  of  class 
superiority  for  men  of  all  levels  of  the  working  class  became  the  wife  who 
did  not  work  for  wages.  (This  ideology  should  be  separated  from  the  fact 
that  poor  women  always  have  had  to  work  for  wages).  The  books  that  began 
to  appear  espousing  these  new  values  of  "scientific  motherhood"  and 
"domestic  science"  were  geared  especially  for  the  emerging  "middling 
classes"  of  mass  production  monopoly  capitalism. 

At  the  same  time  that  this  20th  century  ideology  of  individual  and 
isolated  "motherhood"  was  spreading,  bolstered  by  the  "science"  of 
mothering  developing  in  schools  and  literature,  there  was  the  contradictory 
reality  of  an  ever-increasing  employment  of  women  in  the  labor  market.  The 
mass  production  of  the  monopoly  capitalist  era  has  necessitated  continually 
increasing  consumption  by  the  working  class.  By  the  1920s,  with  the 
introduction  of  mass  advertising,  mass  consumption  was  essential  to  the 
development  of  capitalism,  and  it  was  necessary  for  women  to  do  this 
consuming. 

The  demand  for  full-time  mothering  responsibility  for  women  in  our 
society,  resulted  in  a  series  of  further  contradictions.  As  women  were 
becoming  increasingly  employed  in  the  labor  market,  full  time  motherhood 
became  the  ideal.  Second,  women  were  being  relegated  to  the  home  as  their 
primary  responsiblity  just  as  technology  made  possible  modern  birth  control 
and  bottle  feeding.  Third,  while  women  have  been  increasingly  convinced  of 

Motherwork/43 


their  "maternal  instincts"  and  the  "naturalness"  of  their  roles  as  mothers, 
they  were  told  by  a  whole  movement  of  male  experts  how  to  be  good 
mothers.  Fourth,  as  middle  class  women  were  more  effectively  able  to 
control  their  family  size  with  modern  contraception,  they  were  spending 
more  and  more  time  with  children.  The  expansion  of  children's  individual 
needs  took  over  and  controlled  more  of  women's  time  and  energy.  They 
became  specialists  par  excellence  in  mothering.8 

During  the  1 930s  and  after  World  War  1 1,  the  intensification  of 
specialization  and  the  sexual  division  of  labor  reinforced  attempts  to  keep 
women  out  of  the  labor  force.  In  the  late  1940s,  the  ideology  of  the  "isolated 
nuclear  family"  served  to  mask  the  social  reality  of  the  rapidly  increasing 
participation  of  women,  especially  married  women,  in  the  labor  force. 
Despite  the  fact  that  women  were  working  in  increasing  numbers,  they  were 
supposed  to  believe  that  their  real  identity  lay  in  family  duties.  Even  during 
the  war,  with  the  massive  influx  of  women  into  factories  and  war  work, 
women's  wage  work  was  projected  as  an  extension  of  their  family  duties,  to 
be  revoked  when  the  war  was  over.  This  ideology  was  supported  with 
contracts  and  agreements  for  the  women  to  give  up  their  jobs  —  to  their 
husbands  and  to  their  male  neighbors  — when  the  men  returned  from 
overseas.9 

Although  more  and  more  women  have  entered  the  labor  force  in  the 
1960s  and  1970s,  and  it  is  no  longer  desirable  to  deny  their  presence,  women 
are  still  employed  as  women,  and  particularly  as  mothers.  In  fact,  the 
extensive  research  in  mainstream  family  sociology  as  early  as  1960  about 
working  women  in  terms  of  "role  conflict"  or  "working  mothers,"  alerts  us  to 
the  crucial  importance  of  women  being  treated  as  "mothers"  in  the  labor 
force. 

The  Relationship  of  Motherhood  to  Waged  Labor 

Thus,  not  only  is  the  definition  of  women's  work  in  the  home  as  mother 
determined  by  and  for  patriarchal  capitalism,  but  it  is  crucial  in  determining 
what  happens  to  women  in  the  labor  market  today.  When  women  go  into 
waged  labor,  they  do  so  as  mothers.  This  may  be  understood  in  at  least  the 
following  ways: 

1 .  Most  importantly,  women  enter  the  labor  market  in  order  to  fulfill  their 
duty  as  mothers  in  the  home  — to  secure  money  to  buy  goods  and  services 
for  their  families  that  previous  generations  of  mothers  used  to  produce  in 
the  home. 

2.  Once  in  the  labor  market,  women  —  all  women  —  are  treated  as 
mothers  — former,  actual,  or  potential. 

3.  As  paid  market  workers,  women  continue  to  do  "mothering"  on  the 
job. 

44/Quest 


Before  we  explore  each  of  these  in  more  detail,  however,  we  need  a 
clearer  understanding  of  the  work  that  is  mothering. 

The  physical  and  emotional  work  of  women  in  the  home  has  been  termed 
"motherwork"  by  Jessie  Bernard.10  "Motherwork"  consists  of  several 
different  andjnterconnected  features.  Specifically,  these  are:  {^mothering 
which  consists  of  the  emotional  and  physical  care  of  infants  and  children: 


Motherwork/45 


touching,  rocking,  smiling,  feeding,  teaching,  diaper-changing,  playing, 
disciplining,  etc.;  and  (2)  added  housework  caused  by  infants  and  children. 
This  includes  the  extra  cooking,  cleaning,  laundering,  shopping,  sewing, 
driving,  waiting,  etc.  necessitated  by  caring  for  children.11 

Neither  the  "mothering"  nor  the  "added  housework"  components  are 
simple  phenomena.  The  "mothering"  component  of  motherwork  is  not 
limited  to  infants  and  small  children.  As  Bernard  suggests,  "the  stroking, 
support,  loving  care  and  healing  which  women  supplied  to  all  family 
members  in  the  home  according  to  the  Victorian  model  remains;  it  is  still 
written  into  the  role  script  of  all  women  workers  no  less  than  mothers."12 
With  regard  to  the  "added  housework"  component,  Bernard  suggests  that 
with  small  children  the  physical  work  involved  in  motherwork  requires  an 
enormous  amount  of  housework.  When  the  children  are  older,  however,  it 
may  involve  part-time,  outside  jobs. 

Now,  let  us  return  to  each  of  our  three  explanations  of  how  this 
"motherwork"  extends  into  the  job  market:  i.e.,  when  women  go  into  waged 
labor,  they  go  as  mothers. 

First,  women  enter  the  labor  market  to  buy  the  goods  and  services  they 
need  in  their  jobs  as  mothers.  Just  as  industrial  capitalism  pushed  goods  that 
had  been  produced  by  women  out  of  the  home,  monoply  capitalism  also 
has  increasingly  pushed  out  services.  In  post  World  War  II  U.S.,  women 
needed  jobs  to  pay  both  for  services  as  well  as  goods  for  their  children, 
previously  provided  at  home:  education,  health  care,  nursing, 
psychotherapy,  birthing  of  babies,  food  preparation,  clothing,  shoes, 
washing  machines.  In  monopoly  capitalism,  goods  and  services  increasingly 
are  found  only  in  the  market.  It  has  become  cheaper  to  produce  such  things 
as  clothing  by  mass  production  rather  than  in  the  home.  It  follows,  then,  that 
under  capitalism,  it  is  necessary  that  the  women  who  work  in  the  home  be 
able  to  work  in  the  market  as  well.  Women  are  both  "finely  tuned 
customers,"  and  also  "workers  in  home,  ready  for  integration  outside  the 
home."1 3  Hence,  keeping  women  in  the  role  of  mother  and  employing  them 
as  such  in  the  market  is  a  profitable  solution  to  capitalism's  needs.  On  the 
one  hand,  women  are  employed  to  provide  goods  and  services  from  which 
the  economy  can  profit  directly.  On  the  other  hand,  many  other  tasks 
remain  for  women  to  do  in  the  home  at  no  cost  to  the  economy.  This  results 
in  lower  wages  for  women  in  the  market  and  segregates  them  so  they  do  not 
compete  there  with  men. 

Contradictions  abound  between  women's  position  as  mothers  and  their 
position  as  wage  earners.  First,  having  children  increases  costs  to  the  family 
and  increases  the  likelihood  of  women  having  to  work  outside  the  home, 
even  though  they  are  supposed  to  be  staying  at  home  and  doing  full-time 
child  care.  Second,  while  men  are  affirmed  in  their  double  relation  of  wage 

46/Quest 


earner  and  breadwinner,  women  often  see  their  roles  as  good  mothers 
in  conflict  with  their  roles  in  the  labor  force,  especially  in  relation  to  the 
emotional  and  physical  well-being  of  their  children.  Further,  while  women's 
"femininity"  is  supposedly  enhanced  as  mothers  in  the  service  of  husbands 
and  children,  once  in  waged  labor,  women's  desirability  as  sexual  objects 
comes  into  conflict  with  their  femininity  as  mothers  and  wives  at  home.  Not 
only  is  patriarchy  affected  by  this  but  so,  too,  is  capital.  One  important 
mechanism  for  dealing  with  this  contradiction  has  been  the  expansion  of  the 
sex  segregation  of  the  labor  force  through  the  threat  of  sexual  harassment. 
For  example,  women  are  segregated  off  from  men  in  lower  paid  and  less 
powerful  jobs.  On  the  one  hand,  this  tends  to  protect  them  from  being 
sexually  harassed  by  male  co-workers  (although  not  necessarily  from  male 
supervisors).  On  the  other  hand,  it  reminds  women  of  their  dependence  on 
men  for  protection  outside  this  supposedly  safe  sex-segregated  work  space. 
More  recently,  however,  all  forms  of  violence  against  women  including 
sexual  harassment  on  the  job  and  rape  in  marriage  are  being  fought  against 
by  women  as  they  move  between  motherwork  at  home  and  motherwork  in 
the  market. 

A  second  major  consequence  of  the  extension  of  motherwork  from  the 
home  to  the  market  is  that  when  women  enter  the  labor  market  they  are 
treated  as  mothers  —  past,  actual  or  potential.  This  phenomenon  is  attested 
to  by  the  increasing  literature  treating  employed  women  as  "working 
mothers"  rather  than  as  "employees".  Further,  the  old  rationalization  for  not 
advancing  women  is  often  still  used.  If  the  woman  is  single  or  newly  married 
and  without  children,  she  will  not  be  given  a  responsible  job  with  high  wages 
since,  it  is  said,  she  will  probably  leave  when  she  has  a  chance  to  marry  and 
have  children.  If  she  has  children,  the  rationalization  given  is  that  she  will  be 
unreliable  because  of  the  need  to  be  absent  if  her  children  are  sick.  This 
apologia  persists  despite  the  fact  that  male  turnover  and  absenteeism  rates 
are  similar  to  women's,  the  crucial  difference  being  that  women  have 
traditionally  left  the  market  for  lack  of  child  care  and  other  family  services, 
while  men  have  left  a  particular  job  for  personal  advancement.  Men's 
reasons  for  leaving  are  always  more  acceptable,  for  men  are  perceived  as 
workers;  women  are  perceived  as  mothers. 

More  recently,  during  the  economic  crises  of  the  mid  1970s,  the  charge  of 
women's  "instability  and  unreliability"  as  workers  abated  since  it  became 
economically  worthwhile  for  a  company  to  exploit  women  as  part-time 
workers.14  Mothers  of  school  age  children  are  now  said  to  be  stable, 
conscientious,  and  appreciative  of  companies'  tailoring  work  hours  to  their 
family  schedules.  Furthermore,  because  women  are  "mothers  first"  and 
because  only  men  are  paid  a  family  wage,  women  are  always  classified  as 
"secondary  workers"  in  the  family.  This  assumption  holds  true  whether  the 

Motherwork/47 


In  search  of  Q< 


If  you  like  what  you  see  in  this  issue  of  Quest,  look  over  our  list  of  back  issues.  You'll  find  that 
Quest  offers  a  host  of  salient  articles  written  by  some  of  the  women  who  made  the  movement 
happen. 


FIRST  YEAR 

1-1  Process  of  Change  (a  feminist 

classic,  $5.00) 
Rita  Mae  Brown,  "The  Good  Fairy" 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "The  Reform 

Tool  Kit" 
Nancy  Hartsock,  "Two  Perspectives 

on  Power" 
1  -2  Money,  Fame  &  Power  ($3.35) 
Vicki  Gabriner,  "ERA,  The  Year  of  the 

Rabble" 
Coletta  Reid,  "Taking  Care  of  Business" 
Alice  Quinn,  "Insanity  and  Control:  A 

A  Class  Trap" 
1-3  The  Self  hood  of  Women 

($3.35) 
Rita  Mae  Brown,  "It's  All  Dixie 

Cups  to  Me" 
Lucia  Valeska,  "If  All  Else  Fails,  I'm 

I'm  Still  a  Mother" 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Self  Definition  and 

Political  Survival" 
1-4  Women  and  Spirituality  (a  feminist 

classic,  $5.00) 
Mary  Daly,  "The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond 

Patriarchal  Religion" 
Peggy  Cleveland  and  Sally  Gearhart,  "On 

the  Prevalence  of  Stilps" 
Dorothy  Riddle,  "New  Visions  of  Spiritual 

Power" 

SECOND YEAR 

2-1   Future  Visions  and  Fantasies 

($3.35) 
Janice  Raymond,  "The  Illusion  of 

Androgyny" 
Z.  Budapest,  "Witch  is  to  Womon  as 

Womb  is  to  Birth" 
Cynthia  Washington,  "Concrete 

Playgrounds  on  my  Mind" 


2-2  Theories  of  Revolution  (a  feminist 

classic,  $5.00) 
Lucia  Valeska,  "The  Future  of  Female 

Separatism" 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Not  for  Lesbians  Only" 
Nancy  Hartsock,  "Fundamental 

Feminism 
2-3  Organizations  &  Strategies 

($3.35) 
Karen  Kollias,  "Feminism  in  Action" 
Sandra  Flowers,  "Use  and  Misuse  of 

Coalitions" 
Jean  Elshtain,  "Alternatives  to 

Individualism" 
2-4  Leadership  ($3.35) 
Bertha  Harris,  "The  Lesbian:  The 

Workmaker,  the  Leader" 
Jackie  St.  Joan,  "Who  Was  Rembrandt's 

Mother?" 
Lorraine  Masterson,  "Feminist  Leaders 

Can't  Walk  on  Water" 

THIRD  YEAR 

3-1   Kaleidoscope  I  ($3.35) 

Charlotte  Bunch,  "Beyond  Either/Or: 

Feminist  Options" 
Hope  Landrine,  "The  Club" 
June  Arnold,  "Feminist  Presses  and 

Feminist  Politics" 
3-2  Communication  and  Control 

($3.35) 
Deb  Friedman  &  Lois  Yankowski, 

"Snuffing  Sexual  Violence" 
Chris  Murphy,  "The  Shadow  Box" 
Sheri  Maeda  and  Jill  Shapiro,  "Put 

Another  Nickel  In" 


48/Quest 


est  back  issues? 


3-3  Work,  Work,  Work  ($3.35) 

Nancy  Hartsock,  "Staying  Alive" 
Dierdre  Silverman,  "Sexual  Harassment: 

Working  Women's  Dilemma" 
Marilyn  Frye,  "Who  Wants  a  Piece  of 

the  Pie?" 
3-4  Race,  Class  &  Culture  ($3  35) 
Brenda  Eichelberger,  "Voices  on  Black 

Feminism" 
Michelle  Russell,  "An  Open  LEtter  to  the 

Academy" 
Mary  McKenney,  "Class  Attitudes  and. 

Professionalism" 

FOURTH  YEAR 

4-1   Kaleidoscope  II  ($3.35) 
Barbara  Deming,  "Remembering  Who 

Who  We  Are" 
Red  Apple  Collective,  "Women's 

Unions  and  Socialist  Feminism" 
Jackie  MacMillan, "Prostitution  an  Sexual 

Politics" 


4-2  International  Feminism  ($3.35) 

Stephanie  Urdang,  "Women  in  the 

Guinea-Bisseau  Revolution" 
Elizabeth  Reid,  "Women,  Economic 

Development,  and  the  UN" 
Anja  Meulenbelt,  "On  the  Political 

Economy  of  Domestic  Labor" 
4-3  Body  Politic  ($3  35) 
Polly  Joan,  "Manipulation  of  the  Breast' 
Hallie  Iglehart, "Unnatural  Divorce  of 

Spirituality  &  Politics" 
Ellen  Hall,  "Who  Gets  Sick  &  Why?" 
4-4  Women  in  Their  Communities 

(J3.35) 
JEB,  Photo  Essay 
Dorothy  Allison,  "Weaving  the  Web  of 

Community" 
Jo  Delaplaine,  "Women  in  the  Latin 

Community" 


Send  order  to:  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Dept.  A 
P.O.  Box  8843 
Washington,  DC  20003 

I  have  enclosed  $ . 


I  would  like  to  order  the  following  back  issues: 


Please  send  my  Quests  to: 
Name 


Address 


■Zip. 


Motherwork/49 


woman  is  single,  a  grandmother,  married,  or  divorced.  Being  viewed  as  a 
mother  in  a  nuclear  family  rationalizes  the  low  wages  of  all  women 
throughout  their  lives  as  waged  laborers. 

This  tendency  to  use  women's  status  as  mothers  and  therefore  only 
"secondary  workers"  as  a  rationalization  for  lower  wages  is  being 
increasingly  challenged  by  women.  The  current  women's  movement,  which 
has  recognized  the  oppressive  contradiction  of  women's  "double  day," 
encourages  women  to  fight  against  labor  market  inequalities.  By  filing 
complaints  with  the  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  —  in 
accordance  with  Title  VII  of  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964  — women  are 
refusing  to  accept  their  lower  status  in  the  job  market.  However,  because  of 
the  interrelatedness  of  women's  work  in  the  labor  force  and  their  roles  in  the 
home,  the  fight  against  lower  status  also  requires  an  understanding  of  their 


50/Quest 


total  reproductive  position.  Therefore,  women  are  struggling  against  the 
control  of  their  bodies  for  male  benefit  and  profit  —  both  by  husbands  in  the 
home  and  male  bosses  on  the  job.  A  major  focus  of  the  women's  liberation 
movement  since  its  rebirth  in  the  1960s  has  been  on  reproductive  rights. 
Political  action  has  been  organized  to  demand  the  regaining  of  women's 
control  of  their  bodies.  The  fight  against  involuntary  sterilization  of  third 
world  and  poor  white  women  and,  more  recently,  against  chemical  and 
other  companies  which  require  women  to  be  sterilized  before  they  are  hired 
or  kept  in  hazardous  jobs,  reflects  this  focus. 

Finally,  as  we  all  know,  "motherwork"  does  not  end  at  home.  Women 
perform  such  mothering  tasks  on  the  job  as  nurturing,  soothing,  healing, 
teaching,  and  giving  sexual  comfort  and  ego  support.  Even  unmarried 
women  with  no  children  of  their  own  must  mother  men  at  work.  These 
mothering  tasks  are  sometimes  paid  for  — as  nurses,  teachers,  social 
workers,  etc.  —  and  sometimes  simply  appropriated  —  boosting  the  boss's 
ego,  making  coffee,  getting  his  reports  into  final  shape  before  typing  them, 
doing  housecleaning  tasks  to  help  present  the  boss  to  the  public,  etc. 

Here  too,  the  contradictory  patriarchal  aspects  of  "motherwork",  hitherto 
private  in  the  family,  become  publicly  visible  in  waged  labor.  Women,  both 
individually  and  collectively,  have  begun  to  challenge  non  job-related 
demands.  Moreover,  they  are  increasingly  becoming  aware  of  the  unwaged 
work  done  at  home  in  their  mothering  tasks,  for  which  they  are  now  being 
paid  in  the  market.  Not  only  does  this  put  pressure  on  capitalism,  as  women 
learn  that  the  unpaid  work  they  do  benefits  the  ruling  class's  profits,  but  it 
intensifies  the  contradictions  within  patriarchy:  on  the  one  hand,  women 
and  men  have  similar  interest  at  home  in  providing  for  their  families;  on  the 
other  hand,  in  the  market,  men's  and  women's  interests  are  very  different. 
This  in  turn  is  threatening  to  men,  as  their  wives  must  continuously  increase 
their  labor  force  participation  to  keep  up  with  rising  inflation. 

Thus  it  is  that  women's  role  as  mother  in  the  patriarchal  capitalist  home 
reinforces  their  treatment  as  mothers  in  a  labor  market  organized  to  benefit 
men  and  capital,  which  in  turn  reinforces  their  work  as  mothers  in  the  home. 
These  relations  of  reciprocal  reinforcement  should  not  obscure  the  fact  that 
a  multitude  of  conflicts  emerge  in  this  situation.  Women's  role  as  mothers  is 
in  the  interest  of  capital  and  affects  the  outcome  of  class  struggle;  likewise, 
women's  role  as  mothers  in  the  home  is  in  the  interest  of  men,  but 
simultaneously,  is  the  historical  outcome  of  struggles  between  men  and 
women.  Thus,  although  the  relations  between  patriarchy  and  capitalism 
appear  to  mesh,  their  linkages  can  and  will  be  broken.  Motherwork  at  home 
and  motherwork  in  the  market  are  intimately  linked.  They  need  not  be.  It  is 
out  of  the  contradictory  nature  of  this  relationship  that  new  possiblities  for 
women  and  mothers  will  emerge. 

Motherwork/51 


Natalie  Sokoloff,  Assistant  Professor  of  Sociology  at  John  jay  College  at 
C.U.N.Y.,  is  a  socialist  feminist  thinker  and  activist  who  is  interested  in  women 
and  the  labor  force. 


Notes 

^ee,  e.g.,  Adrienne  Rich,  Of  Woman  Born:  Motherhood  as  Experience  and  Institution  (New 
York:  WW.  Norton,  1976). 

2Jessie  Bernard,  The  Future  of  Motherhood.  (New  York:   Penguin  Books,  1974.) 

3lvy  Pinchbeck,  Women  Workers  and  the  Industrial  Revolution.  (London:  Frank  Cass,  1969).  As 
quoted  in  Laura  Oren,  "The  Welfare  of  Women  in  Laboring  Families:   England,  1860-1950". 
Feminist  Sutides  1  (Winter-Spring,  1973),  p.  108. 

4Eli  Zaretsky,  "The  Effects  of  the  Economic  Crisis  on  the  Family"  in  U.S.  Capitalism  in  Crisis. 
Edited  by  Crisis  Reader  Editorial  Collective.  (New  York:   Union  for  Radical  Political  Economics, 
1978),  p.  211. 

5ld. 

'Barbara  Easton,  "Industrialization  and  Femininity:  A  Case  Study  of  Nineteenth  Century  New 
England"  in  Social  Problems  23  (April,  1976) 

7Barbara  Ehrenreich  and  Deidre  English,  "The  Manufacture  of  House  Work"  in  Socialist 
Revolution  26  (October-December,  1975).  Complaints  and  Disorders.  (New  York:  Faculty  Press, 
1975). 

"Nancy  Chodorow.  "Mothering,  Male  Dominance,  and  Capitalism"  in  Capitalist  Patriarchy  and 
the  Case  for  Socialist  Feminism.  Edited  by  Zillah  Eisenstein.  (New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press, 
1979). 

'Joan  Ellen  Trey,  "Women  in  the  War  Economy"  in  Review  of  Radical  Political  Economy  4 
July,  1972,  pp.  40-57). 
10Jessie  Bernard,  p.  116. 

11  It  has  been  estimated  that  housework  with  no  children  at  home  consists  of  1000  hours  per 
year.  With  a  child  over  the  age  of  six,  this  figure  increases  to  1 500  per  year.  But  with  a  child 
under  six,  2000  hours  are  required.  There  are  only  8760  hours  in  an  entire  year.  (See  Jessie 
Bernard).  Thus,  51/2  hours  a  day  are  spent  in  housework  in  a  household  with  a  child  under  6. 
This  does  not  include  bathing,  diapering,  disciplining,  playing,  feeding,  soothing  the  child,  etc. 

12Jessie  Bernard,  p.  116 

13Roslyn  Baxandall,  Elizabeth  Ewen  and  Linda  Gordon,  "The  Working  Class  Has  Two  Sexes"  in 

Monthly  Review  28  (J  uly-August,  1 976),  p.  1  -9. 

14See  R.D.  Barron  and  CM.  Norris,  "Sexual  Divisions  and  the  Dual  Labor  Market"  in 
Dependence  and  Exploitation  in  Work  and  Marriage.  Edited  by  Diana  Leonard  Barker  and 
Sheila  Allen.  (London:   Longmans,  1976). 

15See  Jerry  Flint  "Growing  Part-Time  Work  Force  Has  Major  Impact  on  Economy"  in  New  York 
Times,  (April  12, 1977),  p.  1,56. 

52/Quest 


Gender  Politics 
of  I  nf  ancy 


by  Sandra  Harding 

From  the  perspectives  of  both  our 
own  recollections  and  of  social 
theory,  human  infancy  has  been  a 
kind  of  "black  box."  All  of  us  were 
human  infants,  and  yet  we  have  few 
recollections  of  infancy.  We  largely 
reconstruct  our  own  infancy  from 
family  snapshots  and  the  oral  history 
of  relatives.  Until  very  recently,  if 
one  looked  at  most  social  science 
theories,  one  would  have  thought 
that  infants  do  not  have  much  of  a 
social  life,  and  that  what  they  do 
have  is  of  little  interest  to 
economists,  political  theorists  or 
sociologists.  Infant  social  life 
certainly  has  been  of  little  interest  to 
Marxists  or  most  feminists  theorizing 
about  the  causes  of  sexism, 
classism,  racism  and  heterosexism. 
Even  so,  we  often  wonder  if  there 
isn't  something  missing  in  our 
theories  which  supports  these  forms 
of  domination  and  makes  them  so 
resistant  to  our  attempts  to 
eliminate  them.  In  most  theories,  the 
conscription  of  individuals  into 
systems  of  oppression  occurs 
through  various  kinds  of  social 


learning  in  later  childhood  and  in 
adult  life,  reinforced  and  maintained 
by  the  capitalist  patriarchal 
institutions  of  our  society.  Infant 
social  life  has  nothing  to  do  with  all 
of  this. 

This  lack  of  theory  about  the 
relationship  between  cultural 
variations  in  the  conditions  of 
infantile  social  life  and  variations  in 
the  institutions  structuring  adult  life 
is  understandable  if  we  think  about 
how  we  cannot  remember  or  report 
first-hand  anything  of  interest  about 
our  personal  experience  of  having 
been  infants.  It  is  also 
understandable  if  we  notice  how 
"the  family"  —  the  institution  within 
which  most  infantile  experience  takes 
place  —  has  been  treated  by  most 
theories  more  as  a  part  of  nature 
than  as  a  part  of  culture.  Apart  from 
anthropologists,  it  is  only  recently 
that  social  scientists  have  become 
aware  in  any  theoretically  clear  way 
that  "the  family"  is  simply  an 
abstraction  used  to  refer  to  a  wide 
variety  of  arrangements  in  different 
cultures,  and  in  different  classes  and 
ethnic  groups  within  our  own 
society.  For  instance,  only  recently 


©1981,  Sandra  Harding 


Gender  Politics  of  Infancy/53 


have  political  theorists,  economists 
and  sociologists  even  begun  to 
glimpse  that  there  is  anything  wrong 
with  the  "male  head  of  household" 
model  assumed  from  Aristotle 
through  Talcott  Parsons  and  John 
Rawls  in  accounts  of  existing  or 
ideal  states,  economies  or 
functional  social  systems.  It  is  these 
two  factors  —  lack  of  first-hand 
recollection  and  lack  of  political 
analysis  —  that  have  combined  to 
make  infantile  social  relations  a 
theoretical  "black  box." 

Lack  of  interest  in  the  nature  of 
infantile  social  life  is  surprising, 
however,  when  we  consider  that  the 
transformation  which  takes  place  in 
infancy  is  from  little  human  animals, 
apparently  lacking  any  distinctive 
marks  of  cultural  differentiation 
(remember  all  the  melodramas 
turning  on  a  "switched-in-the-crib" 
plot?),  into  children  who  are 
distinctively  marked  by  culture. 
Young  children  not  only  become 
irreversibly  gendered;  they  have  also 
become  socially  marked  in  many 
other  ways.  They  learn  a  complex  set 
of  rules  that  govern  their  behavior 
and  interactions  —  rules  obvious  to 
anyone  who  observes  children  over 
three  who  have  grown  up  in 
significantly  different  cultures, 
classes  or  ethnic  groups. 

It  is  in  the  context  of  this  virtual 
lack  of  political,  economic  or 
sociological  analyses  of  the 
structure  of  infantile  social  life  and 
its  influences  on  the  institutions  of 
society  that  Dorothy  Dinnerstein's, 
Nancy  Chodorow's  and  Jane  Flax's 


works  have  appeared,  following  on 
Gayle  Rubin's  widely  discussed 
earlier  essay.1  Dinnerstein's 
and  Chodorow's  books  have  been 
especially  criticized  on  the  grounds 
that  they  draw  upon  Freud's 
scientifically  inadequate  and 
politically  oppressive 
psychoanalytic  theory,  and  also 
because  their  conclusions  seem 
naturally  to  feed  into  some  of  the 
worst  politics  of  anti-feminists.  To 
some  feminists,  Dinnerstein  and 
Chodorow  appear  to  blame 
inadequate  mothering  for  a  wide 
array  of  social  evils.  Similarly,  these 
authors  are  sometimes  taken  to  be 
recommending  that  fathers  should 
be  more  involved  in  bringing  up  the 
kiddies  —  at  just  the  time  when  men 
are  beginning  to  win  custody  cases. 
The  glorification  of  fathers  as  the 
poor,  mistreated  victims  of 
irresponsible  "libbers"  in  films  such 
as  Kramer  vs.  Kramer  tends  to  make 
Chodorow's  and  Dinnerstein's 
claims  suspicious,  at  best,  to 
feminists.  Finally,  Chodorow  and 
Dinnerstein  are  sometimes 
understood  to  be  arguing  that 
anything  but  a  standard  model, 
two-parent  heterosexual  family 
damages  children.  Lesbian 
parenting,  for  instance,  is  considered 
especially  pernicious.  Hence,  many 
feminist  critics  have  responded  to 
these  books  by  asking:  who  needs 
yet  more  ammunition  for  anti- 
feminist  politics? 

However,  using  the  insights  of 
these  authors,  we  can  construct  a 
valuable  theory  that  does  not  end 


54/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


up  as  a  support  for  yet  more  sexist 
politics.  We  do  need  to  understand 
what  happens  in  the  "black  box"  of 
infancy,  the  period  when  we  become 
distinctive  social  persons  and, 
especially,  distinctively  gendered 
persons.  The  family  is  the  location  of 
the  processes  whereby  this 
generation's  psycho/social  interests 
in  class,  gender,  race  and 
heterosexual ity  are  passed  on  to  the 
next  generation.  Feminists  need  to 
understand  the  way  this  happens. 
We  need,  and  can  get  from 
Dinnerstein,  Chodorow  and  Flax,  a 
materialist  psychology  of  the  gender 
politics  of  infancy. 


Marxist  Questions  vs.  Marxist 
Answers 

Most  Marxist  theory  has  tried  to 
describe  and  explain  how  the  social 
relations  of  economic  life  determine 
all  other  social  relations  in  a  society. 
Since  infants  are  not  part  of  the 
wage-labor  force,  nor  do  they 
perform  any  other  socially  useful 
labor  (apart  from  "becoming 
persons,"  becoming  future 
laborers),  this  "political  economy" 
approach  tends  to  be  concerned 
only  with  the  effects  on  children  of 
the  family's  economic  oppression 
and  with  the  effect  on  children  of 


Gender  Politics/55 


the  historically  shifting  composition 
of  the  work  force.  Thus,  there  have 
been  studies  of  how  children  in 
working-class  families  suffer  in  many 
of  the  ways  their  parents  do:  they 
lack  adequate  food,  clothing, 
shelter,  educational  opportunities 
and  access  to  health  care  —  the 
whole  array  of  benefits  available  to 
the  children  of  the  bourgeoisie. 
Social  scientists  have  also  observed 
that  children  of  the  bourgeoisie 
often  suffer  from  the  "social 
pathologies  of  the  privileged,"  and 
engage  in  social  practices  which 
lead  them  to  continue  the  classist, 
racist  and  sexist  institutions  they 
inherit  from  the  previous 
generation.2 

Feminist  Marxist  theorists  have 
attempted  to  fit  analyses  of  the 
family  and  of  women's  role  in  society 
into  Marxist  political  economy.3 
They  have  often  returned  to  the 
famous  passages  from  Engels  in  order 
to  legitimate  their  project  both  to 
Marxists  and  to  non-Marxist 
feminists: 

According  to  the  materialistic 
conception,  the  determining  factor  in 
history  is,  in  the  final  instance,  the 
production  and  reproduction  of 
immediate  life.  This,  again,  is  of  a 
twofold  character:  on  the  one  side, 
the  production  of  the  means  of 
existence,  of  food,  clothing,  and 
shelter  and  the  tools  necessary  for 
that  production;  on  the  other  side, 
the  production  of  human  beings 
themselves,  the  propagation  of  the 
species.  The  social  organization 
under  which  the  people  of  a 


particular  historical  epoch  live  is 
determined  by  both  kinds  of 
production,  by  the  stage  of 
development  of  labor  on  the  one 
hand  and  of  the  family  on  the 
other. 4 

Notice  how,  in  a  curious  way, 
Engels'  language  shifts  between,  and 
seems  to  equate,  economic  and 
biological  categories  and  processes: 
". . .  the  production  of  human  beings 
themselves,  the  propagation  of  the 
species/'  This  creative  but 
ultimately  problematic  shift  in 
language  has  led  Marxist  feminists 
to  argue  that  family  life  is  not  a 
construct  of  nature,  but  is  instead  a 
social  construct.  But  it  has  also 
tended  to  pull  their  account  of  the 
"social"  aspects  of  family  life 
toward  the  concepts  of  economic 
analysis  —  as  Engels'  own  account 
tended  to  do.  This  has  obscured  to 
them  and  to  us  the  lack  of  any 
analysis  of  the  social  relations  of 
infants. 

The  return  to  Engels  has  led 
feminists  to  valuable  analyses  of 
how  adult  family  relations,  and 
especially  women's  labor  within  the 
family,  is  both  structured  and 
maintained  by  the  economic 
relations  of  capitalism,  and  in  turn 
supports  the  other  institutions  of 
patriarchal  capitalism.  In  one  of  the 
most  persuasive  of  these  feminist 
corrections  of  the  Marxist  tendency 
to  see  the  family  only  as  part  of  the 
"superstructure"  of  society,  Heidi 
Hartmann  has  argued  that 
partriarchy  and  capital  are  in  a  kind 
of  "lockstep";  that  they  both  are 


56/Quest 


powerful  and  immensely  adaptable 
separate  "systems"  which  are, 
however,  mutually  dependent  on 
each  other.5  Capitalism  could  not 
exist  without  the  patriarchal 
political/economic  relations  of 
family  life  supporting  it  and 
sometimes  adapting  to  it. 
Capitalism,  in  turn,  has  sometimes 
had  to  adapt  to  the  patriarchal 
interests  of  men,  as  men,  at  the 
expense  of  benefits  just  to  the  men 
who  are  members  of  the 
bourgeoisie. 


One  recent  break  from  the 
political  economy  of  Marxist 
analyses  has  been  made  by  Batya 
Weinbaum,  who  argues  that  wage 
labor  and  political  relations  are  not 
only  supported  by  the  patriarchal 
relations  of  family  life,  but 
structured  by  the  age  and  gender 
divisions  of  family  life,  which 
certainly  historically  predate  any 
class  society.6  In  any  office,  factory 
or  political  movement,  for  example, 
one  can  identify  institutionally 
entrenched  social  relations  modeled 
on  those  originating  in  families 
between  fathers,  sons,  brothers, 
mothers,  daughters  and  sisters. 
Weinbaum's  analysis  points  to  a 
psycho-social  dynamic  which  must 
lie  behind  the  curious  and  irritating 


Gender  Politics/57 


fact  that  female  "comrades"  during 
socialist  revolutions  always  find 
themselves  mysteriously  turned  into 
the  same  old  "girls"  and  "women" 
after  the  revolution.  In  spite  of  all 
the  fancy  rhetoric,  was  it  only  the 
roles  of  "sis"  and  "mom"  which  they 
were  permitted  to  play  during  the 
revolution? 

Meanwhile,  at  the  fringe  of 
feminist  awareness,  is  the  work  of 
the  "Freudian  Left."7  In  a  variety  of 
ways,  these  writers  have  suggested 
that  capitalism's  political  economy 
is  structured  and  maintained  by 
something  far  deeper  in  human 
personality  and  more  pervasive  in 
contemporary  culture  than  simply 
the  economic  drive  to  extract  profit 
from  the  labor  of  others  — 
something  deeper  and  more 
pervasive  than  "accumulation" 
motives  and  goals.  Their  work 
suggests  that  the  political 
economy  of  capitalism  is  simply  one 
expression  of  authoritarianism  —  of 
more  general  domination  structures 
in  both  personality  and  culture. 
Hence  they  examine  the  influence  of 
both  early  family  life  and  of  struc- 
tures of  sexuality  on  the  production 
and  reproduction  of  persons  having 
distinctively  authoritarian 
personalities.  They  look,  for 
example,  at  the  family  life  of  the 
Prussian  aristocracy  which  produced 
the  personalities  of  the  SS 
elite  — creators  of  the  Holocaust. 
But  they  are,  in  fact,  concerned  not 
with  all  of  family  life  but  only  with 
young  boys'  social  relations  with 
their  fathers.  There  is  little  concern 


in  their  writings  with  the  social 
relations  of  infants  of  either  sex,  or 
of  infants'  relations  to  their  major 
caretakers  —  their  mothers. 

For  feminists,  the  kinds  of 
questions  Marxists  ask  are  more 
important  than  the  actual  analyses 
of  political  economy  they  have 
provided.  These  questions  are:  what 
are  the  actual,  historical  social 
relations  of  a  society  which,  first  of 
all,  ensures  that  the  dominant 
groups  will  find  desirable  certain 
kinds  of  social  institutions  and 
second,  ensures  that  they  will  find 
some  beliefs  about  nature  and  social 
life  more  plausible  than  other  beliefs 
they  might  have  held?  Marxists' 
answers  to  these  questions  have 
tended  to  focus  only  on  economic 
aspects  of  social  life;  or,  in  those 
rare  instances  when  they  have 
ventured  out  of  strictly  economic 
categories,  they  have  been 
concerned  only  with  social  relations 
between  men,  or  the  social  relations 
of  fathers  and  sons.  In  either  case, 
infant  social  life  and  children's 
relations  with  their  mothers 
have,  until  recently,  remained 
unexamined.  The  focus  on 
economic  aspects  of  social  life 
should  not  surprise  us,  since  Marxist 
theorists  have  generally  been  men 
and  since  "men's  sphere"  is  the 
public  life  structured  by  political 
economy.  And  it  should  not  surprise 
us  that  infant  experience  has  been 
ignored  by  both  bourgeois  and 
Marxist  theory,  constructed  largely 
by  men,  since  "men's  sphere"  —  the 
"father-world"  —  is  not  the  primary 


58/Quest 


environment  with  which  infants 
interact. 

These  considerations  lead  us  to 
ask  "the  Marxist  question"  of 
Marxist  theory  and  practice:  what  is 
it  about  men's  actual,  historical 
social  relations,  as  men,  which 
ensures  these  significant  gaps  in  the 
text  of  their  social  analyses?  If  the 
categories  of  Marxist 
thought  — economic  categories  — 
prevent  an  analysis  within  that 
thought  of  the  social  relations  of 
infancy,  and  if  infant  social  relations 
are  one  of  the  supports  of  classism, 
as  well  as  of  racism,  sexism  and 
heterosexism,  then  Marxist  thought 
is,  in  this  respect,  classist.  It  cannot 
identify  and  analyze  all  of  the  roots 
of  the  very  social  relations  it  was 
specifically  constructed  to 
penetrate.  Notice  that  we  have 
arrived  at  this  insight  by  asking 
exactly  the  kinds  of  questions 
Marxist  thought  invented.  The 
Marxist  epistemology  —  theory  of 
knowledge  —  has  led  us  to  find 
inadequate  the  Marxist  political 
economy. 

Feminist  Answers 

The  questions  raised  by  Marxist 
analysis  call  for  a  single  feminist 
account  of  the  nature  and  causes  of 
the  forms,  the  structures,  of  three 
kinds  of  social  phenomena  which 
earlier  theories  generally  examined 
separately.  We  want  a  single 
account  of  the  structures  of 
individual  masculine  personalities, 
the  structures  of  patriarchal  social 


institutions,  and  the  structures  of 
beliefs  and  theories  produced  by 
such  "personalities"  living  in  such 
institutions.  Why  are  the  forms  of 
these  three  phenomena  so  similar, 
even  though  their  contents  vary 
immensely  from  society  to  society 
and  within  societies?  Within 
patriarchies,  what  is  it  about  men's 
actual,  lived  social  relations,  as  men, 
which  ensures  that  their  personalities, 
the  social  institutions  they  create, 
and  the  beliefs  and  theories  they 
find  plausible  will  all  institutionalize 
domination  relations  not  only  in  the 
"contents"  but  also  in  the  forms  of 
personalities,  institutions  and 
beliefs? 

These  three  social 
"products"  —  institutions,  beliefs 
and  personalities  —  are  all  mutually 
supportive;  all  reinforce  and 
maintain  the  others.  But  what 
requires  us  to  revise  all  the  earlier 
theories  about  the  causes  of 
domination  relations  in  each  of 
these,  is  the  discovery  of  the 
"mechanism"  which  creates  those 
domination  structures  in  individual 
masculine  personalities  —  personali- 
ties which  go  on  to  construct 
institutions  and  belief  systems. 
Dinnerstein,  Chodorow  and  Flax 
show  us  how  to  examine  the  social 
relations  which  turn  newborn 
biological  males  into  socially 
gendered  men.  They  show  us  how  to 
understand  that  it  is  the  male 
infant's  experience  of  the 
asymmetrically  valued  division  of 
labor  by  gender  which  is  the  missing 
link  in  reproducing  domination 


Gender  Politics/59 


structures  in  all  three  social 
phenomena.  Hence  we  must  look  at 
the  historically  specific  social 
relations  of  family  life,  but  shift  our 
attention  from  the  interactions  and 
experiences  of  adults  and  older 
children,  to  the  interactions  and 
experiences  of  infants. 

As  noted  above,  "the  family"  is 
simply  an  abstraction  used  to 
designate  the  wide  variety  of 
cultural  forms  and  functions  within 
which  our  species  is  biologically  and 
socially  produced  and  reproduced. 
But  as  one  looks  at  our  own  society 
and,  with  the  help  of  cross-cultural 
and  historical  studies,  across  the 
breath-taking  differences  in  these 
cultural  forms  and  functions,  two 
constants  which  appear  to  be 
virtually  universal  leap  out  to  the 
alert  feminist  inquirer.  First,  it  is 
usually  a  woman  or  women  who  are 
the  primary  caretakers  of  infants. 
This  is  not  surprising,  since  it  is 
women,  not  men,  who  breast-feed 
infants  and  who  interact  most 
frequently  with  them.  (It  is  not 
breast  feeding  itself  which  is 
significant,  but  rather  the  greater 
physical/social  proximity  for  mother- 
infant  interactions  which  it  creates.) 
Second,  women  are  the  devalued 
gender  in  all  modern  societies,  and 
probably  in  most  earlier  ones.  The 
ways  in  which  women  are  devalued 
and  the  degree  to  which  they  are 
devalued  vary  enormously  from 
culture  to  culture.  But  the  fact  that 
men  and  boys  are  socially  valued 
more  highly  than  women  and  girls 
seems  to  be  true  of  most  societies  to 


which  we  have  historical  access.8  In 
these  societies  we  should  expect  to 
find  distinctive  masculine 
personalities,  and  institutions  and 
beliefs  which  reflect  and  are 
maintained  by  them. 

Post-Freudian  psychoanalytic 
object-relations  theory,  on  which 
Chodorow,  Dinnerstein  and  others 
draw,  distinguishes  the  biological 
birth  of  the  infant  from  the 
"psychological  birth"  of  the  social 
person.9  Biological  birth,  an  event  of 
short  duration,  is  relatively 
uninfluenced  by  social  variables. 
The  psychological  birth  of  a 
"person"  takes  about  three  years 
and  is  greatly  influenced  by  the 
social  environment  in  which  it 
occurs.  Biological  human  infants 
become  social  human  persons 
during  this  period.  Their 
"natures"  —  their  personalities  —  are 
not  fixed  or  determined  during  this 
process,  for  many  significant  changes 
in  our  personalities  are  and  can  be 
made  after  the  age  of  three.  But  the 
kinds  of  persons  infants  become  are 
greatly  influenced  by  the  particular 
social  relations  the  infant 
experiences  as  it  is  transformed,  and 
transforms  itself,  from  biological 
infant  to  social  person.  The  process 
of  becoming  a  social  person  is 
simultaneously  a  process  of 
becoming  distinctively  gendered. 
The  two  processes  are  really  only 
one  process,  for  they  are 
experientially  and  analytically 
indistinguishable:  all  social  persons 
are  also  socially  gendered  persons. 
Thus  our  attention  is  drawn  to  how, 


60/Quest 


during  this  process,  little  boys  and 
little  girls  develop  distinctive  ways 
of  relating  to  their  bodies,  their 
feelings  and  emotions,  to  other 
people  and  to  nature  itself. 

We  want  to  look  at  the  creation  of 
a  "self/other"  construct,  especially 
in  young  males.  The  hypothesis  we 
can  make  is  that  like  the 
unobservable  "gene"  of  biological 
theory,  this  unobservable 
"self/other"  construct  in  males  may 
be  responsible  for  passing  on  from 
generation  to  generation  the 
tendency  to  construct  domination 
structures  such  as  classism,  sexism, 
racism  and  heterosexism. 

Psychological  birth  is  the  first 
human  "labor."  Far  from  being  a 
passive  recipient  of  "external 
stimuli,"  the  infant  struggles  to 
emerge  from  its  initial  "oneness" 
with  the  psycho/physical 
environment  of  its  caretakers  —  the 
"mother-world."  This  first  human 
labor  is  extremely  difficult  and 
painful  because  the  infant  wants  to 
remain  in,  or  return  to,  that  oneness 
with  the  mother-world  while 
simultaneously  desiring  to  become  a 
separate  person. 

For  children  of  both  sexes,the 
"world"  from  which  they  must 
differentiate  themselves,  and  against 
which  they  discover/create  their  own 
autonomous  identity,  is  in  one  sense 
the  same  world  —  it  is  the  mother  — 
world.  But  in  another  sense,  it  is  a 
very  different  world  for  males  and 
for  females. 

The  stereotypical ly  masculine 
personality  develops  through 


separation  and  individuation  from  a 
kind  of  person  who  biologically  he 
cannot  become  and  must  exercise 
will,  control,  not  to  become 
socially  —  a  devalued  woman.  He 
cannot  and  must  not  become  her, 
this  first  "other";10  and  this  effort 
teaches  him  that  he  must  not 
become  any  later  other.  He  can  only 
hope  to  have  her  again  as  an  adult, 
or  to  have  others  like  her.  Her  body, 
experientially  embedded  as  it  is  in 
her  whole  mother-world,  becomes 
the  first  model  for  the  bodies  and 
worlds  of  others  —  of  persons  who 
are  perceived  as  unlike  himself  and 
against  which,  at  the  risk  of  losing 
his  self-identity,  he  must  maintain  a 
strong  —  even  rigid  —  sense  of 
separation. 

In  contrast,  the  stereotypical  ly 
feminine  personality  develops 
through  her  struggle  to  separate  and 
individuate  from  a  kind  of  person 
who  she  will  in  fact  become—  a 
devalued  woman.  She  cannot  hope 
to  have  this  first  or  any  later  other, 
but  will  naturally,  seemingly  without 
exerting  any  will,  become  her.  Her 
experience  of  separation  from  the 
mother-world  has  an  ambiguity 
lacking  in  the  boy's  experience. 

The  discovery  of  the 
psycho/physical  struggles  through 
which  masculinely  gendered 
humans  are  created  provides  the 
missing  link  between  the  observable 
self/other  domination  tendencies  of 
masculine  personalities,  and  the 
structured  domination  relations 
observable  in  patriarchal  belief- 
systems  and  institutions.  Men  seem 


Gender  Politics/61 


to  risk  losing  their  own  autonomous 
self-identity  unless  they  can  find 
ways  to  delimit  and  control  their 
physical,  emotional  and  social 
relations  to  "others." 

The  valuable  hypothesis  at  the 
core  of  Chodorow's,  Dinnerstein's 
and  Flax's  work  is  this:  patriarchal 
cultures,  where  men  design  and 
control  the  social  institutions  and 
systems  of  belief,  may  distinctively 
reflect  the  stereotypical ly  masculine 
modes  of  structuring  social  relations 
between  self  and  other  which 
originate  in  individuals,  in  the 
psycho/physical  labor  required  to 
become  masculinely  gendered 
social  persons.  The  two  kinds  of 
evidence  which  support  this 
hypothesis  are,  first,  the 
observations  of  the  male  infant's 
struggles  to  transform  himself,  within 
the  mother-world,  into  a  masculine 
social  person  and,  second, 
observations  that  all  of  the 
institutions  and  belief-systems  of 


patriarchies,  designed  and 
maintained  by  men,  share  built-in 
mechanisms  for,  and  justifications 
of,  controlling  and  dominating 
"others."  Relatives  of  the 
"authoritarian  personality"  of 
interest  to  the  Freudian  Left  are 
produced  not  just  in  the  Prussian 
aristocracy  or  just  through  young 
boys'  relations  with  their  fathers,  but 
in  young  males'  almost  universal 
infantile  experience  of  separating 
and  individuating  themselves  from 
the  mother-world.  And  this 
personality  structure  shows  up  not 
just  in  the  preference  for  Nazism  or 
other  such  obvious  authoritarian 
forms  of  socal  life,  but  in  all  the 
institutional  structures  associated 
with  patriarchies. 

Six  Criticisms  of  This  Kind  of 
Theory 

This  kind  of  theory  is  easily 
misunderstood.  Let's  look  at  the  six 


62/Quest 


kinds  of  criticism  which  have  been 
raised  against  Chodorow's  and 
Dinnerstein's  formulations  of  it. 
Some  of  these  criticisms  are  related 
to  the  others,  but  we  can  take  them 
up  separately.  First,  since  Chodorow, 
Dinnerstein  and  Flax  have  not 
described  the  historical  details  of 
classism,  racism,  sexism  and 
heterosexism,  or  how  these  actually 
function  in  particular  societies,  it  is 
necessary  to  ask  what  the  theory  is 
about  Second,  as  a  psychological 
theory,  isn't  the  theory  really 
idealistic?  Doesn't  it  mislead  us 
about  what  the  real  "material" 
causes  of  social  life  are?  Third,  isn't 
the  theory  deterministic,  leading  to 
the  depressing  and  politically  absurd 
conclusion  that  nothing  can  change 
unless  we  can  universally  change  the 
conditions  of  infant  care?  Fourth,  to 
what  extent  does  the  hypothesis  rest 
on  inadequately  supported  empirical 
claims  that  women  have  always 
done  most  of  the  infant  care  and 
that  women  are  universally 
devalued?  Fifth,  isn't  the  theory 
fatally  flawed  by  its  reliance  on 
Freudian  theory?  Finally,  doesn't  the 
theory  logically  result  in  support  for 
anti-feminist  politics? 

First,  in  order  to  understand  just 
what  the  theory  is  about  —  what  it  is 
explaining  —  one  needs  to  keep  in 
mind  the  distinction  in  science 
between  "appearances"  and 
"reality."  Biological  theories  argue 
that  genes  really  exist  even  though 
they  are  unobservable:  we  can  see 
their  observable  traces  in  the 
regularities  or  patterns  of  inherited 


physical  characteristics.  Similarly, 
this  theory  suggests  that  it  is  the 
unobservable  self/other  construct 
developed  in  men's  infancy  which 
we  can  see  structuring  the 
observable  regularities  of  classim, 
racism,  sexism  and  heterosexism  in 
patriarchal  societies.  In  this  respect, 
the  underlying  reality  of  the 
psycho/social  construct  makes  its 
appearance  as  these  historically 
specific  institutionalized  forms  of 
dominating  others.  Most  social 
theorists  have  explained  class,  race, 
gender  and  heterosexual  oppression 
as  separate  systems  which  have 
separate  causes,  or  else  one  has 
been  said  to  cause  some  of  the 
others.  This  theory,  in  contrast, 
implies  that  these  traditional  kinds 
of  explanations  amount  to  simply 
correlating  observable  regularities, 
that  the  conceptual  schemes  of 
these  social  theories  do  not  have 
categories  which  enable  them  to 
describe  what  it  is  that  structures  all 
of  these  domination  relations. 

The  analogy  with  genetic  theory 
also  helps  us  to  understand  the 
sense  in  which  this  is  a  materialist 
psychology.  Even  though  we  cannot 
observe  genes,  we  know  they  are 
really  there.  A  person  possesses 
distinctive  genetic  characteristics 
because  real  physical  interactions  in 
nature  have  occurred  earlier,  and 
our  genetic  characteristics  have  real 
physical  consequences  in  our 
children  and  grandchildren. 
Similarly,  the  self/other 
configuration  occurs  in  masculine 
personalities  because  of  the 


Gender  Politics/63 


particular  psycho/social/physical 
interactions  male  infants  have  with 
their  environment  —  the  mother- 
world.  That  particular  environment 
is  in  turn  intentionally  maintained  by 
all  of  the  other  economic,  political, 
social  institutions  in  patriarchal 
societies. 

We  can  use  the  analogy  with 
genetic  theory  in  a  third  way,  this 
time  to  understand  how  this 
materialist  psychology  is  not 
deterministic.  It  is  not  claiming  that 
individuals'  social  natures  are  fixed 
or  determined  at  any  age  or  in  any 
specific  way,  but  only  that  their 
natures  or  personalities  are 
influenced  by  the  kind  of 
environment  with  which  they 
interact  as  they  struggle  to 
transform  themselves  from  infants 
into  social  persons.  For  example,  if  I 
carry  genes  for  tallness,  that  does 
not  determine  that  I  will,  in  fact,  be 
tall.  Many  non-genetic  physical 
variables,  as  well  as  social  variables, 
combine  to  determine  my  height. 
Any  of  the  following  things  could 
have  happened  to  make  me 
relatively  shorter  than  I  am:  while 
she  was  carrying  me,  my  mother 
could  have  had  inadequate 
nutrition,  been  a  heavy  smoker  or 
been  on  drugs,  causing  me  to  be 
shorter  than  genetics  alone  would 
predict.  Furthermore,  as  a  child  J 
could  have  been  nutritonally  or 
otherwise  deprived;  for  example,  I 
might  have  been  exposed  to 
chemicals  in  the  air  or  water  which 
interfered  with  my  growth.  Or,  I 
might  have  had  a  disease  or  an 


accident  which  interfered  with  my 
"normal"  growth.  The  best  way  to 
put  the  point,  however,  is  not  in 
terms  of  "interference."  One's 
genetic  inheritance  can  only  be 
realized  through  its  interaction  with 
social  and  physical  variables  which 
collectively  determine  an 
individual's  height.  This  means  also 
that  we  can  intentionally  decrease 
or  increase  an  individual's  height  or 
a  group's  average  height  by  creating 
appropriate  social  and  physical 
conditions  through  which  genetic 
inheritance  will  be  realized.  Active 
human  agency  contributes  to  the 
realization  of  heredity  and 
environment  in  the  individual. 

Similarly,  the  self/other 
configuration  developed  in  infancy 
is  realized  through  its  subsequent 
interaction  with  all  of  the 
institutionalized  patterns  of  social 
relations  in  a  society,  and  its 
interaction  with  our  intentionally 
chosen  projects.  In  our  culture, 
virtually  all  the  racist,  classist,  sexist 
and  heterosexist  institutions  of 
society  work  to  reinforce  individual 
masculine  personalities  and  to 
expand  in  institutional  scope  this 
self-dominating-other  construct. 
Men  are  encouraged  by  almost  all 
social  relations  to  develop  the 
stereotypical  adult  masculine 
personality  which  is  comfortable 
with  women,  "lower  classes"  and 
nature  itself  only  when  it  is 
dominating  and  controlling  them. 
Some  men  have  had  or  sought  social 
interactions  which  work  against 
strengthening  this  self/other 


64/Quest 


configuration  in  their  own 
personalities  and  in  social 
institutions.  Some  have  been  raised 
by  a  nurturing  father  and/or  a 
mother  who  represented  the  rational 
public  life  in  which  the  young  boy 
could  expect  to  take  his  place  as  a 
social  person.  And  some  have  had  or 
sought  collective  decision-making 
in  left  politics  or  in  communal  living. 
Individual  experience  varies,  and 
these  atypical  experiences  are  a 
potentially  powerful  force  for 
institutional  and  personal  change. 
But  since  individual  behavior  always 
occurs  within  institutions,  individual 
"solutions"  are  not  solutions  at  all 
except  as  they  motivate  the 
changing  of  those  institutions.  If  we 
understand  how  this  self- 
dominating-other  dynamic  is  created 
and  works,  we  can  consciously 
construct  social  relations  for 
children  and  adults  which  do  not 
reinforce  the  offending  self/other 
tendencies  in  our  personalities  and 
institutions.  We  can  construct  social 
practices  which  transform  us  and 
our  institutions  into  types  that  do 
not  need  to  control  or  be  controlled 
by  others.  (The  "authoritarian 
personality"  functions  both  in  the 
rulers  and  the  ruled.) 

To  what  extent  does  the 
hypothesis  rest  on  inadequately 
supported  empirical  claims  that 
women  have  always  done  most  of 
the  infant  care  and  that  women  are 
universally  devalued?  As  is  the  case 
with  all  scientific  theories,  this 
theory  has  been  developed  to 
explain  one  particular  set  of 


puzzles—  in  this  case,  the  puzzles 
about  the  apparent  strength  of 
personal  and  institutional  classism, 
racism,  sexism  and  heterosexism  as 
oppressive  forces  in  contemporary 
Western  life.  But  like  all  good 
theories,  it  seems  to  have 
implications  far  beyond  the 
particular  puzzles  it  was 
constructed  to  solve.  The  theory 
predicts  that  in  societies  where 
women  have  been  less  devalued 
and/or  men  have  done  more  of  the 
infant  care,  we  should  expect  to 
observe  social  practices  which  do 
not  institutionalize  domination 
relations  so  strongly.  Hence  the 
theory  directs  us  to  compare  the 
historical  characteristics  of  the 
mother-world  against  which  the 
infant  defines  itself  in  other 
societies,  and  the  nature  of  the 
self/other  relations  captured  in  the 
institutions  of  those  societies.  What 
was  the  mother-world  like  in  the 
ancient  matrilinies  and/or 
matriarchies?  Do  the  institutions  of 
these  societies  structure  relations  of 
dominating  other  people,  of 
dominating  nature?  Is  there  ever 
such  a  sharp  separation  between 
nature  and  culture  in  matriarchal  or 
matrilineal  societies? 

We  do  not  have  to  look  as  far 
afield  as  ancient  matrilinies  to  find 
evidence  to  support  the  hypothesis 
that  the  offending  self/other 
construct  in  adult  males  is  strongest 
in  groups  where  devalued  women  do 
most  of  the  infant  care.  Angela 
Davis  and  Mina  Davis  Caulfield11 
have  pointed  out  that  in  "cultures  of 


Gender  Politics/65 


resistance"  (black  families  during 
American  slavery  and  Algerian  . 
families  during  the  French  ^ 

occupation  are  their  examples, 
respectively)  women's  labor  in  the 
family  was  the  most  valuable  labor 
to  the  resisting  culture.  Far  from 
being  devalued  in  the  slave  culture 
or  Algerian  culture,  women's  labor 
was  openly  recognized  as  the  only 
labor  which  the  dominant  culture 
could  not  completely  appropriate 
and  twist  to  its  own  ends.  It  alone 
reproduced  the  resisting  culture. 
Hence  we  can  ask  what  was  the 
mother-world  like  for  slave  and 
Algerian  infants?  Was  the  offending 
self/other  construct  as  strong  in 
adult  males  who  grew  up  in 
American  slavery  or  the  French 
occupation  of  Algeria  as  it  is  in 
cultures  where  women's  labor  is 
devalued  by  the  culture? 

Finally,  our  focus  on  the 
correlation  between  forms  of  infant 
care  and  forms  of  society  leads  to 
new  questions  about  periods  of 
great  social  change  in  history.  For 
instance,  were  there  changes  in  the 
mother-world  of  infants  which 
preceded  the  particularly  virulent 
domination  relations 
institutionalized  by  capitalism  and 
modern  science's  controlling  stance 
toward  nature? 

Chodorow's  and  Dinnerstein's 
work  does  not  rest  on  universalist 
claims  about  the  devaluation  of 
women  or  about  child-raising 
practices.  Instead,  it  directs  our 
attention  to  the  probable  importance 
of  cultural  variation  in  the  labor  and 


the  value  of  women  for  the 
personalities  of  the  social  individuals 
produced  through  psycho/social/ 
physical  interaction  with  them. 

Isn't  this  theory  flawed  by  its 
reliance  on  Freudian  psychoanalytic 
theory?12  Critics  have  objected  to 
the  Freudian  claim  that  certain 
historically  specific  characteristics 
of  middle-class  women  and  children 
in  nineteenth-century  Vienna  are,  in 
fact,  characteristics  of  women  and 
children  in  all  societies  at  all  times. 
In  contrast,  the  theory  we  are 
considering  calls  for  an  examination 
of  variations  in  psychological 
development  according  to  the 
historical,  material  and  social 
relations  of  the  division  of  labor  by 
gender—  relations  which  are 
themselves  invested  in  and 
maintained  by  political,  economic 
and  social  relations  within  other 
institutions  of  society. 

Critics  object  to  the  Freudian 
claim  that  men,  women  and  children 
should  be  like  the  expressed  ideal  in 
Freud's  Vienna.  In  contrast,  our 
theory  supports  this  criticism  and 
argues  that  this  kind  of  unjustifiable 
claim  is  part  of  the  arsenal  used  to 
maintain  sexism  and  classism. 

Critics  argue  that  the  focus  on 
psychological  life  supports  a 
typical  strategy  of  the  oppressors, 
mystifying  the  real  economic 
sources  of  human  misery  and,  thus, 
disarming  the  forces  for 
revolutionary  change.  We  have 
already  dealt  with  the  narrow, 
reductionist  and  patriarchal 
tendency  to  understand  by  causal 


66/Quest 


social  relations  only  economic 
relations. 

Critics  charge  that  Freudian 
theory  locates  social  ills  within  the 
"private  domain"  of  the  family 
instead  of  in  the  "public "domain"  of 
the  economy,  and  that  this,  too,  is  a 
typical  strategy  of  the  oppressors 
enabling  them  to  avoid  dealing  with 
the  real  sources  of  human  misery. 


Li  Deral  democratic  theory  does  use 
tr  e  mother  as  a  scapegoat  for  social 
illsin  many  ways,  and  Freudian 
theory  has  been  useful  to  it  in  such 
projects.  Nevertheless,  since  it  is  in 
the  family  (whatever  its  form)  that 
individuals  are  psychologically 
conscripted  into  gender-systems, 
class-systems,  racism  and 


Gender  Politics/67 


heterosexism,  it  is  a  theory  of  such 
conscription  which  we  need  in  order 
to  understand  the  psychological 
investment  in  classism  and  sexism 
which  the  next  generation  will  have. 
Furthermore,  the  division  of  labor  by 
gender  is  itself  understood  to  be 
supported  and  maintained  by 
ongoing  relations  of  class,  race, 
heterosexual  and  gender  oppression 
in  economic  life  and  in  public  life 
more  generally.  The  assumption  that 
there  is  a  clear  division  between 
public  issues  and  private  issues,  and 
that  causal  influences  are  all  from 
the  former  domain  to  the  latter,  is  an 
assumption  that  reductionist  and 
sexist  Marxism  has  uncritically 
inherited  from  liberal  thought. 

Critics  correctly  charge  that 
Freudian  theory  has  a  built-in  class 
and  ethnocentric  bias  in  its  focus  on 
nuclear  families.  But  in  contrast,  the 
trouble-making  environment  which 
the  infant  experiences  should  be 
understood  as  involving  not  a  nuclear 
family,  but  socially  devalued 
women  doing  infant  care  while  men 
control  public  life.  The  caretakers 
need  not  be  biological  mothers,  nor 
need  there  be  only  one  such  woman. 
And  the  early  identification  between 
mother  and  child  need  not  be  as 
strong  as  in  stereotypical  nuclear 
families  in  order  to  create  the 
sufficient  conditions  for  the 
production  and  reproduction  of 
domination  interests.  So,  in  these 
five  respects,  the  theory  does  not 
rely  on  the  objectionable 
characteristics  of  Freudian  theory. 

Finally,  feminists  have  argued  that 


Chodorow's  and  Dinnerstein's 
arguments  logically  contribute  to 
anti-feminist  politics.  But  the 
hypothesis  which  is  the  core  of  their 
theory,  and  which  has  been 
reconstructed  above,  does  not  have 
this  consequence.  It's  true  that  the 
reconstructed  theory  places  great 
importance  on  the  nature  of  the 
family  environment  with  which 
infants  interact.  But  it  is  not 
individual  "inadequate  mothering" 
nor  the  failure  of  father  to  "bring  up 
the  kiddies"  which  can  be  blamed 
for  the  self-dominating-other 
construct  in  masculine  personalities. 
What  needs  to  be  changed  is  the 
systematic  devaluation  of  women 
and  the  systematic  division  of  labor 
by  gender.  Since  capitalist 
patriarchy  invests  in  and  supports 
this  asymmetric  division  of  labor 
through  government  policies, 
economic  structures,  moral 
precepts,  educational  and  legal 
policies,  every  aspect  of 
contemporary  social  relations  must 
be  changed  to  eliminate  the 
production  of  the  self-dominating- 
other  construct. 

When  the  asymmetric  division  of 
labor  is  virtually  society-wide,  it's 
not  clear  what  difference  a  few 
cases  of  lesbian  parenting,  for 
example,  might  have  on  the 
personality  structures  of  the  infants 
in  these  families.  But  it  would  be 
more  likely  that  since  the  infants  do 
not  immediately  experience  a 
division  of  labor  by  gender  —  their 
caretakers  are  also  the  breadwinners 
of  the  family  —  lesbian  parenting 


68/Quest 


might  work  against  the  offensive 
self/other  construct  in  these  few 
individual  cases. 

Conclusion 

As  the  theory  has  been 
reconstructed  above,  it  is  poised 
politically  in  opposition  to  a  Marxist 
political  economy,  though  it  arrives 
at  this  opposition  through  insights 
gained  from  a  Marxist  theory  of 
knowledge.  It  explains  why  the 
strategies  for  political  change 
recommended  by  Marxist  theory  are 
insufficient:  capitalist  accumulation 
structures  are  simply  one 
"appearance"  of  the  underlying 
reality  of  more  general  domination 
relations.  Marxist  analyses  are 
inadequate  because  they  have  failed 
to  account  for  this  additional 
"cause"  of  classism,  racism,  sexism 
and  heterosexism  and  for  the 
reproduction  of  these  across 
generations.  This  failure  of  theory  is 
reflected,  too,  in  the  failure  of 
socialist  struggles  which  have  not 
come  to  terms  with  "the  woman 
question."13  New  social  institutions 
produce  new  kinds  of  social  persons, 
and  new  kinds  of  social  persons  can 


produce  new  institutions.  This 
theory  shows  the  "mechanism" 
which  must  be  changed  if  we  are  to 
produce  new  people,  and  it  shows 
how  eliminating  the 
institutionalization  of  the 
asymmetric  division  of  labor  by 
gender  throughout  society  is  a 
prerequisite  for  changing  that 
"mechanism."  Theories  and  political 
struggles  which  do  not  deal  with 
how  the  asymmetric  division  of 
labor  by  gender  (re)creates  and 
sustains  domination  relations  are 
idealistic,  for  they  fail  to  grasp  a 
crucial  causal  role  in  all  of  social 
life:  the  role  played  by  the  gender 
politics  of  infancy. 

Sandra  Harding  teaches  at  the 
University  of  Delaware  and  has 
published  essays  and  edited  several 
anthologies  on  issues  in  feminist 
theory  and  in  the  philosophy  of 
science.  Discovering  Reality: 
Feminist  Perspectives  on 
Epistemology,  Metaphysics, 
Methodology  and  the  Philosophy  of 
Science,  co-edited  with  Merrill  Hin- 
tikka,  will  be  published  by  Reidel  in 
1981. 


NOTES 

'Dorothy  Dinnerstein,  The  Mermaid  and  the 
Minotaur:  Sexual  Arrangements  and  Human 
Malaise  (New  York:  Harper  &  Row,  1976); 
Nancy  Chodorow,  The  Reproduction  of 
Mothering:  Psychoanalysis  and  the  Sociology  of 
Gender  (Berkeley:  University  of  California 
Press,  1978);  Jane  Flax,  "The  Conflict 
Between  Nurturance  and  Autonomy  in 
Mother-Daughter  Relationships  and  Within 
Feminism,"  Feminist  Studies  4:2  (1978),  and 


"Political  Philosophy  and  the  Patriarchal 
Unconscious:  A  Psychoanalytic  Perspective 
on  Epistemology  and  Metaphysics," 
forthcoming  in  Dis-Covering  Reality,  ed.  S. 
Harding  and  M.  Hintikka  (Dordrecht:  Reidel, 
1981);  Gayle  Rubin,  "The  Traffic  in  Women: 
Notes  on  the  'Political  Economy'  of  Sex,"  in 
Toward  an  Anthropology  of  Women,  ed. 
Rayna  Rapp  Reiter  (New  York:  Monthly 
Review  Press,  1975).  I  have  been  discussing 
the  topic  of  this  paper  and  related  issues  for 


Gender  Politics/69 


two  years  with  Nancy  Hartsock  and  Jane 
Flax,  and  owe  them  both  an  incalculable  debt 
for  helping  to  clarify  my  perspective  on  these 
issues.  Margaret  Phelan's  and  Pamela 
Armstrong's  comments  have  improved  both 
my  thinking  and  writing  in  this  essay. 

2See  Robert  Coles'  series,  Children  of  Crisis, 
Vol.  1-4  (New  York:  Atlantic  Monthly  Press, 
1967  and  forward),  and  Jacques  Donzelot, 
The  Policing  of  Families  tr.  Robert  Hurley 
(New  York:  Pantheon,  1979). 

3See,  for  example:  Batya  Weinbaum  and  Amy 
Bridges,  "The  Other  Side  of  the  Paycheck: 
Monopoly  Capital  and  the  Structure  of 
Consumption,"  and  Heidi  Hartmann, 
"Capitalism,  Patriarchy,  and  Job  Segregation 
by  Sex,"  Capitalist  Patriarchy  and  the  Case  for 
Socialist  Feminism,  Zillah  Eisenstein,  ed. 
(New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press,  1979);  also 
Eleanor  Leacock's  introduction  to  Frederick 
Engels'  The  Origin  of  the  Family,  Private 
Property  and  the  State. 

Frederick  Engels,  "Preface  to  the  First 
Edition,"  The  Origin  of  the  Family,  Private 
Property  and  the  State,  ed.  with  an 
introduction  by  Eleanor  Burke  Leacock  (New 
York:  International  Publishers,  1972),  pp.  71- 
72. 

5Heidi  Hartmann,  "The  Unhappy  Marriage  of 
Marxism  and  Feminism:  Towards  a  More 
Progressive  Union,"  Women  and  Revolution, 
ed.  Lydia  Sargent  (Boston:  South  End  Press, 
1980).  In  "The  First  Division  of  Labor 
Maintains  Patriarchy  and  Capital,"  the  same 
volume,  I  direct  the  argument  of  this  present 
paper  toward  an  appreciation  and  some 
criticism  of  Hartmann's  paper. 

6Batya  Weinbaum,  The  Curious  Courtship  of 
Women's  Liberation  and  Socialism  (Boston: 
South  End  Press,  1978). 

Tor  example,  see  Max  Horkheimer, 
"Authority  and  the  Family,"  Critical  Theory 
(New  York:  Herder  &  Herder,  1972);  The 
Frankfurt  Institute  of  Social  Research,  "The 
Family,"  Aspects  of  Sociology  (Boston: 
Beacon  Press,  1972);  and  the  writings  of 
Herbert  Marcuse,  Theodor  Adorno  and 
Wilhelm  Reich. 


8M.Z.  Rosaldo  lists  exactly  what 
anthropologists  have  discovered  in  "The  Use 
and  Abuse  of  Anthropology:  Reflections  on 
Feminism  and  Cross-Cultural 
Understanding,"  Signs  5:3  (1980),  pp. 
394-395.  The  balance  of  her  essay,  however, 
reflects  a  widespread  confusion  about 
whether  this  kind  of  claim  should  be  regarded 
as  a  "universalist"  assumption  or  a 
hypothesis  to  be  tested. 

'See  Margaret  S.  Mahler,  Fred  Pine,  and  Anni 
Bergman,  The  Psychological  Birth  of  the 
Human  Infant  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1975); 
and  Harry  Guntrip,  Personality  Structure  and 
Human  Interaction  (New  York:  International 
Universities  Press,  1961). 

10Chodorow  gives  a  detailed  account  of  the 
importance  to  the  son  of  not  becoming  like 
his  mother,  and  discusses  why  this  issue  is  so 
important  to  both  mother  and  son.  See 
Chapter  6  of  The  Reproduction  of  Mothering. 

"The  classic  analysis  here  is  Angela  Davis' 
"The  Black  Woman's  Role  in  the  Community 
of  Slaves,"  The  Black  Scholar,  1972.  See  also 
Mina  Davis  Caulf  ield's  "Imperialism,  the 
Family,  and  Cultures  of  Resistance,"  Socialist 
Revolution  20  (1974),  for  a  similar  account  of 
Algerian  women's  roles  in  a  culture  of 
resistance. 

12These  analyses  of  Freud-baiting  are  given 
also  in  my  "The  First  Division  of  Labor 
Maintains  Patriarchy  and  Capital." 

13Weinbaum  and  Hartmann  provide 
illuminating  discussions  of  this  issue. 


70/Quest 


Mother/Daughter 
Roles  in  the 
Feminist  Movement 


by  Mickey  Spencer,  Bridget  Wynne, 
Polly  Taylor  and  Julie  Gale 


We  are  four  women,  ages  22  to  51 . 
Mickey  has  two  sons;  Julie,  three 
daughters;  Bridget  and  Polly  have  no 
children.  We  are,  of  course,  all 
daughters.  We  want  to  share  with 
other  women  some  of  what  we  have 
distilled  about  mother-daughter  sex 
role  stereotypes  from  our  struggles 
to  relate  to  each  other  and  to  other 
women.  We  believe  that  these 
mother-daughter  roles  affect 
many  —  perhaps  most  —  relationships 
among  women,  regardless  of  blood 
ties  or  group  size. 

Our  analysis  originates  from  our 
experiences,  and  our  emphasis  and 
perspective  reflect  this.  We  have 
found  that  our  ideas  apply  to  many 
women  we  have  spoken  with.  We  do 
not,  of  course,  believe  that  they 
apply  equally  to  all  women. 

The  effects  of  both  mother  and 
daughter  roles  are  damaging, 
especially  when  they  interfere  with 
our  quest  for  feminist  group 
structures;  that  is,  structures  that  are 
supportive,  cooperative  and 


nonhierarchical.  For  this  reason,  we 
find  it  essential  for  ourselves,  and 
believe  it  is  crucial  to  the  women's 
liberation  movement,  to  analyze 
these  roles  and  develop 
nonstereotypic  ways  of  relating, 
communicating  and  working 
together. 

Our  vulnerability  to  accepting 
these  roles  does  not  depend  on 
family  ties.  Because  these  roles  are 
taught  to  us  as  children  and 
reinforced  throughout  our  adult 
lives,  we  often  fall  into  the  trap  of 
assigning  them  to  ourselves  and 
others  as  we  enter  new  relationships. 
In  fact,  it  is  difficult  to  do  anything 
else,  even  if  we  work  at  it,  and  it  is 
impossible  if  we  neglect  it.  More 
often  than  not,  our  new 
arrangements  take  on  the 
characteristics  of  family  relations, 
and  the  network  of  complementary 
roles  solidifies  until  we  have  formed 
a  substitute  family  in  which  our 
oppression  thrives. 

We  believe  that  the  imposition  of 
mother-daughter  stereotypes  is  an 
important  tool  for  the  oppression  of 
women:  the  roles  either  exclude  us 
from  power,  or  attach  demeaning 
traits  to  the  power  we  have  been 


©1978,  Mickey  Spencer,  Bridget  Wynne, 


Polly  Taylor  and  Julie  Gale 


Mother/Daughter  Roles  in  the  Feminist  Movement/71 


allowed.  Our  primary  interest  here, 
however,  is  to  show  how  we  repeat 
these  oppressive  roles  in 
relationships  between  and  among 
women,  particularly  in  feminist 
organizations. 

The  Stereotypes 

The  feminine  role  contains 
mutually  incompatible 
requirements.  Women  are  supposed 
to  be  cute  and  helpless,  but 
managing  and  nurturing;  sexy  but 
pure;  dependent  but  self-sacrificing. 
In  fact,  we  are  oppressed  by  two, 
often  incompatible,  feminine 
stereotypes.  Because  these  basic 
contradictions  about  what  we  are 
supposed  to  be  are  truly  "crazy- 
making/'  we  tend  to  go  along  with 
the  division  of  women  into  two 
roles,  and  we  escape  the 
contradictions  by  adopting  either 
the  mother  or  the  daughter  role. 

One  stereotype  is  that  of  the 
"weak,"  incompetent  woman  who  is 
unable  to  admit  that  she  can  cope, 
and  so  cannot  be  the  capable  one 
in  a  relationship.  This  role  —  the 
"daughter"  —  contains  the 
ineffectual,  sexual  (at  least 
incipiently)  aspects  of  femininity  to 
which  the  rebelliousness  of  youth  is 
added.  The  other  stereotype  is  that 
of  the  "strong,"  capable,  self- 
sacrificing  woman  who  cannot  admit 
that  she  can  fail  to  cope,  and  who, 
therefore,  cannot  be  vulnerable  in  a 
relationship.  This  role  —  the 
"mother"  —  contains  the  nurturing 
and  self-sacrificing  aspects  of  the 
feminine  role  to  which  the  active, 


capable  traits  —  usually  identified 
with  the  male  role  —  are  added. 

The  role  of  mother  is  the  only  one 
in  which  women  can  legitimately 
have  power  in  this  society.  But  that 
power  is  strictly  limited:  the  power 
real  mothers  have  over  others  is 
primarily  the  power  to  withhold 
unconditional  love.  Along  with  that 
power  comes  responsibility  for 
others  and  the  expectation  that 
mothers  will  be  nurturing  and  self- 
sacrificing. 

Furthermore,  mothers  are 
traditionally  blamed  for  many  of 
society's  problems.  Criminals  are 
said  to  have  had  inadequate 
mothering  in  their  youth; 
incompetent  men  are  supposed  to 
be  tied  to  the  apron-strings  of  guilt- 
tripping  mothers.  This  link  between 
power  and  self-sacrifice,  and  the  use 
of  mothers  and  mother  figures  as 
societal  scapegoats,  can  keep  us 
from  working  to  gain  power, 
because  "power"  accompanied  by 
self-sacrifice  and  derogation  is 
hardly  attractive. 

Why  the  Roles  Hold  Us 

The  mother-daughter  stereotypes 
have  a  tremendous  grip  on  us.  All 
the  emotional  baggage  of  our 
relationships  with  our  own  mothers 
and  daughters  is  carried  into  our 
relationships  with  other  women.1 

Mother-daughter  stereotyping  is 
different  from  other  instances  in 
which  a  current  relationship  recalls 
an  old  one  (e.g.,  a  man  who  reminds 
us  of  our  father).  The  uniqueness  of 
the  mother-daughter  relationship 


72/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


stems  from  the  mother's  role  in 
teaching  her  daughters 
"appropriate"  social  behavior  and 
from  the  oppression  they  share  as 
women.  As  daughters,  we  can  never 
get  enough  of  the  right  kind  of 
nurturing.2  We  don't  get  enough 
nurturing  because  society  requires 
that  women  be  the  nurturers, 
focusing  the  major  portion  of  our 
attention  and  support  on  men, 
rather  than  on  women.  We  are  also 
unable  to  get  the  right  kind  of 
nurturing  because  most  mothers  are 
too  oppressed  to  treat  us  as  equals, 
to  encourage  us  to  grow,  and  to 
provide  us  with  good  role  models  for 
power  and  happiness. 

In  addition  to  the  ongoing  pain  we 
feel  about  the  lack  of  nurturing  in 
our  mother-daughter  relationships, 
we  suffer  because  mothers  are 
required  to  teach  daughters  the 
oppressive,  debilitating  feminine 
role,  and  to  transmit  society's 
message  that  women  are  inferior.  If 
the  teaching  is  "inadequate,"  and  a 
daughter  emerges  as  a  woman  who 
does  not  practice  the  approved 
behavior  and  attitudes,  she  will  be 
disciplined  swiftly,  and  her  mother 
will  be  censured.  For  a  mother  to 
teach  and  a  daughter  to  learn  this 
negative  role,  both  must  deny  our 
common  oppression  and  conceal  its 
manifestations  from  each  other.3 
Whether  one  or  both  of  us 
ultimately  breaks  away  from  these 
roles,  or  we  both  live  out  our  lives 
within  them,  and  even  if  we  find 
nurturing  elsewhere,  the  pain  and 
anger  generated  by  this  relationship 


continues  to  color  our  relationships 
with  other  women  throughout  our 
adult  lives. 

The  Oppression  of  the 
Mother-Daughter  Roles 

These  roles  are  a  constant 
oppression  in  the  lives  of  all  women. 
It  is  through  them  that  we  are 
victimized  by  men.  "Weak"  women 
can  be  used  sexually.  As 
"daughters,"  our  intelligence  and 
competence  are  ignored  or  rejected, 
or  we  are  expected  to  conceal  them. 
We  are  encouraged  to  be  passive  by 
the  promised  security  of  marriage 
and  by  the  negative  sanctions  of 
humor  and  derision.  The  only  way 
we  can  get  our  needs  met  as 
"daughters"  is  through 
manipulation.  We  are  condescended 
to  as  vulnerable  and  never  taken 
seriously,  even  when,  in  fact,  we 
perform  a  productive  role  with  a 
high  degree  of  competence.  If  we 
express  anger,  it  is  discounted  either 
as  the  expected  rebelliousness  of 
youth  or  as  silly  and  cute.  We  are 
expected  to  look  up  to  others  and  to 
make  a  career  of  making  them  feel 
good.  We  find  it  hard  to  take 
ourselves  seriously  and  tend  to  have 
low  self-esteem. 

As  "strong"  women,  on  the  other 
hand,  our  competence  and  power 
are  qualified.  Our  abilities  are  used 
in  the  service  of  others  and  then 
characterized  as  taking  over  and 
nagging.  If  we  use  our  strength  to 
take  care  of  ourselves,  we  are 
faulted  for  not  nurturing 
others  —  for  being  "bad  mothers." 


Mother/Daughter  Roles/73 


Yet  we  don't  receive  nurturing  from 
others  becase  we  are  expected  to  be 
invulnerable:  as  "mothers,"  we 
must  cope  at  all  times,  and  when  we 
ask  for  help,  we  often  are  not  heard. 
When  we  act  vulnerable  and  are 
heard,  we  are  accused  of  playing 
games,  of  pretending  to  be  weak,  of 
being  manipulative.  We  rarely  have 
energy  or  get  support  for 
independent  creativity;  our  sexual 
needs  are  often  ridiculed  or  ignored, 
and  when  we  express  our  anger,  we 
are  accused  of  failing  in  our  jobs  as 
nurturers. 

Stereotyping  and  Conflict 
Among  Women 

Mother-daughter  role 
stereotyping  by  the  larger  society 
clearly  harms  our  personality 
development  as  women.  What  is 
even  more  devastating,  is  the  extent 
to  which  we  carry  this  stereotypical 
behavior  and  the  inevitable  damage 
it  causes  over  into  peer  group  and 
feminist  activities,  thus  decreasing 
our  ability  to  build  and  maintain  an 
effective  women's  liberation 
movement. 

As  children,  we  learn  the  traits 
associated  with  our  roles  as  a  unit, 
and  as  adults,  we  project  them  as  a 
unit  —  we  learn  that  women  who  are 
sexy  are  also  scatter-brained  and 
dependent,  while  "strong",  self-  , 
reliant  women  are  unattractive  and 
brainy.  While  we  usually  adopt  one 
or  the  other  role  as  our  principal 
mask,  we  may  also  need  to  shift 
from  one  to  the  other  as  our  life 
situations  change.  Whether  we  are 


put  into  the  mother  role  or  the 
daughter  one  can  depend  on  such 
factors  as  appearance,  age  or  power 
differences.  Those  women  who  were 
pretty  and  petite  as  children  were 
rewarded  for  acting  silly,  helpless 
and  cute,  while  those  who  did  not 
conform  to  traditional  standards  of 
beauty  were  trained  for  service  and 
competency. 

As  young  women,  we  are  often 
expected  to  fit  the  daughter 
stereotype,  while  as  we  grow  older 
we  are  more  likely  to  be  put  into  the 
mother  role.  When  relating  to  each 
other  in  feminist  settings,  some  of 
the  problems  between  younger  and 
older  women  seem  to  arise  because 
of  differences  in  style,  language, 
taste,  etc.,  that  come  from  having 
lived  our  lives  at  different  historical 
times. 

Even  more  important  than 
differences  of  style  are  the  problems 
that  arise  from  our  lack  of 
understanding  of  and  respect  for 
each  other's  choices,  which  we  may 
have  made  under  very  different 
historical  conditions.  It  is  hard  for 
the  woman  who  made  the  decision 
to  be  a  housewife  and  mother  in  the 
1950s  and  the  woman  who  made  the 
decision  not  to  marry  or  have 
children  in  the  1970s  to  understand 
each  other's  choices. 

Women's  common  oppression 
results  in  a  very  strong  tie  between 
actual  mothers  and  daughters.  This 
promotes  an  intense  emotional 
involvement  in  each  other's 
behavior  and  in  what  happens  in 
each  other's  lives.  Strong 


74/Quest 


involvement  and  helplessness  to 
control  each  other's  fate  can  evoke 
a  great  deal  of  guilt,  anger  and 
jealousy.  These  feelings  can  spill 
over,  and  when,  because  of  age  or 
other  characteristics,  we  cast 
another  woman  in  the  stereotyped 
role,  we  can  react  to  her  with  all  the 
strong  feelings  with  which  we  react 
to  our  own  mothers  and  daughers. 

When  we  are  trapped  in  these 
roles,  our  lack  of  understanding  may 
keep  us  from  recognizing  and 
allowing  each  other's  stumbling 
attempts  to  act  in  role-free  ways. 
When  one  woman  attempts  to 
discard  her  role,  she  threatens  the 
next  woman's  conformity.  This 
conformity  is  our  protection  against 
a  hostile  world.  Until  we  develop  an 
alternative  system  for  protecting 
ourselves,  we  will  be  hostile  to  new 
behavior  and  punish  it  in  ourselves 
and  others.  And,  of  course,  this 
becomes  a  vicious  cycle;  retarding 
the  development  of  role-free  models 
of  interaction  undermines  the  very 
support  system  which  could  protect 
our  nonconformity. 

Power  Differences 

While  appearance,  age  and 
generational  differences,  and 
idiosyncratic  traits  can  trap  us  into 
mother-daughter  stereotypes,  power 
differences  are  perhaps  even  more 
divisive.  In  this  society,  women  are 
treated  as  an  inferior  group  and 
hence  are  allowed  less  power  than 
men.  However,  in  addition  to  this 
structure  of  gender-based 
oppression,  differences  in  social 


class,  race,  age,  occupational  status, 
sexual  preference,  etc.,  give  some 
women  more  power  than  others. 
Traditionally,  the  only  way  for 
women  to  have  even  a  semblance  of 
power  is  as  mothers.  Therefore,  we 
often  cast  women  with  power  (and 
they  cast  themselves)  in  the  role  of 
"mother."  We  are  then  likely  to 
project  onto  these  women  the 
feelings  and  expectations  we  have 
about  our  own  mothers. 

Power  over  others:  Some  women, 
usually  because  of  their 
higher  occupational  status,  have 
structural  power  over  other  women; 
e.g.,  a  professor  over  students,  or  a 
businesswoman  over  secretaries.  A 
woman  may  also  have  power  over 
store  clerks,  household  workers  and 
even  her  children's  teachers  because 
of  her  —  or,  more  likely,  her 
husband's  —  money  and  social 
status  (even  though  she  may  be 
relatively  powerless  vis-a-vis  her 
husband). 

Women  are  not  used  to  having 
power  over  others,  so  we  often  use  it 
awkwardly  in  our  organizations. 
Sometimes  we  repeat  the  good 
mother  role,  nurturing  everyone  and 
getting  everything  done  while 
making  it  appear  that  everyone  else 
is  doing  it.  The  "organization 
mother"  doesn't  appear  to  compete 
and  lets  others  take  credit  for  her 
work;  she  is  not  threatening.  At  other 
times,  we  reject  this  role  and  end  up 
as  either  the  "organization  bitch"  or 
the  "bad  mother."  The  "organization 
bitch"  is  the  woman  who,  because 
we  usually  have  so  little  power, 


Mother/Daughter  Roles/75 


hoards  it  when  she  gets  it.  The  "bad 
mother"  is  the  woman  who  is 
competent  but  expects  others  to 
share  the  work,  and  is  therefore  seen 
as  scolding  or  nagging.  She  does 
expect  credit  for  her  work,  so  she  is 
seen  as  a  greater  threat  than  a 
woman  who  accepts  the  good 
mother  role. 

Whenever  we  assume  the  role  of 
"organization  mother,"  we  tend  to 
treat  women  as  subordinates,  as  we 
might  treat  daughters,  refusing  to 
share  our  skills  and  resources  with 
them  or  guiding  them 
condescendingly  but  not  expecting 
much  of  them. 

If  we  assume  the  daughter  role  in 
relating  to  women  who  have  power 
over  us,  we  may  look  upon  them  as 
"mothers."  To  the  extent  that  we 
feel  rejected  by  and  resentful  of  our 
own  mothers,  we  react  with  anger 
towards  women  with  power  over  us.4 
To  the  extent  that  we  feel  loved  and 
nurtured  by  our  mothers,  we  tend  to 
expect  love  and  nurturing  from 
women  with  power  over  us,  and  to 
accuse  them  of  being  cold  and 
rejecting  if  they  do  not  give  it  to  us. 

Power  over  our  own  lives:     Many 
of  these  same  problems  arise  among 
women  who  have  different  degrees 
of  power  over  their  own  lives,  even  if 
neither  has  power  over  the  other. 
Common  usage  does  not  distinguish 
between  power  over  others  and 
power  over  our  own  lives.  Therefore, 
we  may  look  upon  a  woman  who  is 
centered,  skilled  or  competent  as 
having  power  over  us.  We  may  then 
take  the  next  step  of  stereotyping 


her  as  a  "mother"  and  treating  her 
accordingly  (even  though,  in  fact, 
mothers  usually  have  very  little 
power  over  their  own  lives). 

Unlike  money,  status  and 
authority,  resources  such  as 
expertise,  skills  and  competence  are 
not  diminished  by  sharing  them 
within  a  feminist  context.  That  is,  if 
we  share  our  skills,  we  may  reduce 
our  power  over  others,  but  we  do 
not  lose  power  over  our  own  lives. 
When  Bridget  and  Mickey  taught  a 
course  about  mother-daughter 
relationships,  we  found  that  we 
brought  very  different  skills  to  the 
project.  Mickey  has  a  more 
academic  background  and  works 
well  with  concepts,  while  Bridget 
felt  somewhat  inadequate  in  these 
areas.  Bridget,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
more  highly  skilled  in  dealing  with 
groups  in  nonthreatening  ways. 
While  we  were  teaching  the  course 
to  the  students,  we  were  also 
learning  each  other's  skills  and 
gaining  confidence  in  our  abilities  in 
new  areas.  Neither  of  us  lost 
anything  and  both  of  us  gained. 

In  the  women's  liberation 
movement,  which  has  few  tangible 
resources,  women  rarely  have  power 
over  others,  except  that  which 
comes  from  differences  in  skills  and 
knowledge.  Distinguishing  these 
personal  resources  from  those  based 
on  money,  status  and  legitimation 
helps  us  to  avoid  treating  different 
kinds  of  power  in  the  same  way 
whenever  we  meet  them.  The  power 
men  have  stems  from  their  control 
over  the  tangible  resources  of 


76/Quest 


society  and  their  access  to  the  best 
options;  their  power  is  consistent 
with  the  masculine  stereotype. 
Women's  power  is  much  more  likely 
to  be  based  on  resources  that  can  be 
shared  and  yet  it  is  stereotypical  ly 
associated  with  the  mother  role, 
which  contains  many  self-weakening 
traits. 

The  illusion  of  power:  Because 
power,  and  in  particular  power  for 
women,  usually  confers 
responsibility,  we  can  make  the 
mistake  of  assuming  that  anyone 
with  a  lot  of  responsibility  must  also 
have  a  lot  of  power.  When  this 
responsible  person  is  a  woman,  we 
make  the  connection: 
responsibility  =  power  =  "mother/' 
When  we  strive  for  competence  and 
accept  responsibility,  but  refuse  to 
add  the  sacrificial  nurturing 
expected  of  mothers,  we  are  often 
seen  as  a  threat  by  other  feminists. 

Trashing 

Mother-daughter  stereotyping  can 
interfere  with  our  attempts  to  create 
supportive,  nonhierarchical  work 
groups.  The  collective  member  with 
the  greater  resources  —  and  hence 
power  —  is  likely  to  be  cast  by 
herself  as  well  as  by  others  in  the 
mother  role,  while  those  with  less 
power  are  cast  in  the  daughter  role. 
Even  if  this  is  acceptable  to  the 
women  involved,  it  mocks  the 
women's  liberation  movement's 
commitment  to  the  equal 
distribution  of  power. 

It  is  often  the  case  that  the 


woman  with  the  greater  resources 
and  skills  is  either  an  early  or 
founding  member  of  the  group,  or  a 
member  with  greater  commitment 
to  it.  This  gives  her  a  kind  of 
seniority  similar  to  the  generational 
differences  between  mothers  and 
daughters.  The  one  with  seniority 
knows  the  early  history  of  the  group 
and  the  reasons  for  early  decisions; 
she  may  resent  newcomers  who 
change  them.  Her  seniority  makes 
her  appear  "older"  and  seem  "old- 
fashioned"  to  the  new  members, 
while  they  appear  inexperienced  and 
incompetent  to  her. 

This  setup  makes  it  easy  for  the 
group  members  to  fall  into  mother- 
daughter  patterns  of  interacting  with 
each  other,  with  all  the  emotional 
baggage  this  implies.  Even  when  a 
woman  is  acting  in  a  role-free  way, 
taking  control  of  her  own  life,  but 
not  expecting  control  over  others,  it 
is  easy  for  us  to  accuse  her  of 
selfishness  and  insensitivity,  since 
we  have  no  models  with  which  to 
recognize  role-free  behavior. 

If  this  stereotyping  dominates  a 
group's  interactions,  then  as  those 
who  initially  had  less  power  become 
more  competent  (often  through  the 
conscious  sharing  of  skills  and 
leadership  by  those  who  have  them) 
and  their  confidence  increases,  they 
may  rebel  against  those  who  taught 
them.  This  rebellion  evokes  many  of 
the  emotions  that  we  feel  towards 
our  own  mothers  —  anger  and 
disappointment,  and  a  feeling  that 
we  must  separate  ourselves  in  order 
to  assert  our  independence. 


Mother/Daughter  Roles/77 


On  the  other  hand,  the  woman 
with  the  greater  skills  may  have 
taught  them  to  other  women  hoping 
that  she  would  get  approval,  love 
and  nurturing  in  return.  When  she 
doesn't  get  it,  she  may  feel  as 
betrayed  as  the  "daughters"  do. 

These  feelings  of  rebellion  and 
betrayal  can  result  in  "trashing."  By 
trashing,  we  mean  the  expulsion 
of  one  ore  more  "powerful"  women 
from  a  group,  often  amid 
accusations  of  elitism,  power  trips, 
personality  problems  and  bad 
politics.  However,  trashing  does  not 
always  involve  confrontation. 
According  to  Joreen5,  it  can  be  so 
subtle  that  no  one  talks  about  it  —  a 
woman's  contributions  are  ignored, 
meetings  are  changed  without 
notice,  mailings  don't  arrive;  finally 
she  gives  up  and  drops  out. 

In  some  situations,  actual 
expulsion  from  the  group  does  not 
occur,  but  the  group  is  continually 
hindered  by  the  same  dynamics.  This 
is  likely  where  the  resources  on 
which  the  woman's  power  is  based 
are  ones  which  the  group  needs 
(such  as  money,  ownership  of  a 
building,  the  right  to  give  course 
credits). 

The  effects  of  trashing  are  tragic 
beyond  the  pain  experienced  by  the 
women  who  are  trashed,  and  even 
beyond  the  damage  to  groups  in 
which  it  occurs.  Trashing  teaches  all 
of  us  that  it  is  dangerous  to  be  strong 
and  skillful,  and  to  try  to  act  in  role- 
free  ways.  We  learn  that  it  is  safer  to 
keep  our  roles,  to  be  the  good 
"mother"  —  or  better  yet  the  good 


"daughter"-and  thus  avoid  the 
danger  of  being  trashed.  By 
discouraging  women  from  learning 
to  be  powerful  and  by  expelling 
from  the  women's  liberation 
movement  those  who  are  powerful, 
we  are  reinforcing  the  very 
oppression  we  are  trying  to  combat. 
Some  women  do  use  power  in 
awkward  and  even  damaging  ways. 
However,  when  we  trash  women,  we 
are  acting  out  the  traditional  pattern 
of  blaming  the  mother.  Moreover, 
we  are  turning  against  relatively  safe 
targets  —  our  sisters  —  instead  of 
attacking  potentially  dangerous 
targets  such  as  oppressive  social 
institutions. 


Overcoming  the  Roles 

Our  need  for  nurturing  and 
approval  from  other  women  led 
many  of  us  to  expect  that  those 
needs  would  be  met  by  other 
feminists.  There  are  many 
competent,  active  and  resourceful 
women  in  the  movement  who  may, 
in  fact,  resemble  our  idealized 
mother  image,  and  some  of  them 
may  accept  and  even  seek  this  role. 
It  is  easy  to  expect  them  to  give  us 
what  our  own  mothers  were  unable 
to  provide,  and  to  become  angry 
and  hurt  if  these  women  do  not 
meet  our  expectations. 

We  think  co-nurturing  is  a  model 
we  can  use.  We  define  co-nurturing 
as  nurturing  and  caring  between 
equals;  unlike  mothering,  it  carries 
the  expectation  that  the  nurturing 
will  be  reciprocal  and  neither  will 


78/Quest 


have  control  over  the  other. 

Clearly,  our  concept  of  co- 
nurturing  can  best  be  put  into 
practice  in  a  society  in  which  people 
have  equal  power  over  their  own 
lives  and  do  not  have  power  over 
each  other  (except  possibly, 
temporarily).  As  we  work  towards 
this  vision,  though,  we  can  make 
changes  in  our  own  lives  today;  we 
can  share  our  resources,  especially 
our  knowledge  and  experience,  and 
we  can  learn  to  distinguish  and 
support  each  other's  attempts  to 
develop  role-free  models  of 
behavior  and  interaction. 

When  the  power  differences 
among  women  are  minimal,  and  it  is 
some  trait  such  as  age  or 
appearance  that  makes  us 
stereotype  each  other,  then  making 
the  distinction  between  co-nurturing 
and  mothering  should  make  it  easier 
for  us  to  give  and  accept  nurturing 
and  caring  without  an  element  of 
control  interfering  in  our 
relationships. 

Even  when  there  are  significant 
differences  in  power  over  our  own 
lives,  but  not  power  over  each  other, 
we  believe  that,  with  effort,  we  can 
overcome  the  stereotype  trap.  All 
four  of  us  work  hard  to  create  co- 
nurturing  relationships  in  our  work 
and  in  our  relationships.  When 
Bridget  and  Mickey  taught  together, 
our  differences  in  academic  degrees 
and  in  income  created  differences  in 
the  amount  of  power  each  of  us  had 
over  our  own  lives.  Thirty  years 
difference  in  age  made  the  struggle 
to  avoid  the  mother-daughter  roles 


both  harder  and  more  necessary. 
Sometimes  we  felt  it  would  be  easy 
to  give  in  and  accept  the  roles 
society  foists  upon  us.  But  our 
continued  efforts  to  be  co-nurturing 
paid  off.  Bridget  now  has  more 
confidence  in  her  academic  ability, 
and  Mickey  has  learned  new  ways  to 
relate  to  groups.  And  the  course, 
which  could  have  been  just  another 
boring  series  of  lectures  or  an 
equally  boring  rap  group,  was,  in 
fact,  a  valuable  learning  experience 
for  many  women  including 
ourselves. 

We  must  all  share  in  the  effort  to 
identify  and  avoid  stereotyping 
attitudes  and  behavior  in  ourselves 
and  to  discuss  the  emergence  of 
roles  in  specific  situations.  While  we 
recognize  that  our  analysis  is  biased 
in  favor  of  women  who  are  more 
often  put  into  the  "strong"  mother 
role,  we  feel  justified  in  expecting 
the  so-called  "weak  daughter  types" 
to  take  a  more  active  role  in  solving 
problems  with  "strong  mother 
types." 

If  a  "daughter  type"  takes  more 
responsibility  in  finding  solutions  to 
mutual  problems  and  becomes 
more  aware  of  the  needs  and 
vulnerabilities  of  the  "mother,"  she 
is  helping  both  women  to  break  out 
of  the  stereotype  that  is  jeopardizing 
the  relationship.  Complementary 
behavior  by  the  "mother"  involves 
taking  less  responsibility  for  others, 
taking  greater  care  of  herself,  and 
accepting  both  support  and 
leadership  from  "daughters." 


Mother/Daughter  Roles/79 


Mickey  Spencer  is  a  writer  and  one 
of  the  editors  of  Broomstick,  a 
feminist  journal  by,  for  and  about 
women  over  forty.  She  has  organized 
consciousness  raising  groups  for 
older  women  and  feminist  research 
groups. 

Bridget  Wynne  is  a  feminist  writer 
and  organizer,  currently  working  as  a 
coordinator  for  Women  Against 
Violence  in  Pornography  and  Media. 
She  helped  organize  a  young 
people's  liberation  group  while  in 


high  school,  and  a  feminist  caucus  in 
the  Women's  Studies  Department 
while  in  college.  She  has  taught  in  the 
U.S.  Berkeley  Women's  Studies 
Department  and  in  university 
extensions. 

Polly  Taylor  is  co-editor  of 
Broomstick.  She  retired  in  1977  from 
a  career  as  a  psychotherapist  in 
Buffalo,  N.Y.,  in  order  to  promote 
feminist  communication  and 
networking  among  mid-life  women. 


Footnotes 

'We  analyze  the  relationships  between 
related  mothers  and  daughters  in  Bridget 
Wynne,  Mickey  Spencer,  and  Polly  Taylor, 
"Mothers  and  Daughters:  A  Feminist 
Perspective"  in  Broomstick  (3543 18th  St., 
San  Francisco,  CA  94110),  Vol.  I,  No.  9,  July 
1979  (This  issue  is  out  of  print;  send  40<f  plus 
28<f  self-addressed  stamped  envelope  for 
reprint  of  article.) 

2Adrienne  Rich,  Of  Woman  Born  (New 
York:  WW.  Norton  and  Company,  1976). 


3Thanks  to  Jan  Oxenberg  for  this  idea. 

4We  often  resent  authority  from  a  woman 
more  than  from  a  man.  Because  men  have 
more  power  over  their  own  lives  and  more 
power  over  us  than  women  do,  we  learn  to 
approve  of  men's  behavior  in  order  to 
survive,  while  societal  misogyny  encourages 
us  to  disapprove  of  women's  behavior. 

5Joreen,  "Trashing:  The  Dark  Side  of 
Sisterhood,"  Ms.,  April  1976. 


80/Quest 


The  Incredible  Case  of 

The  Stack  o'  Prints 
Mutilations 


by  D.A.  Clarke 

On  Monday,  March  31st,  1980,  a  woman  walked  into  the  Special 
Collections  room  of  the  University  of  California  at  Santa  Cruz  library.  She 
checked  out  a  set  of  photographic  prints,  tore  them  up,  and  poured 
Hershey's  chocolate  syrup  over  the  remains;  a  photographer  recorded  the 
scene.  The  woman  called  her  action  "The  Incredible  Case  of  the  Stack  o' 
Prints  Mutilations." 

The  woman  was  anti-rape  activist  Deborah  Spray.  The  material  she 
destroyed  was  a  three-dollar  promotional  copy  of  a  photoseries  entitled 
"The  Incredible  Case  of  the  Stack  o'  Wheats  Murders."  The  series  is  defined 
by  its  promotors  as  a  "humorous"  treatment  of  what  are  sometimes  known 
as  signature  murders  —  those  in  which  the  victim  is  subjected  to  a 
characteristic  mutilation,  or  in  which  a  particular  object  is  always  left  at  the 
scene  of  the  crime. 

Each  of  the  photographs  shows  a  woman,  stripped  either  from  the  waist 
down  or  entirely,  lying  in  what  appear  to  be  copious  amounts  of  her  own 
blood.  The  woman  is  usually  gagged  and  bound,  and  her  head  is 
occasionally  obscured  by  a  bag  or  cloth.  In  some  prints  she  bears  realistic 
knife  wounds.  The  partial  or  complete  nudity  of  the  woman,  and  the  fact 
that  she  often  lies  with  spread  legs,  suggests  that  she  has  been  raped  prior  to 
or  after  her  death.  In  one  photograph,  an  upright  Coke  bottle  stands 


Media  &  Culture/81 


between  her  thighs,  an  allusion  to  the  common  device  of  rape  with  an 
object.  The  victim  is  always  in  a  familiar,  mundane  setting  (a  kitchen,  a 
suburban  doorstep)  and  every  picture  contains  a  stack  of  whole  wheat 
pancakes. 

The  victim's  blood,  in  the  photographs,  is  really  Hershey's  syrup,  and  the 
photographer  is  not  a  police  officer  but  "artist"  Les  Krims.  Anyone  who 
purchases  the  ten  prints  in  1 4  x  1 7  size  (for  $450)  receives,  gratis,  one  can  of 
Hershey's  syrup  —  and  enough  pancake  mix  to  make  one  Stack  o'  Wheats. 

The  day  after  Deborah  Spray  saw  the  Stack  o'  Wheats  prints  for  the  first 
time,  the  murder  of  Barbara  Schwartz  made  the  front  page  of  the  San 
Francisco  Chronicle:  she  was  stabbed  to  death  while  jogging,  in  broad 
daylight,  on  Mount  Tamalpais,  her  screams  overheard  by  golfers  who  did 
not  respond.  Two  UCSC  women  had  been  murdered  in  the  summer  and  fall 
of  1979  —  Jennifer  McDowell  and  Diane  Steffy.  Residents  of  Santa  Cruz 
remember  well  the  time  of  the  Kemper  murders,  when  woman  after  woman 
was  found  dead  and  mutilated.  Some  of  us  will  never  forget 
Larry  Singleton,  who  raped  fifteen-year-old  Mary  Vincent  and  then  hacked 
off  both  her  arms,  any  more  than  we  will  forget  the  Boston  Strangler,  the 
Hillside  Strangler,  or  "Stinky,"  the  rapist.  Every  month  or  so  there  is 
something  new  to  remember. 

It  has  been  estimated  that  every  five  minutes,  somewhere  in  this  country, 
a  woman  is  being  raped;  that  every  three  minutes,  somewhere,  a  woman  is 
being  battered.  It  has  been  estimated  that  one  out  of  every  three  women,  in 
any  populous  area,  will  be  raped  at  least  once  in  her  life.  These  statistics  are 
so  much  a  part  of  our  awareness  that  we  consider  it  unwise  for  women  to 
risk  walking  anywhere  at  night. 

Given  the  context  of  real  violence  against  women,  the  Stack  o'  Wheats 
prints  must  appear  at  least  in  the  worst  of  taste,  as  much  so  as  "humorous" 
treatments  of  Auschwitz  and  Dachau,  or  "satirical"  photo-reconstructions  of 
Klan  terrorism.  Violence  against  women  in  this  country  is  unceasing, 
omnipresent,  vicious,  tragic  and  terrifying.  It  is  hardly  a  matter  of  humor. 

Still,  as  the  Chancellor  of  the  University  remarked,  it  is  a  potentially 
dangerous  thing  when  a  person  or  group  destroys  library  materials  on  the 
grounds  that  they  are  offensive  or  tasteless.  Many  students  and  staff  called 
Spray's  action  censorship,  comparing  it  to  repression  during  the  reign  of 
Nazism  or  McCarthyism;  some  went  so  far  as  to  call  Spray  herself  a  fascist. 
Others  took  the  more  limited  position  that  art  must  remain  immune  to 
political  criticism  or  action,  and  that  artistic  expression  has  by  definition 
certain  license  not  accorded  to,  for  example,  journalism.  These  are  separate 
issues,  and  will  be  considered  separately. 


82/Quest,  vol.  V,  no.  3 


Art 

First,  it  is  necessary  to  define  terms.  Art,  strictly  speaking,  is  any  human 
skill  or  the  product  of  the  application  of  any  human  skill  —  anything  human- 
created,  made  by  the  intentional  shaping  and  manipulation  of  the  world.  A 
forest  tree,  therefore,  does  not  constitute  art;  a  bonsai,  or  a  topiary  garden, 
does. 

The  word  "art"  traditionally  describes  only  the  creations  of  white  males; 
women's  and  Third  World  peoples'  art  are  grouped  under  the  term  "crafts." 
This  parallels  a  world-view  in  which  the  white  male  is  the  only  true  human 
(thus  by  definition  the  only  artist)  and  all  other  things  (living  and  otherwise) 
are  "nature"  or  "the  world"  upon  which  he  acts. 

In  the  visual  arts,  this  world-view  is  manifested  in  the  preference  of  the 
traditional  male  painter  and  photographer  for  studies  of  animals,  "natives," 
and  women.  These  are  treated  as  no  less  objects,  in  his  eye,  than  the  fruit 
and  flowers  of  his  innumerable  still-lifes.  The  same  view  is  reflected  in  the 
recent  proliferation  of  "how-to"  photography  books,  with  titles  like 
Photographing  Pets,  Photographing  Flowers,  Photographing  Children,  and 
Photographing  Women  —  all  these  being  definable  simply  as  non-men  and 
therefore  suitable  objects  for  artistic  composition. 

There  is  an  old  riddle,  quoted  by  Andrea  Dworkin  in  Woman  Hating:  "Why 
don't  women  create  great  art?"  The  tradition  (male)  answer  is,  "Because  they 
are  great  art."1  This,  too,  reflects  accurately  a  patriarchal  (male-supremacist) 
view  of  women.  Not  only  is  she  the  object,  that-which-is-looked-at:  she  is  raw 
material,  inanimate,  to  be  shaped  —  according  to  a  male  standard  —  into 
"beauty." 

What  Dworkin  perceptively  calls  "the  technology  of  beauty"  is  a  vast 
array  of  methods  and  devices  for  modifying  women's  bodies.  From  foot- 
binding  to  eyebrow-plucking  to  hair-bleaching,  all  the  major  processes  of 
female  "beautification"  are  painful,  or  hazardous,  or  both;  and  they  must  be 
so,  inevitably,  for  they  are  alterations,  damage  done  to  the  living  body. 

Thus,  beauty  in  woman  consists  of  a  series  of  alterations  to  her  nature. 
What  begins  as  adornment  (optional)  becomes  cosmetic  (necessary).  Woman 
becomes  no  more  than  empty  canvas;  her  natural  form  is  seen  as  ugly  or 
repulsive;  she  must  be  shaped  into  "beauty"  by  the  will  and  hand  of  man; 
and,  inescapably,  her  beauty  is  the  product  of  pain  (as  it  must  be).  If  beauty 
is  then  the  evidence  of  pain  —  the  pain  of  being  modified,  twisted,  made 
artif  ical  —  it  is  one  short  and  logical  step  to  the  conclusion  that  the  evidence 
of  pain  is  beautiful.  In  other  words,  "she  is  desirable  because  she  is  beautiful, 
passive,  and  victimized."2 


Media  &  Culture/83 


THIS  IS 
VIHLEM'K' 
«i.4I\ST 
■  WOMEN 


V 


5  ■  4  VvT 

I 


t 


84/Quest 


Media  &  Culture/85 


Critic  Robert  Sobieszek's  review,  which  accompanies  the  Stack  o'  Wheats 
photoseries,  clearly  reflects  this  point  of  view:  "....  no  police  file 
contains . , .  such  an  array  of  utterly  exquisite  corpses ...  By  meticulous  design 
the  streams  of  blood ...  did  little  to  hide  the  body's  harmonious  lines  but 
rather  gave  it  a  new  beauty... despite  the  somewhat  romantic  exaggeration." 

A  corpse  is  a  human  being  irrevocably  a Itered,  incomparably  passive, 
human  only  in  form,  having  neither  will  nor  personality.  These  being 
apparently  exact  criteria  of  the  patriarchal  aesthetic  of  female  beauty,  it  is 
not  surprising  that  the  reviewer  can  find  the  corpses  "exquisite,"  rather  than 
sorrowful  or  horrible.  Blood  is  an  obvious  sign  of  damage  and  hurt  to  a  living 
creature:  in  Sobieszek's  eyes,  this  evidence  of  pain  enhances  woman's 
beauty.  The  use  of  the  word  "romantic"  in  this  context  completes  the 
revelation  of  an  aesthetic  inimical  to  women. 

Spray,  and  many  other  women  at  UCSC  (by  no  means  all  of  the 
"experienced"  radical  feminists),  saw  the  Stack  o'  Wheats  action  not  as  an 
attack  on  the  photographer,  Les  Krims,  or  on  the  library,  but  as  self-defense 
in  the  face  of  violence.  These  women  believe  the  creation  and  existence  of 
the  prints  is  an  act  of  violence  against  women  rather  than  a  work  of  art;  they 
believe,  fundamentally,  that  art  can  constitute  violence. 

Now  consider  violence.  "We  speak  of  'doing  violence'  to  a  text,  an  idea,  or 
principle.  That  means  to  misrepresent  it  or  distort  it  unscrupulously."3  When 
we  speak  of  doing  violence  to  a  person,  likewise,  we  mean  to  deny  her/his 
claim  on  our  humanity:  to  deny  a  human's  will,  nature,  or  dignity.  Both 
these  levels  of  violence,  physical  and  abstract,  are  inherent  in  the  patriarchal 
aesthetic. 

The  traditional  male  artist  regards  woman  as  an  object  in  the  world;  his 
conception  of  art  therefore  includes  acting  upon,  using,  and  shaping 
women.  Female  beauty  as  represented  in  this  aesthetic  is  consequently  a 
mis  representation,  a  lie,  an  unscrupulous  distortion  of  the  reality  of  women's 
bodies. 

The  distortion  and  damage  wrought  upon  the  bodies  of  living  women  is 
the  corresponding  physical  violence.  Footbinding,  corsets,  clitoridectomies, 
all  reflect  the  ideology  that  woman  must  be  changed  to  meet  a  male 
standard.  The  end  result,  as  we  see  in  the  Stack  o'  Wheats  and  in  all  "violent 
pornography,"  is  the  interpretation  of  the  pain,  disfigurement,  and  death 
of  women  into  things  seen  as  beautiful  or  intriguing.4 

Les  Krims  claimed  in  a  telephone  interview  that  he  was  attempting  to 
portray  the  horror  of  violence  against  women.  He  referred  to  the  series  as 
essentially  expository  and  even  feminist  in  nature.  It  is  fruitless  to  argue 


86/Quest 


about  his  intentions;  the  photographs  are  intrinsically  anti-feminist, 
pornographic,  and  misogynist  in  impact. 

This  is  inherent  in  his  choice  of  a  model  who  perfectly  conforms  to 
current  male  standards  of  female  beauty,  a  woman  shaven  where  male  taste 
dictates  she  be  shaven,  without  visible  musculature,  posed  exactly  as 
models  are  posed  in  "men's"  magazines.  It  is  inherent  in  his  being  in  the 
position  to  choose,  being  the  artist  who  has  the  power  to  tell  this  woman  to 
disrobe,  to  lie  in  uncomfortable  and  ridiculous  positions,  to  be  covered  with 
chocolate  syrup,  to  be  stared  at,  considered,  manipulated,  and  used  by  the 
male  mind  and  eye.  Krims  thus  enacts  the  entire  scenario  of  the  male 
dehumanization  of  women. 

Further,  as  Sobieszek  notes,  "the  postures  are  far  less  telling  of  struggle 
than  of  surrender,  provocativeness,  and  sensuality."  Aside  from  the 
important  preconception  that  women  "provoke"  the  violence  committed 
against  them,  and  the  equally  important  question  of  whose  "sensuality" 
requires  the  mutilation  of  the  female  body,  it  becomes  apparent  that  there  is 
here  no  realistic  depiction  of  the  ugliness  of  rape,  torture,  and  murder.  There 
are  no  bruises  on  the  model  (presumably  they  were  not  "sensual"  enough  for 
the  artist's  design);  there  are  no  signs  that  she  fought,  as  women  do  and  have, 
for  her  life.  She  is  the  embodiment  of  the  patriarchal  rape  fantasy:  the  docile 
victim,  the  one  who  accepts  her  place  as  object  and  abnegates  her 
humanity. 

There  are  further  clues  that  the  viewer  is  not  meant  to  identify  or  feel  for 
the  woman,  in  the  gags  and  cloths  that  obscure  her  face  and  render  her 
unrecognizable.  We  cannot  see  her  eyes,  through  which  she  might  look  back 
at  her  rapist,  her  murderer,  or  the  omnipresent  male  artist.  We  cannot  see 
her  mouth,  through  which  she  might  communicate  her  rage  and  pain, 
requiring  a  response.  She  is  faceless,  anonymous,  having  no  human 
presence.  Only  her  body  expresses  the  absolute  passivity  of  death. 

All  of  this  is  a  lie.  Krims  is  lying  about  women  and  about  violence/rape;  he 
is  doing  violence  to  the  human  dignity  of  his  model  and  of  everywoman.  In 
presenting  the  male  viewer  with  the  "exquisite,"  nameless,  faceless, 
acquiescent  victim,  he  reinforces  the  confusion  of  attractiveness  and  pain. 
His  art  may  well  be  said  to  constitute  violence. 

One  must  also  consider  the  "do-it-yourself"  Stack  o'  Wheats  kit  included 
with  the  full-size  prints.  It  is  an  invitation  for  the  (male)  viewer  not  only  to 
live  out  the  fantasy  vicariously,  but  to  reproduce  it  in  reality.  By  inviting 
imitation,  the  photographer  completes  the  validation  of  anti-woman 
violence  which  he  began  by  clothing  it  in  "humor"  and  giving  it  the  cachet 
of  "Art." 


Media  &  Culture/87 


I  have  noted  the  reviewer's  reference  to  "sensuality."  He  further 
comments.  "There  is  a  chance  that  a  discrete  pleasure  will  be  received  from 
the  portrayed  transgression  of  another  body  —  a  profound  ecstasy . . ."  one 
could  not  more  accurately  describe  the  psychology  of  rape,  nor  the  function 
of  pornography.  It  is  indeed  transgression  (violence)  that  is  being  eroticized 
in  Krims'  work.  As  Richard  Snowden  said  of  pornographers:  "They  are  not 
selling  sex.  They  are  selling  violence  packaged  in  sex  parts." 

To  defend  the  Stack  o'  Wheats  prints  as  art,  in  all  their  violence  against 
women,  and  to  deny  Spray's  action  the  same  sobriquet  for  its  "violence" 
against  a  set  of  4  x  5  pieces  of  paper,  is  to  defend,  not  art,  but  the 
masculinity  of  art.  It  is  to  defend  the  male  artist's  right  to  abuse  women  and 
Woman  as  he  pleases,  and  deny  the  right  of  women  to  self-defense. 


Censorship 

The  issue  of  censorship  arises  in  every  discussion  of  the  ethics  of 
pornography,  of  actions  such  as  Spray's,  even  of  anti-sexist  amendments  to 
textbook  publishing  guidelines.  It  is  a  complex  issue,  not  soluble  by  a 
simplistic  First  Amendment  stance.  Can  feminists  justify  censorship  (as  some 
justify  killing)  in  self-defense? 

Most  of  us  recoil  instinctively  from  the  idea  of  governmental ly-imposed 
censorship  — particularly  radical  feminists,  whose  works  have  been  barred 
from  many  a  school  library  or  bookstore  by  less  official  censors.  Even  when 
it  is  clear  that  violent  pornography  invites  and  glorifies  the  dehumanization  of 
women,  eroticizes  rape,  and  substitutes  the  sadistic  abuse  of  power  for 
human  sensuality,  we  shrink  from  empowering  the  government  to  close  a 
press,  burn  a  document,  or  imprison  a  writer.  We  suspect  that  the  power  of 
official  censorship  will  be  used,  as  it  has  been  in  the  past,  to  support  the 
privileged  and  silence  the  dissenter.  Pornography,  the  product  of  a 
multimillion-dollar  industry,  is  the  literature  of  patriarchy.  We,  who  fight 
against  it,  are  the  dissenters.  Can  we  trust  a  male-dominated  government  to 
accurately  represent  women  against  pornographers? 

Yet  how  are  we  not  to  militate  against  the  business  which  sells  the  bound 
and  abused  bodies  of  women  to  millions  of  men  "in  the  name  of 
entertainment  and  free  speech?"  What  are  we  to  say  in  defense  of  the 
publishers  of  books  like  Lets  Gang  Up  On  Teacher,  Little  Schoolgirl  Raped 
and  500  Ways  to  Cut  Up  a  Woman?   How  shall  we  condone  the  dissemination 
of,  not  only  the  cheap  and  ill-printed  flimsies  that  are  sterotypical  "dirty 
magazines,"  but  the  slick  full-color  glossies  like  Hustler,  which  has  shown 
women  not  only  beaten  and  raped,  but  chewed  up  in  meat  grinders,  cut  up 


88/Quest 


with  chain  saws,  electrocuted,  and  penetrated  with  bizarre  plastic  toys?  And 
above  Hustler  in  the  pyramid  of  porn  are  the  truly  major  publications,  like 
Penthouse  andPlayboy.  No  blood  is  shown  in  these;  but  in  photoessay  and 
text  they  feed  the  reader  a  constant  diet  of  women  portrayed  as  enjoying 
humiliation  and  rape.  These  constitute  an  unceasing  barrage  of  lies;  they 
provide  a  feast  of  object-women,  naked  in  public  for  clothed  males  to  ogle. 

Some  research  has  indicated  that  male  subjects,  after  seeing  many  porn 
films,  begin  to  interpret  women's  screams  of  pain  and  fear  as  erotic.  One  is 
reminded  of  the  case  of  the  English  man  who  invited  four  friends  to  come 
over  and  rape  his  wife.  They  did,  and  were  acquitted  on  the  grounds  that  it 
was  reasonable  of  them  to  have  believed  the  husband  when  he  told  them 
that  her  cries  only  meant  that  she  was  enjoying  it 

Research  has  not  yet,  however,  produced  results  conclusive  enough  to 
provoke  any  popular  response  (such  as  led  to  attempts  at  curbing  the  violent 
content  of  children's  television).  Perhaps  it  is  not  even  necessary  to  prove 
that  pornography  lies  in  some  kind  of  cause-effect  relationship  with  realized 
violence  against  women;  for  it  certainly  condones  and  normalizes  such 
violence  by  constant  exposure.  It  might  be  said  that  when  people  habitually 
see  women  only  as  victims,  they  are  less  likely  to  be  shocked  and  angry 
when  a  woman  is  victimized. 

It  is  evident  that  pornography  could  not  be  the  product  of  a  non-sexist 
culture.  Where  women  are  acknowledged  as  fully  human,  valuable  persons, 
it  will  be  shocking  and  intolerable  to  the  community  to  hear  or  see 
exaltations  of  rape  and  femicide.  In  a  non-sexist  culture,  pornography 
would  be  instantly  either  ludicrous  or  horrible,  or  both,  to  any  viewer.  In 
ours,  it  is  commonplace. 

This  is  the  main  reason  why  official  censorship,  even  if  applied  as  desired, 
will  not  solve  the  problem  of  porn.  As  feminists  are  well  aware,  even  the 
instaneous  destruction  of  all  the  rape-glorifying  texts  and  pictures  in 
existence  would  not  stop  rape  or  the  battery  and  mutilation  of  women. 
Feminist  anti-porn  actions  are  therefore  not  undertaken  to  advocate 
governmental  suppression,  nor  in  the  hope  of  individually  eradicating  every 
woman-hating  document  ever  produced.  Rather,  they  are  committed  in  the 
tradition  of  civil  disobedience,  with  an  eye  to  educating  the  community, 
with  a  determination  to  call  attention  to  issues  and  bring  concealed  untruths 
into  the  light  of  controversy. 

The  victim  of  what  is  legally  called  slander  has  recourse  in  the  courts  to 
redress  the  wrong  done.  Women,  subjected  to  the  organized  and  profitable 
slanders  of  pornographers,  cannot  afford  to  institute  legal  (governmental) 
retribution  in  the  form  of  censorship.  In  feminist  analysis  and  art,  we 


Media  &  Culture/89 


instead  to  publicize  issues,  to  incite  public  discussion  and  exploration  of 
cultural  values.  Controversy  is  the  lifeblood  of  the  political  and  artistic 
community;  it  is  through  the  (often  heated)  argument  over  visible  and 
controversial  actions  (like  Spray's)  that  real  change  takes  place  —  the  change 
that  starts  in  the  heads  and  hearts  of  the  people. 

I  consider  Spray's  action  to  be  in  an  entirely  opposite  spirit  to  that  of 
censorship.  Censorship  is  an  official  function  enforced  from  above,  not  the 
solitary  action  of  an  individual.  Further,  the  publicity  Spray  organized 
(including  an  on-campus  forum  to  discuss  the  implications  of  her  action,  as 
well  as  coverage  by  the  local  media)  has  extended  awareness  of  the  issue  of 
violence  against  women  not  only  within  the  University  but  to  some  degree  in 
the  town  of  Santa  Cruz.  In  view  of  the  history  and  results  of  her  project,  it  is 
impossible  to  claim  that  Spray  undertook  it  with  the  intention  of  silencing, 
concealing,  or  repressing  anything;  rather,  she  resorted  to  drastic  action  to 
create  an  environment  of  healthy  controversy. 

The  university  dropped  criminal  charges  against  Spray,  who  was 
considered  for  academic  disciplinary  action.  She  was  later  nominated  by  a 
sizable  group  of  students  and  staff  (including  the  Provost  of  her  college  and 
her  arresting  officer)  for  a  Chancellor's  award  for  "outstanding  contribution 
to  campus  understanding  of  ethical  principles."  The  Chancellor  declined  to 
give  such  an  award  this  school  year. 

Conclusion 

The  complicated  interaction  of  power,  violence,  sexuality,  and  sexism  is 
resident  in  all  our  lives.  We  cannot  hope  to  avoid  an  aesthetic  and 
epistemology  which  permeate  every  medium  of  our  culture.  The  Stack  o' 
Wheats  action  is  a  remarkably  well-documented  illustration  of  the  issues 
and  the  difficulty  of  resolving  them. 

Pornography  is  aimed  at  teaching  men  to  believe  a  lie  about  women.  It 
teaches  men  to  equate  power  with  sex,  and  violence  with  pleasure,  denying 
all  desire  for  trusting  and  reciprocal  sensuality.  The  need  for  intimacy  with  a 
loving  equal  is  repressed;  the  ascent  into  passion  or  ecstasy  is  perverted  into 
a  descent  into  brutality,  domination,  and  hatred.  It  is  only  a  trifle  rhetorical 
to  say  that  men  stand  to  lose  their  souls  under  the  rising  tide  of  porn:  to  lose 
their  valid  perception  of  their  own  needs  and  their  ability  to  perceive  the 
humanity  of  women.  Women,  meanwhile,  stand  to  lose  not  only  freedom 
and  self-respect,  but  life  itself. 

Spray's  action,  and  its  implications,  are  relevant  to  all  of  us.  Her  intent 
was  certainly  not  to  silence  a  lone  pornographer,  nor  to  terrorize  the 


90/Quest 


University  library.  Her  action  is  rather  an  invitation  for  us  to  examine, 
rigorously,  the  ethics  of  a  male-dominated  art  and  its  aesthetic,  as  well  as 
our  own  values,  priorities  and  assumptions.  It  is  a  refusal  to  be  silent  in  the 
face  of  slander.  It  has  brought  into  sharp  focus  the  tension  between  on  the 
one  hand  a  belief  in  civil  liberty  and  freedom  of  speech,  and  on  the  other 
hand  a  belief  in  women's  right  to  liberty  and  the  need  to  oppose  violence  in 
the  media.  Both  a  political  statement  and  an  artwork,  "The  Incredible  Case 
of  the  Stack  o'  Prints  Mutilations"  is  above  all  an  exercise  in  issues. 

Ms.  Spray  earnestly  desires  feedback.  Send  comments  and  contributions  c/o 
Nikki  Craft  College  Five,  Box  670,  UCSC. 

DA.  Clarke  is  a  radical  feminist  and  freelance  writer  in  Santa  Cruz,  California. 
She  makes  her  living  as  an  electronics  technician. 


Notes 

'Andrea  Dworkin,  Woman  Hat/ng(New  York:  E.P.  Dutton,  1974)  p.  46. 
2lbid.,  p.  48. 

Frederick  Wertham,  "The  Goddess  of  Violence,"  in  G.  Estey  and  D.  Hunter,  ed.,  Violence:  A 
Reader  in  the  Ethics  of  Action.  (Waltham,  Mass.:  Xerox  College  Publishing,  1976)  p.  210. 
4I  tend  to  put  the  term  violence  pornography  in  quotes  because  it  implies  that  there  is  non- 
violent pornography;  this,  to  me,  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  and  I  reserve  the  word  erotica  for 
non-abusive  sexual  material. 

Reading  List 

Further  resources  for  the  reader  interested  in  pursuing  any  of  the  issues  I 
have  touched  upon: 

Daly,  Mary,  Gyn/Ecology,  1978,  Beacon  Press. 

Dworkin,  Andrea,  Women  hating,  1974,  E.P.  Dutton. 

Griffin,  Susan,  Rape:  The  Power  of  Consciousness,  1979,  Harper  and  Row. 

Griffin,  Susan,  Woman  and  Nature,  1978,  Harper  and  Row. 

Russell  and  Vande  Ven,  eds.,  The  Proceedings  of  the  International  Tribunal  on  Crimes  Against 

Women,  1976,  Les  Femmes. 

Spray,  Deborah.  Speech  given  at  Stack  o'  Wheats  forum,  UCSC. 


Media  &  Culture/91 


We  would  like  to  thank  all  the  people  who  contributed  to  Quest  from 
April  1,  1980  -October  1,1 980. 

Sponsors:     Barbara  Deming 

Supporters:     June  Arnold,  Enid  Braveman,  Jane  Dolkart,  Barbara  Frank 

Friends:     L  Luan  Corrigan,  Ann  Ferguson,  Ellen  Malcolm,  Susan  Read, 
Andrea  Shepard 

Contributors:     Sally  Gearhart,  Margo  George,  Catharine  A.  MacKinnon,  Ruth 
Robbins,  Kerry  A.  Thalheim 

QQQQQQQQQQQQ 

92/Quest 


Non-Profit  Org. 
U.S.  POSTAGE 

PAID 

Permit  45679 

Washington,  D.C. 


Future  Issues 
Movement  Building 

How  deliberate  and  self-aware  are  you  —  are  all  of  us  — in  building  a 
movement  for  change?  What  have  been  our  most  effective  movement- 
building  techniques,  and  why?  What  can  we  learn  from  other  movements? 
Quest  in  this  issue  seeks  to  explore  the  underlying  philosophies,  the 
strategies  and  the  mechanics  of  building  a  movement—  both  what  we  have 
done  and  what  we  might  be  doing. 


Designing  Our  Future 

This  issue  will  examine  why  ecology,  the  environment,  nuclear  power  and 
appropriate  technology  are  feminist  issues.  How  can  women  as  producers, 
as  designers,  as  consumers  influence  new  technologies?  What  are  the  points 
of  access  for  women  for  use,  development  and  control  of  alternate 
technologies?  How  do  we  demythologize  technology  and  move  towards 
control  of  such  technologies?.  What  will  an  environmental/feminist  Utopia 
look  like?  We  welcome  articles  from  women  who  are  scientists,  grass-roots 
organizers  on  safe  energy  issues,  women  in  government,  in  public  interest 
organizations,  in  environmental  and  energy  education,  researchers,  and 
hands-on  appropriate  technologists  and  futurists: 


Also  Coming  Up 

Reproductive  Control 


