QUEST 


$2.00 


m 


MONEY,  FAME 
and  POWER 


QUEST  =r" 

a  feminist  quarterly 

MONEY,  FAME.    „w„ 
and  POWER 

contents 

Quest  Perspective  on  MONEY,  FAME  and  POWER 

Emily  Medvec  2 

FACTORY  WOMAN-A  Poem 

Pat  Ouelette  5 

TAKING  CARE  of  BUSINESS 

Coletta  Reid  6 

Organizing  That  Works:  CLUW 

Anne  Marie  Troger  24 

INSANITY  and  CONTROL:  A  Class  Trap 

Alice  Quinn  35 

Put  Your  MONEY  Where  Your  MOVEMENT  Is 

Beverly  Fisher  50 

ERA:  The  YEAR  of  the  RABBLE 

Vicki  Gabringer  62 

THE  CAKE- A  Poem 

Ms.  K.  74 

An  Interview  on  WOMEN'S  HEALTH  POLITICS 

Part  II       Frances  Hornstein  75 

Copyright  (^  1974  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly, 
Inc.  All  rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission 
is  strictly  prohibited.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  pub- 
lished four  times  a  year  in  January,  April,  July,  and  Octo- 
ber by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  1909  Que  St., 
N.W.  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Application  to 
mail  at  second-class  postage  rates  is  pending  at  Washington 
D.C. 

Printed  by  Diana  Press,  Baltimore,  Maryland,  U.S.A. 
Subscription  rates  are  $7.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 
$8.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $10.00/year  overseas; 
$12.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.00/sample  copy.  Address 
all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box 
8843,   Washington,   D.C.    20003. 


Graphic  on  flap  by 
Jackie    MacMillan. 


staff 


Copy  Editor 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Managing  Editor 
Beverly  Fisher 

Design  Editor 
Alexa  Freeman 

Promotion  Editor 
Karen  Kollias 

Editors 

Jane  Dolkart 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Mary-Helen  Mautner 
Emily  Medvec 
Gerri  Traina 

advisory 
committee 

Dolores  Bargowski 
Rita  Mae  Brown 
Jean  O'Leary 
Sidney  Oliver 
Juanita  Weaver 


production 
assistants 


Lee  Schwing 
Shirl  Smith 
Sue  Lenaerts 


I 


Cover  design  by  Casey 
Czarnik. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua12wash 


Notes  on  reader  responses 

We  regret  that  this  issue  does  not  include  any  readers'  responses. 
We  are  eager  to  receive  more  feedback— letters  and  comments, 
in  all  forms— to  keep  us  in  touch  with  your  opinions  and  ideas 
about  Quest.  However,  we  do  not  plan  a  "Letters  to  the  Editors" 
section  and  should  clarify  the  kind  of  responses  that  we  will  print 
in  the  journal  itself.  We  seek  substantive  critique  and  commentary 
on  previous  articles.  We  want  to  print  readers'  analysis  and  ques- 
tions, both  long  and  short  responses,  which  are  themselves  the 
seeds  of  further  (future)  articles.  We  hope  that  this  kind  of  readers' 
response  will  further  debate  on  issues  raised  previously  as  well  as 
suggest  more  directions  for  future  debate  and  articles.  Write  us 
at  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington  DC,  20003. 


Change  of  Address 

For  change  of  address,  please  give  eight  weeks  notice  and 
include  the  mailing  label  of  your  most  recent  copy  of  Quest: 
a  feminist  quarterly.  Bulk  rates  available  upon  request. 
Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request. 


Sigrid  Trumpy 


Quest 
Perspective 


on 


MONEy, 

Fame 


AN' 


POWER 


by  Emily  Medvec 


In  order  to  transform  the  historical 
condition  of  women's  powerlessness 
and  economic  dependence  into  one  of 
liberation  and  self-determination,  the 
Women's  Movement  must  develop  a 
feminist  ideology  and  strategy  of 
change  which  is  economic  as  well  as 
political.  The  reality  of  the  liberation 
of  all  women  lies  in  a  revolutionary 
Women's  Movement  organized  to  eli- 
minate capitalism  as  well  as  male  sup- 
remacy. 

This  volume  of  Quest  begins  a  dis- 
cussion of  that  direction  of  change  by 
focusing  on  the  issues  of  money,  fame, 
and  power.  To  date,  these  issues  have 
significantly  fragmented  our  political 
power  as  a  Movement  and  continue  to 
perpetuate  the  economic  divisions 
among  women  stemming  from  class, 
race,  and  heterosexual  privilege. 

All  too  often,  feminists  have  chosen 
to  confront  the  power  of  male  suprem- 
acy as  expressed  in  social  institutions 
and  personal  relationships  only  as  a 
problem  of  sexual  inequality  within  the 
system.  We  have  ignored  the  over- 
whelming economic  dominance  and 
control  over  our  day-to-day  survival 
exercised  by  capitalism.  Consequently, 
three  promises  of  capitalism— money, 
fame,  and  power— remain  unquestioned 
and  ideologically  powerful.  By  leaving 
these  issues  dormant,  we  as  a  Move- 
ment remain  weak,  without  the  politi- 


2/ Quest,  vol.  I  no.  2,  fall,  1974 


cal  and  economic  understanding  and 
power  necessary  to  achieve  self-deter- 
mination. 

We  have  chosen  the  lowest  political 
denominators  from  which  to  organize 
a  Women's  Movement:  1)  the  "sister- 
hood is  powerful"  ethic,  and  2)  the 
"personal  is  political"  strategy.  By 
grounding  our  politics  in  "sisterhood  is 
powerful"  for  purposes  of  emphasizing 
our  commonality,  and  by  using  the 
"personal  is  political"  only  as  a  vehicle 
of  consciousness,  the  Women's  Move- 
ment has  perpetuated  the  illusion  that 
because  all  women  are  oppressed,  all 
women  have  the  same  goals,  interests, 
and  needs.  The  fallacy  of  this  assump- 
tion is  reflected  in  the  numerous  splits 
and  directions  of  the  Women's  Move- 
ment. The  vacuum  created  by  a  splin- 
tered Movement  has  allowed  the  more 
organized  segments,  such  as  the  Nation- 
al Organization  for  Women  (NOW)  and 
the  National  Women's  Political  Caucus, 
with  their  white  middle-class  centered 
demands,  to  "speak  for"  the  entire 
Women's  Movement. 

The  fault  lies  in  the  tendency  of  the 
Women's  Movement  to  ignore  capital- 
ism as  a  crucial  feminist  issue.  For  ex- 
ample, the  failure  of  feminists  to  speak 
out  quickly  and  concretely  on  the  cur- 
rent crisis  of  inflation  continues  this 
tendency  and  fosters  reformism  which 
legitimizes  capitalism. 

In  place  of  an  anti-inflation  prog- 
ram directed  at  controlling  soaring 
prices  and  skyrocketing  profits,  gov- 
ernment and  business  have  adopted  an 
anti-union  strategy.  The  silence  of 
feminists  on  this  issue  will  not  counter 


hostility  among  women  towards  unions. 
In  fact,  this  anti-inflation  policy  rein- 
forced with  feminist  silence  will  hinder 
the  much  needed  organization  of  work- 
ing women,  including  the  32  million 
women  workers  just  beginning  to  or- 
ganize into  unions  to  achieve  the  eco- 
nomic leverage  for  necessary  wage  in- 
creases and  benefits.  Will  feminists 
support  the  survival  needs  of  working 
women  or  will  they  narrowly  look  at 
their  shrinking  dollar  and  blame  the 
wrong  enemy? 

By  not  developing  a  strategy  and 
politics  that  recognizes  the  relationship 
between  capitalism  and  male  suprema- 
cy, we  are  protecting  its  strongest 
agents:  men  who  believe  in  male  supre- 
macy and  feminists  who  support  cap- 
italism. We  already  know  that  male 
supremacy  will  not  deliver  money  and 
power  to  women,  but  many  feminists 
still  expect  that  capitalism  reformed 
will  give  women  economic  indepen- 
dence. Consequently,  the  Women's 
Movement  has  too  often  chosen  to 
integrate  women  into  the  economic 
system,  rather  than  to  integrate  the 
economic  reality  of  that  system  into 
our  strategy  for  change. 

Just  as  the  position  of  women  is  a 
function  of  their  economic  dependence, 
so  is  the  position  of  the  Women's 
Movement.  For  this  reason  the  rela- 
tionship between  money  and  the  Move- 
ment is  a  political  issue.  Without  mo- 
ney, we  cannot  create  the  conditions 
necessary  for  a  powerful  Movement  of 
revolutionary  opposition.  We  must  ex- 
tend our  focus  to  the  new  arena  of 
creating  our  own  political  and  econo- 


Quest  Perspective/3 


mic  base:  establish  banks  and  credit 
unions,  publishing  companies,  an  inde- 
pendent strike  fund  for  working  wom- 
en, more  diverse  feminist  businesses, 
technological  research  and  develop- 
ment centers,  a  feminist  political  party, 
TV  networks,  feminist  hospitals  and 
universities,  and  so  forth.  The  possibi- 
lities open  to  the  Movement  in  this  area 
are  infinite.  The  limitation  is  not  prim- 
arily talent,  skills,  or  imagination,  but 
money  and  our  unwillingness  to  make 
a  financial  commitment  to  women  and 
the  Movement.  Only  if  we  understand 
revolution  as  a  continuous  process  of 
change  rather  than  as  a  single  event  of 
seizing,  does  the  Movement's  need  for 
money  become  meaningful. 

At  this  point,  another  relationship 
between  politics  and  economic  reality— 
the  question  of  power— surfaces.  While 
class  and  money  represent  the  econo- 
mic aspects  of  power,  the  political  as- 
pects of  this  relationship  revolve  around 
leadership  and  organization  as  prere- 
quisites to  gaining  power.  Since  we  re- 
main a  Movement  lacking  the  power  of 
organization,  we  are  unable  to  organ- 
ize for  power.* 

In  the  same  way  that  the  question 
of  power  raises  questions  of  the  power 
of  organization,  the  aspects  of  this  rela- 
tionship must  be  examined  from  three 
different  perspectives:  1)  the  intercon- 
nection between  political  power  and 
economic  power,  2)  coalition  politics 
as  both  a  building  block  and  possible 
impediment,  and  3)  the  links  and  con- 
tradictions between  organizational 
structure  and  goals.  The  exploration  of 
these  issues  is  necessary  for  the  Wom- 


en's Movement  to  create  new  means 
towards  achieving  self-determination 
for  women. 

Our  new  direction  must  stress  that 
feminist  consciousness  alone  does  not 
change  economic  and  political  reality, 
and  that  only  a  Women's  Movement 
that  responds  to  its  internal  class  dif- 
ferences and  unravels  its  polarity  about 
the  question  of  power,  can  become  a 
revolutionary  force  for  economic  and 
political  change. 

In  conclusion,  the  crucial  question 
remains:  will  we  trade  our  feminist 
consciousness  and  sex  loyalty  for  the 
false  promises  of  capitalism  or  will  we 
dare  to  bite  the  hand  that  feeds  us?  If 
we  want  a  revolutionary  Women's 
Movement  that  fifty  years  from  now 
will  not  have  to  ask  again:  "Why  did 
women  accept  reformism  and  capita- 
lism?", the  fundamental  issues  of  mo- 
ney, fame,  and  power  must  be  con- 
fronted directly  within  the  Women's 
Movement.  We  cannot  afford  to  be 
bought  off  by  false  promises. 

Emily  Medvec  is  a  lesbian /feminist 
and  a  political  economist. 


*Editor's  Note:  In  the  same  way  that  the 
question  of  power  raises  problems  con- 
cerning organization,  the  question  of  leader- 
ship raises  problems  concerning  fame.  Be- 
cause the  problems  of  fame  connect  most 
directly  with  issues  of  leadership  and  or- 
ganization, the  editors  of  Quest  will  devote 
an  entire  issue  to  the  fundamental  relation- 
ship between  leadership  and  fame  (Volume 
II,  No.  4),  and  to  the  questions  of  organi- 
zation within  the  Women's  Movement.  (Vol- 
ume II,  No.  3) 


4/Quest 


Factory  woman 


Blue  collar,  green  collar,  yellow  collar, 

No  collar  at  all. 

No  color  at  all; 

My  mother  is  pale  as  the  winter  sun 

Which  doesn't  have  a  time  card  to  punch. 

On  weekends  she  looks  for  rainbows 

Which  start  out  brown  in  the  bottle 

And  turn  into  orange-blue-red  streaks  in  her  sleep. 

But  Monday  comes  too  soon 

All  grey  and  dusty  with  two  coffee  breaks 

And  a  half-hour  lunch. 


by  Pat  Oulette 


Factory  Woman/ 5 


g 

GO 

O 

< 

< 


vv: 


OW!!! 


O 


o  o 


£  v  Coletta  Re  id 


Graphics  by  Nancy  Myron 


6! 'Quest,  vol.  I  no.  2,  fall,  1974 


In  1969,  a  middle-aged  widow  be- 
came frustrated  by  her  lack  of  ad- 
vancement in  her  profession.  The 
Women's  Movement  had  made  her 
acutely  aware  of  the  subtle  but  daily 
discrimination  she  was  facing.  After 
assessing  the  industries  and  markets  in 
her  city,  she  decided  to  go  into  busi- 
ness for  herself.  She  moved  into  an 
area  in  which  small  businesses  still  had 
potential  and  she  secured  a  loan  from 
the  SBA,  which,  coupled  with  a  small 
inheritance,  gave  her  a  start.  She  hired 
two  men  to  do  the  shopwork  and  a 
young  girl  to  answer  the  telephone, 
type  letters,  do  the  billing,  and  wait  on 
customers.  From  the  privacy  of  her 
own  office,  she  dealt  with  the  banks 
and  suppliers,  paid  the  bills,  and  did 
the  bookkeeping.  On  occasion,  she 
sought  the  advice  of  other  profession- 
als—accountants, lawyers,  and  man- 
agement consultants— but  she  alone 
made  all  the  business  decisions.  After  a 
year,  she  moved  into  a  slightly  differ- 
ent field  where  she  could  make  more 
money.  When  one  of  her  workmen 
missed  work  because  of  family  illness, 
she  fired  him,  and  hired  a  black  teen- 
ager at  a  lower  wage,  to  be  trained  by 
her  remaining  senior  workman.  Five 
years  after  its  beginning,  her  business 
had  grown  to  ten  employees;  fifteen 
years  after  its  beginning,  she  formed  a 
public  corporation  to  get  additional 
capital. 

At  the  same  time  this  woman  was 
starting  her  business,  other  women  in 
the  same  city  were  starting  a  newspa- 
per—but they  were  opposed  to  calling 
it  a   "business."   The  Women's  Move- 


ment had  made  them  acutely  aware  of 
the  individual  "tokenism"  that  is  part 
of  career  advancement  in  a  capitalist 
structure.  These  women  wanted  to 
change  the  position  of  women  in  soci- 
ety. Making  money  was  not  their  aim; 
making  a  revolution  was.  They  hired 
no  one;  whoever  wanted  to  work  with 
them  was  welcome.  Everyone  did  ev- 
erything. There  were  no  hierarchical 
work  divisions; all  decisions  were  made 
collectively.  No  work  standards  were 
set;  no  one  was  fired,  but  neither  was 
anyone  paid.  Five  years  after  its  be- 
ginning, the  group  continued  to  put 
out  the  same  product,  in  its  same  form, 
to  approximately  the  same  number  of 
customers.  Fifteen  years  after  its  be- 
ginning, the  newspaper  was  still  de- 
pendent on  large  benefit  parties  for 
its  funding. 

Admittedly  the  two  preceding  ac- 
counts are  caricatures  but  are  not  so 
far  from  the  truth  as  to  be  unrecog- 
nizable. Most  women's  businesses  are 
an  uneasy  mixture  of  the  two— in  mo- 
tivation, aim,  structure,  and  assimila- 
tion into  capitalism. 

In  the  past  five  years,  hundreds  of 
women's  projects  have  been  formed  by 
individuals,  partners  and  groups.  These 
projects  vary  from  film  companies  to 
painting  crews  to  law  co-ops.  Many 
have  balked  at  calling  themselves  busi- 
nesses; however,  I  shall  refer  to  all 
projects  which  deliver  marketable  pro- 
ducts and  services  as  businesses.  The 
nature  of  the  products  or  services 
delivered  is  irrelevant— what  is  relevant 
is  that  the  projects  function  within 
capitalism    and  require   money   (from 


Taking  Care  of  Business/7 


somewhere)  to  keep  functioning.  The 
refusal  of  many  feminists  to  refer  to 
their  projects  as  businesses  has  ob- 
scured discussions  of  women's  enter- 
prises. The  question  is  not  which 
projects  are  businesses,  but  which 
businesses  are  politically  progressive 
and  financially  successful.  A  women's 
magazine  which  depends  upon  foun- 
dation funding  is  not  inherently  less  a 
business  and  therefore  more  noble  than 
one  which  depends  upon  readers  and 
advertising  for  its  money. 

Women  form  businesses  for  a  vari- 
ety of  reasons.  Many  are  frustrated 
with  their  jobs— because  they  cannot 
tolerate  the  work  they  have  to  do  to 
survive,  because  their  talents  and  abili- 
ties are  not  being  used,  because  they 
are  not  allowed  to  gain  skills  and  to 
assume  responsibilities,  or  because  they 
see  themselves  out  of  work  at  fifty. 
Equally  important  has  been  the  desire 
to  use  our  work,  skills,  and  knowledge 
for  ourselves  in  building  structures  to 
replace  those  oppressive  ones  run  by 
men.  Forming  women's  record  com- 
panies, karate  studios,  and  health 
clinics  is  a  way  to  gain  control  of  and 
access  to  that  which  affects  women. 
In  short,  feminist  businesses  are  a  way 
to  survive  and  gain  skills  for  women. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  goal  of 
women's  businesses  is  to  put  women 
in  a  position  to  gain  and  use  economic 
power.  Generally  this  goal  has  been 
overlooked  because  the  Women's  Move- 
ment, like  the  general  populace,'  be- 
lieves that  state  power  (political  power) 
is  independent  from  economic  power.l 
Within    radical   feminism    there   is  no 


adequate  analysis  of  women's  econo- 
mic position  and  almost  no  discussion 
of  strategies  for  changing  it. 2  The  U.S. 
Women's  Movement  has  not  produced 
a  single  book  analyzing  women's  eco- 
nomic position  nor  taken  seriously 
other  revolutions  that  have  attempted 
to  change  it. 3  Most  of  us  are  ignorant 
of  how  contemporary  socialist  societies 
have  redistributed  wealth  and  econo- 
mic power.  We  have  produced  little 
discussion  on  the  kind  of  economy  we 
envision,  or  how  we  would  implement 
an  equitable  distribution  of  resources. 
These  pressing  economic  issues  must 
become  clear  if  we  are  to  change  the 
existing  economic  structures. 

With  this  in  mind,  I  shall  discuss 
the  role  of  women's  businesses  in  gain- 
ing economic  power  for  women,  not  as 
an  isolated  topic,  but  as  part  of  a  gene- 
ral discussion  of  the  material  condi- 
tions that  determine  women's  lives, 
women's  role  as  workers  under  capi- 
talism, and  the  direction  of  U.S. 
capitalism  today. 

Part  I.  Women,  Corporations 
and  Capitalism 

For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of 
U.S.  capitalism,  our  economy  is  char- 
acterized by  a  high  rate  of  inflation  in 
peacetime  with  a  lower  Gross  National 
Product,  decreased  productivity,  and 
high  unemployment.  Since  World  War 
II  there  has  been  a  low  but  steady  rate 
of  inflation  except  during  the  Korean 
and  Vietnam  Wars  when  inflation  in- 
creased rapidly  through  the  increased 
manufacture  of  war  materials.  A  war- 


SlQuest 


time  economy  put  more  money  into 
circulation,  reduced  the  amount  of 
consumer  goods  available,  increased 
the  GNP,  and  lowered  unemployment. 

However,  now  there  is  no  war,  yet 
demand  continues  to  outstrip  supply— 
and  prices  continue  to  rise.  The  con- 
trol of  present-day  inflation— an  infla- 
tion partially  caused  by  world-wide 
monetary  policy  and  lack  of  fiscal  re- 
straint, but  more  specifically  by  the 
expansion  of  monopoly  capitalism  to 
world-wide  markets— continues  to  baf- 
fle the  economists. 

The  great  economic  success  and 
world-dominance  of  the  U.S.  is  a  200 
year  history  of  unremunerated  (ex- 
propriated) labor  of  women,  slaves  and 
the  working  class  here  and  in  "under- 
developed countries."  After  slavery 
was  abolished  and  labor  began  de- 
manding a  larger  share  of  profits,  U.S. 
corporations  looked  abroad  for  un- 
tapped sources  of  slave  labor  and 
resources.  Exploitation  of  the  poor 
and  raping  of  the  land  took  place  both 
at  home  and  abroad  as  the  U.S.  es- 
tablished its  world-wide  economic  em- 
pire, an  empire  as  extensive  as  that  of 
19th  century  Britain,  although  less 
visible.  U.S.  companies  now  own  ma- 
jor resources  and  are  the  major  em- 
ployer in  the  Third  World. 

Although  the  Third  World  may 
appear  to  be  a  melange  of  numerous 
small  countries  with  independent  eco- 
nomies, in  fact,  most  of  their  econo- 
mies have  been  dominated  by  U.S. 
multi-national  corporations  with  con- 
sequent production  and  resources  di- 
rected  toward  U.S.  interests.  Ultima- 


tely, investors  in  and  owners  of  U.S. 
corporations  benefited  from  this  im- 
perialism. 4  However,  secondarily,  U.S. 
workers  have  reaped  the  side  effects— 
the  highest  standard  of  living  in  the 
world.  U.S.  workers  have  not  identified 
with  workers  abroad  because  of  both 
these  material  benefits  and  the  racist, 
patriotic  propaganda  fed  to  them  daily. 
They  are  encouraged  to  blame  foreign 
people  for  economic  problems  that 
have  occurred:  "It's  those  foreigners 
getting  all  that  foreign  aid;  why  doesn't 
our  government  take  care  of  people 
at  home?" 

In  addition  to  unremunerated  labor 
and  the  exploitation  of  natural  re- 
sources, two  other  factors  have  led 
to  the  U.S.'s  phenomenal  economic 
growth:  technology  and  increasingly 
efficient  production  methods  (speciali- 
zation, assembly  line  procedures,  etc.). 
Since  WW  II,  U.S.  productivity  has 
become  so  high  that  we  have  been  able 
to  produce  far  more  consumer  goods 
than  we  need,  creating  a  switch  from  a 
production  economy  to  a  consumer 
economy.  More  "needs"  have  been 
created  as  products  proliferated  and 
their  useful  time  span  decreased.  Since 
1950  economic  growth  has  been  de- 
pendent on  people  buying  more  and 
more:  companies-  can  produce  more 
and  so  there  must  be  people  out  there 
who  can  buy  more.  Wages  have  risen 
astronomically,  so  that  people  will 
have  more  to  spend  on  consumer  prod- 
ucts. 

As  U.S.  companies  saw  the  limita- 
tions of  consumer  possibilities  at 
home,   they  turned  abroad,  becoming 


Taking  Care  of  Business/9 


multi-national.  The  last  10  years  has 
seen  a  big  push  for  the  creation  of 
consumer  economies  in  the  Third 
World.  Birth  control  (in  India  and 
Brazil  for  example)  has  been  advocated 
to  encourage  small  nuclear  families. 
The  family  must  be  small  so  that  there 
will  be  money  left  over  from  "survival" 
needs  for  consumer  needs.  There  must 
be  someone  (the  mother)  with  time 
available  to  buy  and  maintain  the  pro- 
ducts bought  or  the  economy  will 
flounder. 5 

Creating  consumer  economies  in 
"underdeveloped"  countries  is  a  slow 
process,  and  U.S.  companies  have  not 
stood  still  at  home  waiting.  One  of  the 
laws  of  growth  of  capitalism  requires 
that  to  stay  in  a  business,  a  company 
must  show  an  increased  rate  of  profit 
every  year,  otherwise  investors  will 
withdraw  their  capital  and  place  it  in 
other  stocks.  The  methods  of  increas- 
ing the  rate  of  profit  are  limited.  The 
most  common  is  to  sell  a  product 
cheaper  than  competitors  thereby  cap- 
turing a  larger  share  of  the  market. 
This  is  usually  done  by  increasing  the 
productivity  of  workers  through  in- 
troducing bigger  and  more  efficient 
machinery  and  increasing  specialization. 
Many  U.S.  companies  have  reached 
the  limit  in  terms  of  machinery  and 
specialization.  Another  method  is  to 
create  new  markets;  that's  where  con- 
sumer economics  abroad  come  in.  The 
third  is  entering  and  taking  over  re- 
lated markets  or  expanding  into  other 
forms  of  your  own  product  so  that  a 
monopoly  is  created  in  the  field.  A 
monopoly   allows   one    or  a  few  com- 


panies   to    fix   prices,   divide   markets, 
and  make  unrestrained  profits. 

Every  major  industry  in  the  U.S.  is 
moving  toward  or  has  already  reached 
oligopoly  (where  4  companies  have 
captured  50%  or  more  of  the  market) 
or  virtual  monopoly.  For  example,  the 
automobile  industry  stabilized  as  a 
monopoly  years  ago.  Specialization, 
(heater  plants,  axle  plants,  etc.),  as- 
sembly-line production,  and  machine 
technology  were  introduced  first  in 
Ford  plants.  The  competition  was 
driven  out— remember  Packard,  Nash 
and  Studebaker?  The  companies  left 
expanded  to  meet  all  possible  markets, 
creating  quite  a  few  of  their  own  on 
the  way— family  cars,  luxury  cars, 
small  cars,  sportscars,  etc.  Both  distri- 
bution—"go  see  your  Ford  dealer"— 
and  related  production— "Bodies  by 
Fischer"  (a  subsidiary  of  Ford)  are 
owned  by  the  automobile  companies. 
The  emphasis  is  on  packaging;  each  car 


10  / Quest 


changes  its  model  (style)  every  year; 
U.S.  automobiles  have  a  very  short  life 
span;  and  repairs  are  frequent  and  need 
to  be  done  "at  your  authorized  dealer." 

The  consumer  is  in  a  position  of 
no-power  in  regard  to  the  corporations. 
The  old  adage  that  competition  keeps 
prices  down  and  drives  out  inferior 
products  obviously  is  no  longer  rele- 
vant if  it  ever  was.  Inflation  plagues  us 
all,  not  only  because  corporations  are 
in  a  position  to  fix  prices  and  control 
supply  but  also  because  the  economic 
policies  of  corporations  are  finally  reap- 
ing some  of  their  disastrous  conse- 
quences. 

There  is  a  crisis  in  natural  resources 
even  though  some  industries  have 
created  and  exaggerated  the  shortages.  6 
The  earth  does  have  a  limited  amount 
of  trees,  water  power,  coal,  etc.  For 
the  first  time  in  U.S.  history,  there  is 
no  longer  abundance  everywhere  just 
for  the  taking.  Secondly,  the  Third 
World  countries  have  learned  their 
economic  lessons  well.  After  decades 
of  exploitation,  some  are  nationalizing 
major  industries  owned  by  U.S.  com- 
panies and  raising  prices  to  the  level 
the  market  will  bear.  Others  are  in- 
volved in  wars  of  national  liberation 
aimed  at  reclaiming  the  labor  of  their 
people  and  their  nation's  natural  re- 
sources for  themselves. 7  Finally,  the 
creation  of  consumer  economies  a- 
broad  coupled  with  the  entry  of  the 
Soviet  Union  and  China  into  trade  re- 
lations with  U.S.  companies  means 
that  there's  far  greater  demand  for 
products  than  U.S.  corporations  can 
meet.  At  the  same  time  that  corpora- 


tions are  forced  to  produce  less  be- 
cause of  the  shortage  in  and  high  cost 
of  raw  materials,  demand  has  increased 
and  prices  continue  to  rise. 

Multi-national  corporations  have  no 
national  allegiances;  they  sell  to  the 
highest  bidder.  Prices  within  the  parent 
country  of  the  corporation  rise  to 
meet  those  consumers  abroad  are  will- 
ing to  offer.  The  seeming  rhetorical 
phrase  of  Weatherpeople  a  few  years 
ago— "the  colonization  of  the  mother 
country"— is  fast  becoming  a  reality. 
U.S.  workers  who  formerly  benefited 
from  the  lowest  consumer  prices  in  the 
world  and  the  highest  standard  of  living 
cannot  afford  what  they  easily  bought 
four  years  ago.  Having  been  offered 
material  goods  as  compensation  for 
lack  of  power,  U.S.  workers  identi- 
fied with  U.S.  corporations  rather  than 
foreign  consumer-workers.  Now  they 
find  themselves  in  the  same  position  as 
foreign  workers.  There  is  no  end  in 
sight— either  to  inflation  or  to  the  de- 
pletion of  natural  resources.  Present- 
day  "monopoly"  capitalism  dominated 
by  multi-national  corporations  can  of- 
fer no  solutions  to  the  average  Ame- 
rican who  is  now  both  a  beleaguered 
worker  and  a  beleaguered  consumer. 

Women  and  Work 

Traditionally  women  have  been 
viewed  as  having  no  role  in  the  econo- 
my. Because  the  primary  productive 
work  they  do  is  unpaid,  they  are  viewed 
as  unproductive. °  However,  women 
perform  one  absolutely  necessary  and 
useful  labor:  they  reproduce  via  their 


Taking  Care  of  Business/11 


own  bodies  the  next  generation.  In 
reproduction,  women  are  the  instru- 
ments of  production.  This  material 
fact  has  been  the  basis  of  their  exploi- 
tation by  men  (patriarchy).  The  social- 
ly necessary  labor  women  perform  in 
bearing  children  is  not  only  unpaid 
but  is  appropriated  by  men.  They  are 
not  "her"  children,  but  "his"  children. 
They  take  "his"  name,  submit  to  his 
authority,  live  under  man-made  laws 
and  go  to  male-created  schools.  Wom- 
en, without  men,  can  only  have  "ille- 
gitimate" children:  to  be  legitimate 
you  have  to  belong  to  a  father. 

The  natural  relation  to  bearing  chil- 
dren is  extended  to  raising  them.  The 
female  maintains  the  children's  lives- 
prepares  their  food,  washes  their  cloth- 
ing, socializes  them,  etc.  For  this  she 
gets  paid  nothing  directly,  although 
the  work  she  does  is  absolutely  neces- 
sary to  society.  And  finally,  her  life- 
maintaining  role  for  his  children  is 
extended  to  the  father  of  the  children. 
Again  she  gets  paid  nothing  directly. 
She  is  outside  of  the  wage  economy 
and  her  labor  is  appropriated  by  a  man. 
His  work  is  made  possible  by  her  work, 
but  his  work  is  the  only  paid  work. 
Within  the  family  she  is  a  slave,  getting 
only  room  and  board  for  creating  value 
far  in  excess  of  that. 9 

Betsy  Warrior  described  women's 
role: 

"Women  are  not  just  laborers  in  the 
male-defined  sense  of  the  word.  Wom- 
en are  the  source  of  all  labor  in,  that 
they  are  the  producers  of  all  laborers. 
This  is  the  basic  means  of  production 
(reproduction)  in  any  society.  It  creates 


the  first  commodity,  female  and  male 
laborers,  who  in  turn  create  all  other 
commodities  and  products.  Men  as  the 
ruling  class  profit  from  this  commodity 
through  its  labor.  These  profits  come 
in  two  sizes:  king-size  and  super.  The 
individual  man  who  is  king  of  his  castle 
(the  patrilineal  family)  has  his  labor 
power  produced,  prepared,  and  main- 
tained for  him  free.  When  he  sells  his 
labor  power  on  the  market  he  is  selling 
a  commodity  he  owns  but  did  not  pro- 
duce, thereby  profiting  from  the  slave 
labor  that  went  into  the  making  of  this 
product.  The  male  capitalist  class  makes 
a  super-profit  when  it  buys  this  labor 
power  and  then  receives  the  surplus 
value  of  its  "outside"  economy  pro- 
duction J  o 

This  job  is  unpaid  (room,  board, 
and  pin  money),  entails  99.6  hours  of 
work  per  week,  requires  no  qualifica- 
tions except  being  female,  and  has  no 
protective  laws,  no  possibilities  of  ad- 
vancement, collective  bargaining,  or 
assured  pensions.  In  essence  then,  the 
females'  predominant  role  in  the  eco- 
nomy is  that  of  a  slave.  Even  those 
places  available  to  women  in  the  wage 
economy  are  extensions  of  their  role 
in  the  family;  teaching,  nursing,  clerk- 
ing, waitressing,  and  cleaning  are  based 
on  servicing  and  waiting  on  others. 
Women  go  into  the  paid  labor  force 
disadvantaged  not  only  because  they 
are  women  but  also  because  they  don't 
have  wives. H  They  don't  have  anyone 
to  cook  their  meals,  keep  their  houses, 
or  raise  their  kids.  In  fact,  if  they're 
married  they  not  only  have  to  do  all 
that  for  themselves,  but  for  their  hus- 


12/ Quest 


bands  too.  No  one  renews  their  labor 
power  daily,  but  they  are  expected  to 
continue  the  unpaid  job  of  renewing 
their  husband's  labor  power.  It  is  basic 
to  remember  that  women's  primary 
role  in  the  economy  is  as  a  mother  and 
housewife  not  as  a  worker  in  the  wage 
economy.  She  is  first  of  all  exploited 
as  a  sex  in  the  family  and  that  is  how 
her  consciousness  is  formed. 

When  women  work  outside  the 
family,  they  find  themselves  exploited 
once  again.  Capitalism,  as  a  specific 
economic  system,  is  based  on  the  ex- 
ploitation of  workers.  Capitalism,  as 
such,  is  only  a  further  development  of 
patriarchy.  In  patriarchy,  women's  pro- 
ductive labor  (childbirth,  child-raising 
and  housework)  is  appropriated  by 
one  man  in  particular  and  by  all  men 
in  general.  This  exploitation  is  the 
source  of  primitive  accumulation.! 2 
In  other  words,  because  of  women's 
labor,  men  can  sell  their  labor  power 
without  maintaining  it  and  are  able  to 
accumulate  land  and  commodities. 
Without  exploiting  women  such  accu- 
mulation, would  not  be  possible.  This 
primitive  accumulation  through  the 
patriarchal  family  has  made  possible 
the  advanced  accumulation  in  capita- 
lism and  the  maintenance  of  a  class 
society.  In  this  way  patriarchy  enables 
capitalism  to  exist,  as  capitalism  main- 
tains patriarchy  today. 

Class  is  a  structure  among  men 
made  possible  by  patriarchy.  Certain 
men  who  now  have  to  sell  their  labor 
to  survive  (as  women  sell  their  sexuali- 
ty through  reproduction),  work  and 
produce  a   product.  The  price  of  the 


product  reflects  its  cost  (labor,  over- 
head, materials,  investment  for  expan- 
sion and  replacement  of  equipment) 
and  profits.  The  profit  is  returned  to 
the  owner,  not  for  any  work  done,  but 
simply  because  he  is  the  owner— had 
the  money  to  start  the  business  initial- 
ly. The  workers  produce  the  profit,  but 
the  owner  receives  it.  Thus  capitalism 
creates  a  class  society.  The  class  of 
people  who  are  the  owners  are  the 
ruling  class— they  own  the  natural  re- 
sources (land,  mineral  rights,  etc.)  and 
the  instruments  of  production  (facto- 
ries, equipment,  etc.)  and  decide  how 
to  use  them.  Everybody  who  works 
for  them  is  a  member  of  the  working 
class. 

In  addition,   there  is  a  remnant  in 
monopoly  capitalism  of  the  petit-bour- 


Taking  Care  of  Business/ 13 


geois— people  who  own  their  own 
means  of  production  but  who  do  not 
employ  others  on  a  large  scale— small 
shopkeepers,  farmers,  some  profession- 
als. These  people  do  not  sell  their 
labor  to  others;  they  own  more  than 
their  own  labor.  Many  people  who 
were  formerly  petit-bo urgeoise  have 
become  part  of  the  working  class  but 
do  not  see  themselves  as  workers.  They 
are  the  managers,  supervisors  and  pro- 
fessionals—the ones  sociologists  call 
middle-class  or  white-collar  workers. 

Although  the  professional  or  white- 
collar  worker  sells  his  labor  just  as  the 
blue-collar  worker,  he  doesn't  think 
he's  in  the  same  class.  He  is  given  priv- 
ileges within  a  system  that  exploits 
him.  13  Ruling  class  men  don't  literally 
run  the  corporations  they  own:  they 
hire  middle-class  men  to  do  it.  Middle- 
class  men  are  administrators,  profes- 
sionals, and  managers  whose  job  is  to 
keep  the  working  class  in  line.  They 
don't  get  their  hands  dirty,  don't  do 
the  same  task  over  and  over  again, 
supervise  others  if  only  a  file  clerk, 
have  some  control  over  their  own 
routine,  and  are  expected  to  show 
initiative,  take  responsibility  and  make 
decisions.  Generally  they  are  better 
paid  than  blue-collar  workers,  but  even 
if  they're  not,  they  have  the  respecta- 
bility of  a  "better"  job  with  more 
access  to  money  and  status.  They 
don't  own  the  means  of  production 
but  feel  content  with  their  jobs  be- 
cause they  could  be  so  much  worse 
off— look  at  the  people  "below"  them. 

When  women  enter  the  wage  eco- 
nomy they  do  so  as  workers.  There  are 


almost  no  women  with  power  in  the 
ruling  class,  except  through  the  death 
of  fathers  or  husbands— Katherine  Gra- 
ham, for  example.  Although  ruling 
class  wives  and  mothers  perform  sexual 
and  reproductive  labor  for  their  hus- 
bands, they  do  not  do  their  own 
housework  or  raise  their  children.  They 
hire  other  women  to  do  it  for  them, 
becoming  the  petit -bourgeois  or  man- 
aging class  among  women. 

Once  in  the  labor  force,  women  are 
exploited  as  workers.  The  profit  their 
labor  creates  is  expropriated  by  the 
owners.  There  are  fewer  women  in 
middle-class  jobs  than  men,  but  they 
have  accepted  the  same  hierarchy  of 
jobs  and  ideology.  They  don't  identify 
as  workers  and  think  they  are  better 
than  the  cleaning  women,  cafeteria 
workers,  and  file  clerks  below  them. 
Women  administrators  have  to  get 
more  work  out  of  "their  girls"  to  keep 
their  jobs.  Middle-class  women  are 
used  as  "tokens,"  feeding  the  lie  that 
women  can  advance  if  they  are  smart 
and  hard-working.  Women  are  paid  less 
for  doing  the  same  work  as  men; 
they're  restricted  in  the  type  of  jobs 
available  and  kept  out  of  the  skilled 
trades,  vocational  schools  and  appren- 
ticeship programs.  They  are  kept  as  a 
reserve  labor  pool  and  are  not  counted 
in  unemployment  statistics.  Women 
are  marginal  to  the  wage  economy; 
they  are  not  seen  as  having  a  right  to 
work,  even  low-paid,  monotonous,  dir- 
ty work.  Within  capitalism  women  are 
second-class  citizens;  they  are  even 
more  exploited  than  male  workers.  14 

In    a    capitalist  society,   women  in 


14/Quest 


general,  and  workers  in  particular, 
have  never  had  any  control  over  the 
economy.  Capital— money  and  the  need 
for  profits— determines  what  will  be 
produced,  how  much  of  it,  and  for 
whom:  you  can  sell  a  lot  more  cars, 
year  after  year,  than  you  can  sell  mass 
transit  systems.  Consumer  goods  do 
not  proliferate  because  Americans  are 
inherently  more  materialistic  than  oth- 
er people,  but  because  corporations 
can  make  more  money  from  consumer 
goods  than  durable  goods  and  services. 
A  primary  aim  of  socialism  is  to 
put  the  people  back  into  control  of  the 
economy.*  In  order  to  take  control  of 
the  economy  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
small  percentage  of  white  men  with 
money,  their  ownership  of  natural  re- 
sources and  their  ability  to  hire  others 


as  wage  laborers  has  to  be  ended.  What 
form  a  socialist  economy  takes  is  up 
to  the  people  who  create  it.  General 
goals  usually  include:  1)  some  form  of 
worker  control  over  the  workplace; 
2)  little  differences  in  salaries;  3)  every- 
one sharing  in  both  manual  and  mental 
labor;  4)  a  place  in  the  wage  economy 
for  everyone  working  to  the  highest  of 
of  her  or  his  ability;  5)  a  mechanism  for 
workers'  control  over  the  direction  of 
the  economy  through  political  control 
over  the  state.  And,  of  course,  within 
all  of  this,  people  have  to  survive. 

Part  II— Feminist  Businesses: 
One  Way  Out? 

Feminists  have  generally  regarded 
women's  businesses  with  suspicion. 15 
Within  capitalism  there  are  only  two 
options:  exploiting  others  as  an  owner 
or  being  exploited  as  a  worker.  Femi- 
nists have  often  assumed  that  women 
who  start  businesses  will  become  own- 
er/exploiters in  the  way  men  have,  and 
that  they  will  identify  their  interests 
with  those  of  capitalism.  Under  this 
assumption,  the  only  "respectable" 
work  for  a  woman  under  capitalism  is 
a  working-class  job  for  a  white/owner/ 
man. 

It  seems  perfectly  natural  to  me  to 
want  to  stop  working  for  and  being 
exploited  by  a  white/owner/ man!  Clear- 
ly, providing  goods  and  services  for 
women  is  an   option  open  to  only  a 


*I   am   not    suggesting  that  this  is  the 
only  aim  of  socialism. 


Taking  Care  of  Business/15 


few  women,  as  there  are  only  a  few 
places  available  for  small  businesses  to 
survive  in  corporate  capitalism.  Just  as 
capitalism  cannot  afford  to  provide 
jobs  for  all  women,  it  cannot  afford 
for  all  women  to  own  their  own  busi- 
nesses. Economic  liberation  for  women 
will  only  come  with  an  entire  re-struc- 
turing of  the  economic  system. 

As  discussed  in  the  introduction, 
feminist  businesswomen  are  those  who 
see  their  business  as  part  of  a  multi- 
faceted  strategy  for  gaining  economic 
power  for  women  as  a  group.  They  are 
trying  to  create  new  economic  forms 
at  the  same  time  that  they're  surviving, 
gaining  control  over  a  field,  and  devel- 
oping new  skills  and  abilities.  They  are 
different  from  female  capitalists  who 
accept  basic  structures  of  capitalism  as 
good  but  want  women  to  be  involved 
at  higher  levels.  Feminist  businesses 
need  guidelines  to  determine  whether 
they  are  progressing  toward  new  forms 
and  economic  power  or  just  creating 
small  but  comfortable  niches  for  them- 
selves within  capitalism.  I  will  discuss 
some  of  these  questions  as  they  affect 
a  business  that  requires  equipment  and 
produces  a  product,  such  as  Diana 
Press.  Aspects  of  these  questions  would 
vary  for  a  business  organized  to  pro- 
vide services,  such  as  a  law  co-op. 

The  first  question  is  whether  the 
business  aims  at  being  self-supporting. 
Women's  businesses  which  do  not  aim 
to  pay  their  workers  decent  wages, 
which  do  not  price  their  products  and 
services  to  make  a  reasonable  return 
are  not  contributing  to  women's  eco- 
nomic independence.  They  come  out 


of  and  support  either  a  "volunteer"  or 
a  "movement  worker"  mentality,  a 
mentality  that  usually  comes  from 
class  or  heterosexual  privilege. 

Of  the  original  group  that  started 
Off  Our  Backs,  four  of  us  were  mar- 
ried to  men  with  professional  positions. 
Of  the  three  single  women,  one  was 
supported  by  her  parents,  one  had  a 
professional  position  with  considerable 
free  time,  and  one  worked  full-time  at 
a  waitressing  job.  It  was  no  accident 
that  only  the  woman  who  waitressed 
pushed  for  our  getting  salaries.  I  can 
remember  thinking  at  the  time  that 
she  wanted  to  make  money  off  the 
Movement,  whereas  the  rest  of  us,  of 
course,  wanted  to  change  the  world. 

Volunteerism  means  that  you  don't 
really  take  your  work  seriously  be- 
cause you  don't  have  to.  If  you  don't 
think  your  work  should  be  remuner- 
ated then  you  don't  think  it  is  socially 
important.  Businesses  which  women 
conduct  "on  the  side"  (in  meetings  one 
night  a  week  while  they  have  other 
full-time  jobs)  generally  never  get  to 
the  point  of  supporting  anyone  because 
no  one  takes  enough  risks  to  make 
them  work.  Often,  women  who  do 
"volunteer  political  work"  are  patroni- 
zing: they  bring  the  word  to  the  wom- 
en out  there.  Similarly,  women  of 
privilege  often  use  their  one  night  a 
week  to  salve  their  consciences  (and 
consciousnesses)  without  changing  their 
lives  and  taking  financial  risks.  It  is  one 
thing  to  postpone  wages  or  make  them 
subsistence  until  a  business  gets  on  its 
feet;  it  is  something  else  not  to  aim  at 
self-support    for    everyone.   Businesses 


16/ Quest 


in  which  no  one  takes  enough  risk  to 
fail  cannot  succeed. 

Making  enough  money  to  be  self- 
supporting  has  been  one  of  the  biggest 
stumbling  blocks  to  feminist  business- 
es. Almost  all  of  us  have  underpriced 
our  products.  This  has  grown  out  of 
undervaluing  our  work  in  some  cases 
and  out  of  privilege  in  others,  but 
even  more  important  has  been  our  lack 
of  experience  in  estimating  costs  and 
prices. 

At  Diana  Press,  once  we  seriously 
took  into  account  all  the  costs  in- 
volved in  printing  (including  hidden 
costs)  we  found  that  we  could  not 
stay  in  business  charging  the  original 
low  prices  we  had  set.  On  the  other 
hand,  we  couldn't  survive  charging 
prices  that  covered  all  our  costs  as 
no  one  would  buy  from  us.  We  couldn't 
be  competitive  with  other  printing 
companies  because  we  didn't  have  the 
capital  required  to  acquire  efficient 
technology  (in  our  case,  large  presses, 
plus  collating,  folding,  stapling  and 
trimming  machines).  Since  most  wom- 
en do  not  have  access  to  large  accumu- 
lations of  capital,  we  have  to  use  our 
own  labor  to  do  what  other  companies 
use  machines  to  do.  The  result  is,  for 
example,  that  a  200-page  paperback 
costs  Dell  about  $.20  each  while  an 
80-page  paperback  costs  Diana  Press 
about  $.60. 

Women's  businesses  also  operate 
within  the  limitation  of  skills  that 
women  have  managed  to  gain.  We  have 
been  excluded  from  the  decision-mak- 
ing sector  of  the  economy  and  we  have 
little    idea    how    it    runs.    Simple   pro- 


cedures like  inventory  control,  cost 
analysis,  and  monthly  balance  sheets 
are  often  lacking  in  women's  business- 
es. Even  when  we  try  to  learn  these 
necessary  procedures,  we  find  that 
they  are  couched  in  language  you  have 
to  be  initiated  into  and  are  generally 
taught  to  men  on  the  job.  Further, 
most  of  the  actual  skills  of  production 
have  been  kept  from  women  since  we 
work  primarily  in  service  and  main- 
tenance jobs.  Women  don't  run  the 
machinery,  use  the  tools,  perform  the 
physical  labor  and  don't  know  how  to. 
Even  if  Diana  Press  were  given  a 
$100,000  web  press,  we  would  not 
know  how  to  operate  it  or  how  to 
organize  the  work  for  it  or  how  to 
estimate  prices  for  customers.  We 
would  have  to  teach  ourselves,  thereby 
operating  much  less  efficiently  for  at 
least  two  years.  Women  don't  have 
the  physical  experience  and  machinery 
skills  of  working-class  men  nor  do  we 
have  the  organizational  and  administra- 
tive experience  of  middle-class  male 
managers. 

Working  within  the  competitive 
structure  of  capitalism,  women's  busi- 
nesses are  caught  in  a  real  bind.  In 
order  to  compete,  women  have  to  pay 
themselves  (per  hour)  much  less  than 
they  would  receive  on  an  ordinary  job 
and  still  have  to  charge  more  for  their 
goods  and  services  than  do  large  cor- 
porations. Generally,  women  who  buy 
our  products  and  services  are  unsym- 
pathetic to  our  higher  prices.  They 
know  the  sort  of  profit  Dell  is  making 
and  think  that  we  are  trying  to  make 
even  more.  Some  women's  businesses 


Taking  Care  of  Business/ 17 


have,  therefore,  chosen  to  price  their 
products  lower  than  those  of  corpora- 
tions, paying  themselves  no  salaries 
and  building  no  reserves  for  expansion 
or  crisis.  They  live  a  hand-to-mouth 
existence,  remaining  econom'cally  de- 
pendent on  individual  men,  on  welfare, 
on  various  forms  of  hustling  (part-time 
and  seasonal  work),  institutional  con- 
nections (universities),  or  foundation 
grants.  As  a  short-term  strategy  until 
the  business  becomes  more  efficient 
and  its  product  more  established,  it 
can  be  successful.  But  if  a  permanent 
mode  of  operating,  it  is  self-defeating. 
There  is  no  point  in  creating  institu- 
tions for  gaining  economic  power  if 
the  economic  dependence  of  the  wom- 
en who  work  in  those  institutions  is 
perpetuated.  In  addition,  when  one 
women's  business  lowers  its  prices  and 
sacrifices  salaries,  all  other  women's 
businesses  in  the  same  field  find  them- 
selves underpriced.  Those  who  buy 
say,  "Well,  if  this  press  can  sell  their 
books  for  $.60,  why  can't  you?" 

Other  women's  businesses  have  de- 
cided to  get  out  of  production  entirely. 
They  farm  out  production  to  the 
cheapest  bidder,  thereby  lowering  then- 
costs  and  remaining  both  competitive 
and  self-supporting.  For  example,  wom- 
en have  sold  their  presses  and  con- 
centrated on  soliciting  manuscripts, 
editing,  advertising  and  distributing. 
They  say  it's  too  difficult,  expensive 
and  time-consuming  for  women  to  pro- 
duce their  own  work.  This  is  true  but 
short-sighted.  If  women  abandon  pro- 
duction, they  will  never  learn  the 
skills  necessary   for   producing  things. 


They  will  remain  middle-class  admini- 
strators who  need  a  working-class 
which  is  less  well-paid  to  insure  their 
own  salaries.  Such  businesses  do  not 
challenge  the  class  system  but  depend 
on  it  to  remain  self-supporting. 

Every  group  that  has  created  a  poli- 
tical and  economic  revolution  has 
faced  the  problem  of  their  lack  of 
production  skills.  One  way  to  keep  a 
group  down  is  to  keep  them  from 
gaining  the  knowledge  and  expertise 
necessary  to  run  things  themselves. 
The  Russian  Revolution  was  lost  when 
Trotsky  had  to  return  the  bourgeoise 
to  positions  of  power  because  of  their 
skills.  Hospitals  stand  empty  in  Tan- 
zania, brick  factories  in  Cuba.  To  have 
power  means  "to  be  able"— until  we 
are  able  to  do  all  the  work  necessary 
for  a  society  to  survive,  the  only  revo- 
lution possible  will  be  one  of  domina- 
tion. 

Internal  Organization 

Insofar  as  possible,  the  internal 
organization  of  women's  businesses 
should  be  consistent  with  the  goals  of 
the  future  socialist  economy  they're 
working  toward.  All  the  workers  need 
to  be  all  the  owners.  Going  to  rich 
women  or  other  corporations  for  in- 
vestment/ownership is  no  solution.  It 
removes  ownership  from  the  workers 
and  gives  a  return  on  their  investment 
to  the  people  with  the  money,  not  the 
labor,  thereby  perpetuating  the  basis 
of  capitalism. 

All  the  people  who  work  should 
have  some  say  over  what  they  do  and 


18/Quest 


participate  in  determining  the  direc- 
tion of  the  business,  the  organization 
of  the  work,  etc.  This  is  relatively 
simple  when  businesses  are  small  and 
support  only  two  to  five  people,  but 
becomes  more  difficult  as  businesses 
grow  larger.  The  most  efficient  pro- 
duction methods  seem  to  be  centrali- 
zation of  decisions,  rigid  hierarchies, 
extreme  specialization  and  constant 
supervision;  but  these  are  not  necessari- 
ly the  conditions  that  we  want  to 
perpetuate  in  the  future.  Probably 
most  women's  businesses  will  produce 
varying  degrees  of  each  depending  on 
the  difficulty  of  acquiring  the  skills 
necessary  and  the  size  of  the  business. 
These  problems  will  not  solve  them- 
selves and  women  will  have  to  work 
constantly  at  developing  structures  that 
are  adequate  both  to  our  needs  and 
to  getting  the  work  done. 

Workers  should  be  paid  equally  or 
nearly  equally  according  to  need.  Spe- 
cial needs  include  children,  health  pro- 
blems, etc.  Sometimes  women  don't 
need  to  get  paid  because  they  have 
trust  funds,  get  welfare  or  have  middle- 
class  jobs  which  require  little  time  but 
pay  well.  Those  women  should  give 
their  money  to  that  business  or  some 


other  business  and  live  off  their  salaries 
like  everybody  else.  Both  their  not 
getting  paid  or  their  having  cash  in 
reserve  is  destructive  because  it  leads 
to  unequal  decision-making,  unequal 
acceptance  of  responsibility  and  re- 
sentment. The  idea  of  equal  pay  is 
tied  to  the  realization  that  all  work 
that  is  necessary  to  the  success  of  an 
enterprise  is  equally  valuable. 

There  should  be  no  divisions  be- 
tween white-collar/blue-collar  or  work- 
ing-class/middle-class jobs.  In  most  bus- 
inesses, "thinking"  jobs  are  separated 
from  jobs  in  which  you  work  with 
your  hands.  One  group  does  organizing, 
administrative  head  work.  Another 
group  does  dirty  work  or  manual  labor. 
Everybody  has  a  head  and  two  hands 
and  should  learn  how  to  use  both. 
Women  have  very  little  experience  with 
machinery  and  are  prone  to  be  scared 
of  it,  think  they'll  break  it,  and  have 
little  confidence  in  fixing  it.  It  takes 
a  lot  of  pushing  to  get  women  to  buy 
and  use  their  own  machinery.  Women 
are  also  not  experienced  at  organizing 
a  job  from  beginning  to  end.  In  most 
female  jobs,  the  work  is  given  to  us 
each  day  and  doesn't  require  any  over- 
Graphic  by  Nancy  Myron 


Taking  Care  of  Business/ 19 


view.  Acceptance  of  responsibility,  ini- 
tiative and  an  aggressive  attitude  about 
seeing  what  has  to  be  done  are  crucial 
to  the  success  of  feminist  businesses. 

For  most  women,  acquiring  a  skill 
and  taking  initiative  is  getting  out  of 
their  traditional  role.  The  question  is 
not  whether  your  skill  is  "clean"  (type- 
setting or  bookkeeping)  or  "dirty" 
(auto  mechanics  or  printing).  What  is 
vital  is  that  women  develop  all  kinds 
of  skills  necessary  to  a  job  and  that 
they  are  valued  and  paid  equally.  We 
all  can  and  should  share  the  mainten- 
ance tasks  of  our  businesses,  such  as 
cleaning,  but  we  cannot  all  equally 
share  skilled  jobs  because  none  of  us 
would  get  enough  experience  at  any 
one  thing  to  do  it  really  well.  Early 
women's  businesses  confused  the  ne- 
cessity of  sharing  maintenance  work 
with  everybody  being  able  to  do  every- 
thing. The  result  was  that  no  one 
learned  to  do  anything  well  and  the 
businesses  were  exceptionally  ineffi- 
cient. 

Women  should  also  try  to  develop 
businesses  that  are  not  closely  related 
to  the  female  role.  Generally,  the  first 
businesses  women  have  developed  have 
been  in  service  and  retail  industries. 
This  is  partially  because  the  least  capi- 
tal is  needed  for  them,  but  it's  also 
because  women  are  most  familiar  with 
that  sort  of  work.  Waiting  on  people 
in  a  bookstore  or  doing  paste-up  on  a 
magazine  or  hand-making  crafts  are 
typical  women's  jobs.  This  is  not  to 
say  that  women's  bookstores  and  ma- 
gazines and  crafts  are  not  important, 
but  that  women  should  begin  looking 


farther  afield  too.  So  far  women  have 
not  come  close  to  owning  and  opera- 
ting durable  goods  factories,  or  making 
machinery,  or  owning  natural  resources. 
Women  need  to  learn  to  farm,  to  mine, 
to  sail,  to  build  buildings,  be  mach- 
inists, etc. 

Every  effort  should  be  made  not  to 
farm  out  work  to  other  businesses 
which  are  exploitative.  Of  course,  when 
the  whole  economy  is  built  on  exploi- 
tation, many  choices  can't  be  made; 
but  some  can.  For  instance,  most  fem- 
inist newspapers  and  magazines  sub- 
scribe to  addressograph  services.  Those 
services  hire  women  at  the  lowest 
hourly  wage  possible  and  have  them 
sit  at  addressograph  machines  or  stand 
at  mailing  tables  for  eight  hours.  A 
newspaper  could  buy  its  own  machine 
and  the  women  could  share  the  work. 
What  is  monotonous  and  tedious  for 
one  woman  to  do  all  day  every  day 
can  be  less  oppressive  if  shared  and 
done  in  conjunction  with  other  work. 

A  similar  effort  should  be  made  to 
give  as  much  work  as  possible  to  other 
women's  businesses— even  if  they're 
more  expensive  and  slower,  which  they 
probably  will  be.  The  business  should 
be  working  towards  more  basic  pro- 
duction whether  by  buying  equipment 
and  developing  skills  themselves  or 
putting  money  in  other  women's  busi- 
nesses that  are.  When  money  taken  in 
exceeds  the  amount  needed  for  decent 
salaries,  it  should  be  put  in  other  wom- 
en's businesses  or  used  for  expansion 
so  that  more  women  can  be  supported. 
Although  the  money  has  been  made  off 
the  labor  of  individual  owner/workers, 


201  Quest 


it  should  be  used  to  increase  the  power 
of  all  women,  not  to  enrich  the  pock- 
ets of  a  few.  Not  all  women  have  the 
option  to  stop  working  for  the  man, 
and  until  they  do,  private  profit  is  not 
an  option  for  feminists. 

The  business  should  be  providing 
women  with  a  good  or  service  that  is 
important  both  to  their  needs  and  to 
their  developing  consciousness.  Super- 
fluous consumer  goods  and  services 
based  on  female  oppression  (like  Ms. 
nameplates  and  women  symbol  swizzle 
sticks)  are  not  helpful  in  gaining  eco- 
nomic power.  The  amount  of  time, 
energy  and  money  expended  in  starting 
a  business  is  tremendous,  and  the 
women  involved  had  better  make  sure 
they're  providing  a  good  or  service 
which  women  really  need. 

Perhaps  the  most  serious  deficiency 
in  women's  businesses  has  been  the 
lack  of  well-defined  and  carefully 
thought-out  goals.  The  women  involved 
have  to  know  what  they  expect  to  get 
out  of  it  and  what  they  plan  to  put 
into  it.  Do  they  plan  to  get  paid 
enough  to  survive  on,  are  they  willing 
to  work  more  than  a  60-hour  week,  are 
they  gaining  skills  they  plan  to  use  for 
the  rest  of  their  lives,  do  they  look 
forward  to  being  there  for  the  next 
ten  years?  The  extent  and  type  of 
commitment  of  the  women  involved 
determines  the  risks  they  will  take  and 
the  direction  of  the  business.  For  ex- 
ample, if  no  women  see  their  printing 
business  as  long-term,  then  they  will 
not  try  to  get  loans  for  expensive 
equipment  and  the  growth  of  the  busi- 
ness stops  right  there. 


The  definitions  of  the  goals  of  the 
business  are  equally  important.  The 
women  who  run  the  business  have  to 
decide  exactly  what  they  hope  to  ac- 
complish within  the  next  year,  how 
they  plan  to  accomplish  those  goals 
and  where  they're  going  to  get  the 
money  to  implement  them.  Who  are 
they  reaching,  why,  what  with,  and 
how  is  that  going  to  change  within 
the  next  five  years?  Long-term  goals- 
five  years  from  now— may  be  difficult 
to  envision,  but  they'll  be  even  harder 
to  implement  if  no  one  envisions  them. 


CONCLUSIONS 

The  first  step  is  for  women's  pro- 
jects to  start  thinking  of  themselves  as 
businesses-as  businesses  which  are  fi- 
nancially independent  and  self-sufficient 
and  as  businesses  which  support  their 
workers.  In  1968,  the  black  movement 
in  California  was  practically  destroyed 
by  the  withdrawal  of  OEO  grants 
which  had  provided  most  of  their 
money.  We  have  to  be  very  wary  of 
being  financially  dependent  on  found- 
ation funding,  grants,  women's  studies 
programs,  etc.  Only  when  we  develop 
reliance  on  our  own  community  and 
become  self-sufficient  will  we  be  a 
source  of  economic  power. 

Most  women's  businesses  do  not  see 
themselves  as  part  of  a  serious  strategy 
for  gaining  economic  power  for  wom- 
en. It  is  important  that  they  start 
doing  so  in  order  to  evaluate  their 
progress.  Every  socialist  society  is  in- 
volved   in    a   constant   battle   between 


Taking  Care  of  Business/21 


economic  survival  and  creation  of  non- 
exploitative  work  and  worker  control 
of  the  economy.  Women's  businesses 
are  in  a  similar  position  within  corpor- 
ate capitalism.  New  ways  of  organizing 
work  and  the  marketplace  are  just 
dreams  unless  we  can  financially  sur- 
vive. Conversely,  creating  stable  insti- 
tutions which  make  lots  of  money 
is  worthless  if  those  institutions  are 
merely  female-staffed  counterparts  of 
present  capitalist  ones.  Operating  with- 
in that  tension,  feminist  businesses 
have  a  responsibility  to  the  rest  of  us 
to  tell  us  where  they've  been,  where 
they're  going,  why,  and  how  well 
they're  doing.  Corporations  prepare 
annual  reports  for  stockholders,  fem- 
inist businesses  should  also  prepare 
reports  for  women  who  have  an  interest 
in  their  survival— reports  which  are  both 
financial  and  political.  Otherwise  wom- 
en have  no  basis  for  deciding  whose 
products  or  services  to  buy.  Where 
you  spend  your  money  is  political. 

Feminist  businesswomen  have  to 
start  making  alliances  with  other  work- 
ing women.  We  have  to  resist  attempts 
by  the  male  media  to  present  us  as 
"liberated  women";1"  just  as  we  have 
to  resist  urges  by  some  of  us  to  think 
of  ourselves  as  an  economic  elite 
willing  to  risk  our  time  and  money 
for  the  movement. 

We  need  a  lot  more  analysis  of  the 
relationships  between  sexuality,  repro- 
duction, housework  and  the  market- 
place. Without  drastic  changes  in  the 
organization  of  reproduction  and  child- 
raising,  changes  in  the  wage -economy 
will  fall  far  short  of  the  liberation  of 


women.  Unless  women  are  very  clear 
about  which  economic  alternatives  are 
in  their  interest,  we  may  find  ourselves 
again  manipulated  in  and  out  of  the 
workforce  in  the  name  of  "economic 
stability"  of  the  socialist  society. 

FOOTNOTES 

lOr  perhaps  Ellen  Willis  is  right  that 
radical  economic  change  is  not  in  the  self- 
interest  of  middle-class  feminists,  "Econo- 
mic Reality  and  the  Limits  of  Feminism," 
Ms.,  June,  1973;  90-91,  110-111. 

^The  closest  to  such  an  attempt  has 
been  the  collection  of  articles,  "The  Political 
Economy  of  Women"  in  The  Review  of 
Radical  Economics,  IV,  3,  (July,  1972). 

3The  only  serious  discussion  of  the 
change  in  woman's  position  under  socialism 
is  by  a  British  woman,  Sheila  Rowbotham, 
Women,  Resistance  and  Revolution  (New 
York:  Vintage,  1974). 

4"Imperialism  in  Crisis:  The  Third  World," 
Prairie     Fire:     Political     Statement    of    the 
Weather  Underground,  May,  1974,  pp.  78-84. 

5Even  the  "liberal"  economist  John 
Kenneth  Galbraith  recognizes  this,  "How 
the  Economy  Hangs  on  her  Apron  Strings," 
Ms.,  May,  1974,  pp.  74-77,  112. 

6"The  Real  and  Phony  Energy  Crisis," 
Prairie  Fire:  Political  Statement  of  the 
Weather  Underground,  May,  1974,  pp.  18-21. 

'See  Ladun  Anise,  "The  Collapse  of 
Portugal's  Illusive  African  Empire,"  Black 
World,  August,  1974,  pp.  39,  59-65  for  an 
example  of  how  these  wars  affect  the  colon- 
izing country's  economy  and  U.S.  cor- 
porations. 

^See  Sheila  Rowbotham,  "A  Woman's 
Work  is  Never  Done,"  Woman's  Conscious- 
ness, Man's  World  (Baltimore:  Penguin, 
1973),  pp.  67-80  for  a  thorough  discussion 
of  housework. 

^See  Mariarosa  Dalla  Costa,  "Women 
and  the  Subversion  of  the  Community"  in 
rrhe  Power  of  Women  and  the  Subversion  of 


22/Quest 


the  Community  (Bristol,  England:  Falling 
Wall  Press,  1972),  pp.  19-54  for  a  discussion 
of  the  modern  housewife  as  a  creation  of 
capitalism. 

l^Betsy  Warrior,  "Slavery  or  Labor  of 
Love,"  Notes  from  the  Third  Year:  Wom- 
en's Liberation,  (1971),  p.  70.  Also  in  The 
First  Revolution:  A  Journal  of  Female  Lib- 
eration (Cambridge:  Cell  16,  1971),  and 
Radical  Feminism  (New  York:  Quadrangle, 
1973). 

11  Judy  Syfers,  "Why  I  Want  A  Wife," 
Notes  from  the  Third  Year:  Women's  Lib- 
eration, (1971),  pp.  13-14. 

l^Margaret  Small,  "Lesbians  and  an 
Analysis  of  the  Class  Position  of  Women'" 
Lesbianism  and  the  Women's  Movement, 
(Baltimore:  Diana  Press,  1974). 

1  ^Descriptions  of  differences  between 
middle-class  and  working-class  workers  can 
be  found  in  Lessons  from  the  Damned 
(Washington,  N.J.:  Times  Change  Press, 
1973);  "Ways  Petit  Bourgeois  Women  Can 
Struggle  with  Biases,"  Women's  Studies 
Program:     Three     Years    of    Struggle    (San 


Diego:  Inside  the  Beast,  1973)  pp.  33-36; 
Class  and  Feminism  (Baltimore:  Diana  Press, 
1974). 

l^The  most  complete  discussion  of 
woman  as  wage-worker  occurs  in  Juliet 
Mitchell,  Woman's  Estate  (New  York:  Vin- 
tage, 1973),  pp.  123-144. 

l^For  other  discussions  of  feminists  and 
women's  businesses  see  Marjory  Collins, 
Prime  Time,  March,  1973;  statements  from 
participants  at  the  Feminist  Business  Asso- 
ciation (FBA)  conference,  Prime  Time,  Nov./ 
Dec,  1973;  Bea  Baron  and  Marjory  Collins, 
Prime  Time,  May,  1974;  Susan  Davis,  "How 
To  Start  Your  Own  Business,"  Ms,,  June, 
1973,  pp.  69-72,  98. 

16"For  Some  Feminists,  Owning  a  Busi- 
ness Is  Real  Liberation,"  The  Wall  Street 
Journal,  April  15,  1974,  p.  1. 


Coletta  Reid  works  at  Diana  Press 
in  Baltimore. 


Taking  Care  of  Business/23 


Organizing  That  Works 


by 


Introduction 

The  emergence  of  a  new  organiza- 
tion of  working  women— the  Coalition 
of  Labor  Union  Women  (CLUW)-is 
significant  both  in  the  sphere  of  the 
general  economic  struggle  per  se  and  in 
the  sphere  of  the  Women's  Movement. 
It  has  the  potential  to  be  the  much 
needed  link  between  middle-  and  work- 
ing-class women  in  the  Movement,  as 
well  as  to  provide  the  muscle  which 
women  urgently  need  to  improve  our 
general  working  conditions. 

The  emergence  of  CLUW  poses 
three  major  questions  both  to  the 
Movement  and  to  the  interests  of 
working  women:  (1)  Will  CLUW  tran- 
scend its  beginnings  and  become  a 
truly  rank  and  file  organization,  re- 
sponsive to  its  members,  or  will  it  be 
merely  a  women's  auxilliary  to  estab- 
lished trade  unions?  (2)  Will  the  mid- 
dle-class centered  women's  movement 
change  its  focus  to  confront  the  econ- 
omic necessities  of  working  women?  or 
(3)  Are  the  differences  between  middle- 
class  women  workers  irreconcilable? 

Partially  in  response  to  these  ques- 
tions, a  new  consciousness  is  surfacing 


Anne  Marie  Troger 

Emily  Medvec,  Contributing  Editor 

among  women  in  the  American  labor 
movement,  symbolized  by  the  Coali- 
tion of  Labor  Union  Women,  CLUW. 
With  the  exclamation,  "the  baby  is 
born!"  Addie  Wyatt,  an  organizer  of 
CLUW,  closed  its  founding  conference 
in  March,  1974,  and  the  Coalition  was 
launched,  at  least  tentatively. 

According  to  its  founders,  a  group 
of  trade  union  officials,  the  stated  ob- 
jectives of  this  national  coalition  of 
trade  union  women  include  organizing 
the  32  million  non-unionized  women 
in  the  workforce;  pressuring  for  affir- 
mative action  at  the  workplace;  engag- 
ing in  lobbying  campaigns  around  issues 
concerning  women;  and  encouraging 
women  to  move  into  policy-making 
positions  within  trade  unions  and  politi- 
cal parties.  Initially,  rank  and  file  wom- 
en enthusiastically  received  the  idea  of 
an  organization  of  women  workers. 
They  began  immediately  to  organize 
CLUW  chapters  across  the  nation  with- 
out waiting  for  the  CLUW  leadership 
to  take  the  initiative.  The  concept  of 
CLUW  moved  from  that  of  a  coalition 
of  women  in  trade  unions  to  a  broader, 
more  responsive  organization  of  work- 
ing women— at  least  in   the  minds  of 


24 /Quest,  vol.  I  no.  2,  fall,  1974 


the  rank  and  file. 

Well,  the  baby  is  born,  but  she  is  in 
danger  of  suffocation  by  her  own  mid- 
wives.  As  the  dichotomy  between  its 
organizers'  concept  and  its  members' 
perception  of  CLUW  underscores,  the 
Coalition  is  in  danger  of  being  reduced 
to  a  paper  organization  run  by  women 
trade  union  officials  to  foster  individual 
careers  and  traditional  trade  unionism. 

Similarly,  the  Women's  Movement 
has  failed  to  respond  to  the  needs  of 
women  workers.  CLUW  is  a  potentially 
crucial  turning  point:  it  marks  the  en- 
trance of  large  numbers  of  women 
workers  into  the  middle-class-centered 
Women's  Movement,  and  promises  a 
potential,  tangible  focus  around  which 
the  Movement  can  support  the  needs 
of  women  workers. 

I.  The  First  Signal 

Before  examining  the  three  ques- 
tions above,  we  should  look  at  the 
factors  which  made  CLUW's  emergence 
both  necessary  and  possible  at  this 
time.  Its  emergence  is  the  first  sign  of 
the  possible  converging  of  the  diffuse 
Women's  Movement  and  the  more 
specific  but  forceful  organization  of 
women  workers. 

The  Growing  Economic  Crisis 


erican  multinational  corporate  empire, 
and  the  end  of  the  pay-off  to  some 
parts  of  the  American  working  class  to 
reduce  the  standard  of  living  to  an 
international  level.*  Profits  must  still 
be  extracted,  but  to  a  larger  extent 
this  time  from  American  workers, 
through  higher  prices,  job  speed-ups, 
automation,  and  run-away  shops. 

But  for  women,  the  feeling  that 
we  are  being  drawn  into  a  full-fledged 
depression  is  no  news.  Not  only  do  we 
see  inflation  from  week  to  week  in  the 
supermarket,  but  also  the  economic 
crisis  has  a  concrete  impact  on  our 
lives  and  self-concepts.  Middle-  and 
working-class  employed  women  recog- 
nize that  they  no  longer  hold  jobs 
merely  to  "help  the  family  out." 
Instead,  their  salaries  are  as  vital  for 
family  survival  as  is  that  of  their  hus- 
bands'. Women  must  continue  working 
despite  a  continually  contracting  job 
market.  Of  course  this  survival  prob- 
lem is  intensified  for  the  millions  of 
women  who  provide  their  families' 
sole  support.  Clearly,  such  an  organiza- 
tion as  CLUW  is  vital  to  protect  the 
interests  of  working  women  under  any 
condition,  but  particularly  under  the 
present  ones. 

The  Bankruptcy  of 
Traditional  Trade  Unionism 


Rising  unemployment  in  spite  of 
economic  booms,  and  soaring  infla- 
tion in  spite  of  recessions,  have  brought 
home  to  the  public  the  growing  eco- 
nomic crisis.  The  present  crisis  marks 
a  change  in  the  expansion  of  the  Am- 


The   economic  crisis  caused  by  in- 
flation and  massive  lay-offs  has  forced 


*  Editor's  note:  This  issue  is  developed 
further  in  the  article,  "Taking  Care  of 
Business"  by  Coletta  Reid. 


CLUW/25 


workers  to  be  even  more  critically  in- 
terested in  their  only  defense— unions. 
But  unions  are  both  unwilling  and 
unable  to  resolve  the  major  problems 
facing  the  workers. 

Inflation  presents  the  clearest  exam- 
ple of  the  labor  movement's  refusal  to 
confront  the  economic  crisis  effective- 
ly. Inflation  is  not  just  a  bread-and- 
butter  (i.e.  economic)  issue;  it  is  also 
political.  But  the  policy  of  the  national 
union  leadership  has  been  to  conceal 
the  political  aspect  and  concentrate 
workers'  attention  on  the  bread-and- 
butter  aspect  only.  As  part  of  this 
policy,  union  leadership  has  chosen  to 
sell  relief  in  the  guise  of  a  cost-of-living 
escalator,  while  at  the  same  time  elim- 
inating the  workers'  only  politi- 
cal weapon— the  strike— by  pushing  for 
no-strike  contracts.  Inflation  does  not 
result  from  labor  union  policy,  but 
reflects  a  deficiency  inherent  in  the 
profit  motive  of  capitalism.  Inflation, 
therefore,  can  only  be  cured  by  funda- 
mental changes  in  the  economic  struc- 
ture. To  treat  it  as  only  a  cost-of-living 
issue  perpetuates  the  crisis  and  pro- 
duces side  effects  which  broaden  the 


existing  economic  divisions  among 
workers.  1 

A  second  example  of  the  inefficien- 
cy of  traditional  trade  unionism  is  the 
extensive  concentration  of  business 
that  has  developed  in  capitalism:  when 
one  vertically  integrated  conglomerate 
owns  everything  from  oil  refineries  to 
banana  plantations  to  hotel  chains,  a 
one-union  strike  in  one  industry  is  no 
longer  an  effective  weapon.  But  the 
co-ordinating  structure  of  the  AFL- 
CIO  has  refused  to  unify  its  labor  ac- 
tions against  conglomerates  on  a  na- 
tional level,  hiding  again  its  collabora- 
tion with  big  business  under  the  banner 
of  "bread  and  butter"  issues.  The 
result  has  been  a  "bigger-piece-of-the- 
pie"  strategy  which,  ironically,  has 
brought  a  smaller  piece  to  the  workers, 
because  it  refuses  to  deal  with  the 
whole  pie. 

"Bread-and-butter"  issues  must  be 
fought  in  a  larger  political  framework; 
sell-out  leadership  and  competing  un- 
ion structure  cannot  be  expected  to 
deal  with  inflation  and  its  causes  from 
union  headquarters.  Instead,  the  push 
for   rejuvenation    and    political    direc- 


3 

I 

1 


"*-«TU» 

at 

me 


26/Quest 


tion  has  to  come  from  the  workers 
themselves.  For  this  reason,  the  multi- 
union  strategy  of  CLUW  is  a  positive 
sign  of  women's  search  for  an  effec- 
tive unionist  strategy  and  politics  more 
responsive  to  the  economic  needs  of 
the  rank  and  file. 

The  Unionization  Trend 

The  expansion  of  the  service  sector 
and  white  collar  work  has  restructured 
the  industrial  employment  pattern. 
More  people,  especially  women,  now 
work  in  these  sectors  than  in  actual 
production.  Since  the  late  1960's,  the 
service  industry  has  been  the  principal 
employer  of  women  (6.8  million  of 
the  27.9  million  women  in  the  indus- 
trial workforce),  followed  by  the  trade 
industry,  with  6.3  million  women  who 
hold  jobs  mostly  in  retail  stores.  In 
addition,  since  more  and  more  of  the 
service  sector  has  been  taken  over  by 
the  state,  the  employment  of  women 
on  government  payrolls,  primarily  as 
clericals  and  teachers  has  soared,  es- 
pecially on  the  local  and  state  level. 2 

Despite  this  increase  in  numbers  of 
women  working  in  the  service  sector, 
women  still  remain  clustered  in  fewer, 
lower-paid  occupation  groups  than  men. 
Within  this  cluster  of  female  jobs,  the 
social  status  of  the  white  collar  worker 
has  dropped,  the  income  has  declined, 
and  the  work  has  become  production- 
line  oriented.  As  a  result,  massive 
unionization  of  white  collar  workers, 
especially  of  professional  and  state 
employees,  has  brought  the  greatest 
expansion  of  the  labor  movement  in 


recent  years.  New  unions  like  the 
American  Federation  of  Teachers 
(AFT),  and  the  American  Federation 
of  State,  County  and  Municipal  Em- 
ployees (AFSCME),  have  surpassed 
most  traditional  unions  in  membership, 
money,  and  power.  These  recently-or- 
ganized women  also  comprise  a  signi- 
ficant proportion  of  CLUW's  member- 
ship. The  implications  of  this  fact  and 
the  fact  that,  nevertheless,  88%  of 
women  workers  is  still  unorganized, 
will  be  discussed  later. 

The  Emergence  of 
the  Women's  Movement 

The  fourth  factor  leading -to  the 
birth  of  CLUW  is  the  Women's  Move- 
ment; its  very  existence  provided  a 
major  push  to  CLUW's  creation.  The 
ideas  that  the  Movement  spawned, 
though  diffuse,  created  the  conscious- 
ness essential  for  CLUW's  beginning. 
As  Olga  Madar  (former  vice-president 
of  UAW,  and  current  CLUW  national 
Chairwoman)  stated: 
The  Women's  Movement  gave  us  the 
impetus  to  our  moving  ahead  [although 
many  union  women]  had  the  same 
cultural  hangups  as  the  men  over  wom- 
en having  an  equal  role.  .  .But  the 
Women's  Movement  has  been  helpful 
in  making  union  women  and  blue 
collar  wives  aware  that  there  was  bla- 
tant discrimination  against  women  just 
because  they  were  females.  ,3 

In  short,  the  Women's  Movement 
and  its  resulting  consciousness  facili- 
tated the  expression  of  women  work- 
ers' growing  anger.  Realizing  that  they 


CLUW/27 


would  be  locked  into  the  most  boring, 
demeaning  and  underpaid  jobs  forever, 
without  hope  of  promotion  or  advance- 
ment, women  started  to  pressure  with- 
in their  unions  for  equal  pay,  equal 
work,  and  the  implementation  of  Title 
VII  of  the  Civil  Rights  Act,  and  the 
Equal  Rights  Amendment. 

The  existence  of  an  independent 
working  women's  organization  proves 
that  the  issues  raised  by  the  Women's 
Movement— sexual  oppression  and  sex 
stereotyping— are  not  the  gripes  of 
neurotic  middle-class  ladies,  but  rather 
are  issues  of  great  importance  to  a 
broad  spectrum  of  women  workers. 
Without  the  influence  of  the  Women's 
Movement,  CLUW  would  not  have 
been  born;  although  the  Movement's 
influence  on  CLUW  was  diffuse  and 
abstracted,  it  still  was  the  single  most 
critical  force  in  its  creation.  The  ab- 
sence of  any  one  of  the  other  three 
factors  discussed  above  would  not 
necessarily  have  precluded  the  forma- 
tion of  an  independent  working  wom- 
en's organization. 

II.  CLUW  and  the  Class  Question 

Working  women  do  not  have  a 
group  identity.  Women  who  work  do 
not  yet  see  themselves  as  a  distinct 
class,  subjected  to  common  forms  of 
oppression,  although  expressed  through 
different  forms.  Journalists  and  histo- 
rians, whether  establishment  or  left, 
have  subsumed  as  soon  as  they  occured 
those  incidents  where  working  women 
have  been  the  distinct  historical  force, 
such  as  the  strikes  for  union  recogni- 


28/Quest 


tion  in  the  textile  and  garment  indus- 
tries and  in  the  Paris  Commune  and 
Russian  Revolution.  These  important 
"fine "distinctions  have  not  been  made. 
"Working  women"  remains  only  a  so- 
ciological category,  rather  than  a  des- 
ignation for  a  political  force.  Close 
your  eyes  and  say  aloud,  "workers." 
It  carries  the  spirit  of  past  labor  strug- 
gles, but  the  phrase  "working  women" 
still  seems  to  be  a  mere  percentage  of 
the  labor  force,  categories  of  female 
labor.  The  Sojourner  Truths,  the  Moth- 
er Jones,  and  the  Emma  Goldmans 
are  no  substitute  for  even  a  dim  and 
repressed  consciousness  of  a  collective 
history. 

CLUW  could  be  the  agent  for  acti- 
vating a  collective  sense  of  unity 
among  working  women .  After  all,  the 
founding  of  CLUW  constitutes  the  first 
step  towards  working  women  uniting 
in  the  struggle  to  fulfill  our  own,  self- 
defined  economic  and  political  needs. 
But  a  broad  focus  permeating  all  ac- 
tions and  policies  of  the  Coalition,  a 
collective  awareness  of  unity,  can  grow 
only  if  rank  and  file  women,  rather 
than  union  officials,  are  the  moving 
force  in  CLUW  leadership. 

A  cross-section  of  the  female  labor 
force  must  be  represented  in  CLUW 
and,  especially,  in  the  leadership.  Cur- 
rently, the  newly  unionized  white  col- 
lar and  professional  women,  along  with 
union  officials,  are  over-represented. 
An  organization  which  only  reflects 
the  needs  of  middle-class  workers  al- 
most insures  a  split  between  working- 
and  middle-class  women. 
******************************* 


In  the  first  place,  unionization  of 
white  collar  and  professional  workers 
is  politically  ambiguous.  On  the  one 
hand,  unionization  is  progressive,  com- 
pared with  the  old  form  of  bourgeois 
interest  group,  the  "professional  asso- 
ciation." It  reflects  the  growing  pro- 
letarization  of  the  middle  class,  who 
realize  that  their  employers  will  not, 
in  fact,  meet  their  economic  needs  un- 
less forced  to  do  so.  There  is  a  growing 
realization  that  they  are  like  all  other 
workers— nothing  special— and  must 
unionize  to  protect  their  interests.  In 
this  context,  unionization  is  a  positive 
step  toward  unifying  all  workers'  inter- 
ests. The  potential  of  shifting  class 
loyalty  is  most  critical  in  the  realm 
of  public  employees,  who  have  not  yet 
won  the  right  to  strike.  For  example,  a 
cop  who  has  been  on  strike  and  on  a 
picket  line  is  less  likely  to  beat  up 
other  workers  on  a  picket  line  than  a 
cop  who  identifies  with  the  pre-fascist 
ideology  of  a  "professional  associa- 
tion," as  opposed  to  a  union. 

On  the  other  hand,  trade  unionism 
which  only  fights  for  a  bigger  piece  of 
the  pie  can  be  a  reactionary  fight  for 
more  middle-class  privileges,  making  it 
a  fragmenting  force.  White  collar  work- 
ers identify  with  an  ideology  of  privi- 
lege based  on  kind  of  work  and  rela- 
tive status  (secretary  is  better  than 
factory  worker).  While  the  male  white 
collar  worker  is  still  better  paid,  has 
more  job  security,  more  leisure  time, 
and  works  more  independently  than 
the  blue  collar  worker,  this  is  not  the 
case  for  the  average  female  white  col- 
lar worker  employed  in  service,  clerical, 


CLUW/29 


or  retail  jobs.  Despite  the  objective 
differences  between  men  and  women 
in  the  white  collar  sector,  the  tendency 
of  unionism  "pure  and  simple"  which 
only  fights  for  a  bigger  piece  of  the  pie 
could  turn  into  a  reactionary  fight  for 
more  of  the  same  privileges.  More 
privileges  for  the  middle  classes  means 
less  self-determination  for  the  'lower' 
class  community.  By  striving  for  the 
needs  of  one  group  at  the  expense  of 
the  other,  a  potentially  unifying  and 
progressive  form  of  organization  could 
turn  into  a  powerful  weapon  for  fur- 
ther dividing  working  women. 

CLUW  must  guarantee  the  leader- 
ship of  blue  collar,  rank  and  file  wom- 
en, if  necessary  through  structural 
provisions.-  In  order  to  insure  their 
political  influence,  leadership  bodies 
should  be  composed  according  to  the 
size  of  the  sectors  of  the  female  labor 
force,  such  as  clerical,  professional, 
blue  and  white  collar  service  and  fac- 
tory workers.  Although  some  may  ob- 
ject that  such  a  strategy  would  be 
divisive,  sometimes  we  have  to  split 
now  in  order  to  unify  later.  Represen- 
tation in  CLUW  in  each  region  must 
be  composed  of  both  the  organized 
and  unorganized  female  labor  force. 
Such  a  plan  is  the  only  way  to  guaran- 
tee a  significant  voice  for  the  predomi- 
nantly black  and  Third  World  women 
workers  in  unorganized  factory  and 
service  jobs,  and  to  prevent  CLUW's 
blue  collar  women  from  becoming 
mere  adjuncts  to  the  professional 
women  workers. 

CLUW  must  also  face  the  question 
of  whether  it  will  be   a   coalition  of 


women  in  trade  unions,  or  an  organi- 
zation of  working  women.  This  ques- 
tion has  already  arisen  in  the  conflict 
between  the  traditional  trade  unionist 
leadership  and  the  rank  and  file  wom- 
en. 

Two  incidents  at  the  founding  con- 
vention illustrated  that  rank  and  file 
women  are  much  more  aware  and 
militant  than  their  leaders  about  the 
lack  of  union  democracy  (the  right  of 
members  to  elect  officials  and  ratify 
decisions),  and  the  unions'  failure  to 
act  in  their  behalf.  An  amendment  to 
the  Statement  of  Purpose  from  the 
floor  called  upon  CLUW  to  fight  for 
union  democracy  in  all  unions.  The 
officials  denounced  this  amendment  as 
anti-unionism,  because  in  their  view  it 
was  critical  of  traditional  union  poli- 
tics—but the  amendment  still  carried. 
This  incident  reiterated  the  tendency 
of  officials  to  silence  members  by 
manipulative  accusation,  and  pointed 
out  the  dichotomy  between  the  con- 
cerns of  the  officials  and  of  the  mem- 
bers: the  fight  for  internal  democracy 
is  a  fight  for  more  than  bread-and-but- 
ter issues. 

The  second  point  of  disagreement 
with  the  leadership  concerned  a  para- 
graph in  the  Structure  provision  which 
read:  "National  CLUW  and  area  CLUW 
chapters  shall  not  be  involved  in  issues 
or  activities  which  a  union  involved 
identifies  as  related  to  a  jurisdictional 
dispute."  But  if  CLUW  is  serious  about 
organizing  the  unorganized,  it  will  in- 
variably run  into  the  conflicting  inter- 
ests of  individual  unions,  into  so-called 
jurisdictional  disputes.  Declaring  these 


30/Quest 


cases  irrelevant  for  CLUW  is  no  solu- 
tion. If  CLUW  fails  to  develop  guide- 
lines for  its  organizing  drives  based 
upon  the  interests  of  the  women  con- 
cerned, and  on  today's  economic  real- 
ities (conglomerates,  run-away  shops, 
etc.)  rather  than  on  the  business-per- 
spectives of  unions,  it  will  fail  in  its 
primary  reason  for  being.  Nevertheless, 
the  union  officials  implored  them  to 
understand  that  to  take  a  position  in 
inter-union  fights  would  threaten 
CLUW's  existence.  The  overwhelming 
majority  voted  against  excluding 
CLUW's  involvement  in  issues  and  ac- 
tivities of  particular  unions.  They 
clearly  were  searching  for  a  tool  to  re- 
form their  unions  and  expected  CLUW 
to  be  such  a  tool. 

III.  CLUW  and 
the  Women's  Movement 

The  problem  of  class  differences 
confronting  CLUW  has  its  parallels  in 
the  crisis  of  relevance  confronting  the 
Women's  Movement.  An  examination 
of  some  specific  strategy  and  organi- 
zational problems  surfacing  with  CLUW 
will  provide  some  direction  relevant 
to  the  Women's  Movement  at  large. 

A  multi-union  political  organization 
such  as  CLUW  could  be  the  best  thing 
that  has  happened  to  the  labor  move- 
ment in  a  long  time.  Similarly,  a  multi- 
union  organization  of  working  women 
could  be  the  best  thing  that  has  hap- 
pened to  the  Women's  Movement  by 
providing  a  focal  point  for  coming  to 
grips  with  diverse  and  complex  econo- 
mic issues  relevant  to  women. 


CLUW/31 


In  order  for  CLUW  to  meet  effec- 
tively the  needs  and  demands  of  work- 
ing women,  it  must  operate  at  three 
different  strategy  levels:  the  individual, 
the  union  and  the  multi-union.  On  the 
individual  level,  CLUW  can  actively 
support  and  advise  women  who  have 
not  been  represented  by  their  unions. 
Here  CLUW  will  not  act  in  place  of  the 
union,  but  will  put  pressure  on  the 
unions  to  do  what  they  are  supposed 
to  do.  For  example,  blatant  cases  of  a 
union's  refusal  to  defend  and  represent 
its  women  workers  should  be  publi- 
cized within  the  labor  movement.  On 
this  level,  the  knowledge  and  exper- 
ience of  union  officials  is  invaluable. 

On  the  union  level,  CLUW  can  or- 
ganize women's  committees  in  union 
locals.  The  advantages  are  obvious: 
women  of  a  local  union  could  legiti- 
mately unite  to  articulate  their  views 
on  union  matters  and  become  a  pres- 
sure group  for  women's  issues  in  con- 
tracts, strikes,  etc.  In  addition,  wom- 
en's committees  could  become  a  po- 
tential organizing  tool  for  CLUW. 
However,  an  aggressive  women's  com- 
mittee will  survive  the  inevitable  attacks 
from  union  and  management  only  if 
CLUW  as  a  whole  is  willing  to  inter- 
vene in  its  behalf.  At  the  same  time 
CLUW  must  protect  these  committees 
against  various  forms  of  union  co-opta- 
tion in  order  to  guarantee  the  con- 
tinued presence  of  strong,  internal 
pressure  groups  for  women's  interests. 
One  way  to  protect  these  interests  is 
to  have  the  women's  committees 
headed  by  leaders  elected  by  the  rank 
and  file  women  and  supported  by  an 


32/Quest 


independent  operational  fund  from 
their  union,  rather  than  staff  appointed 
by,  and  therefore  accountable  to,  the 
male  leadership. 

The  multi-union  level  strategy  is 
the  most  complex  and  the  most  crucial 
one  at  this  time.  If  CLUW  is  serious 
about  organizing  women  in  non-union 
shops  and  supporting  organizing  drives, 
it  will  have  to  develop  a  set  of  prin- 
ciples to  determine  which  of  the  unions 
contesting  for  representation  should 
be  supported.  These  principles  should 
not  only  include  the  usual  union  ad- 
vertising issues,  such  as  wages  and 
health  benefits,  but  also  such  problems 
as  strike  vs.  non-strike  unions,  the 
union's  position  or  lack  of  one  on  the 
larger  political-economic  issues  of  in- 
flation and  progressive  taxation,  job 
classifications  which  discriminate  on 
the  basis  of  sex  and  race,  and  questions 
of  internal  union  democracy.  Candi- 
date unions  could  be  rated  according 
to  their  "women's  score"  on:  wage 
differentials  within  unions  and  shops; 
the  percent  of  women  with  seniority 
rights;  the  number  of  women  in  skilled 
jobs;  and  the  union's  active  support  in 
contracts  and  legislation  for  such  wom- 
en's demands  as  day  care,  maternity 
benefits,  and  the  ERA. 

If  CLUW  becomes  a  mass  organi- 
zation of  working  women,  these  prin- 
ciples will  have  a  far-reaching  educa- 
tional impact  on  all  workers  by  giving 
political  direction  to  their  strong  but 
vague  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  with 
the  unions.  If  it  achieves  these  goals,  it 
will  have  gone  far  towards  effective 
action  on  behalf  of  women  workers. 


The  Women's  Movement,  for  its 
part,  will  have  to  confront  these  same 
issues  if  it  is  to  gain  the  active  support 
of  working  and  non-privileged  women. 
In  this  respect,  the  specific  goals  out- 
lined above  for  CLUW  can  help  direct 
the  enormous  energy  of  the  Women's 
Movement  towards  broader  and  more 
fundamental  economic  action. 

Although  the  Women's  Movement 
has  primarily  focused  on  middle-class 
demands,  it  may  be  capable  of  devel- 
oping a  viable  relationship  with  CLUW 
that  counteracts  this  tendency  to  ig- 
nore the  needs  of  women  workers.  It 
can  support  major  struggles  that  in- 
volve women  workers  and  aid  in  the 
education,  politicization  and  organizing 
of  all  women  around  such  issues,  as 
increasing  the  minimum  wage  and  the 
right  to  unionize. 

Until  now,  for  example,  bewildered 
feminists  in  CLUW  have  been  shocked 
by  the  maneuvers  pulled  by  union 
bureaucrats,  but  they  have  been  help- 
less in  responding  to  such  tactics.  Fem- 
inists who  lack  even  the  barest  know- 
ledge of  the  history  of  the  labor 
movement,  different  kinds  of  unions 
and  union  structures,  labor  legislation, 
or  the  ongoing  struggle  for  the  right  to 
unionize  have  vascillated  between  an 
uncritical  acceptance  of  the  union 
myth  and  emotional  anti-unionism. 

To  help  overcome  this  deficiency, 
feminists  should  begin  to  integrate 
economic  questions  into  our  ideology. 
Without  learning  about  and  teaching 
economic  theory,  the  history  of  the 
labor  movement,  the  history  of  women 
in  the  workforce,  and  labor  legislation, 


CLUW/33 


we  cannot  build  a  comprehensive  theo- 
ry of  women's  exploitation.  And  with- 
out this  knowledge,  we  cannot  develop 
effective  strategies  and  provide  a  radi- 
cal feminist  direction  for  either  the 
Women's  Movement  or  working  wom- 
en's organizations. 

In  conclusion,  the  Coalition  of  Lab- 
or Union  Women  is  the  first  sign  for 
an  independent  movement  of  women 
workers.  The  question  that  remains  to 
be  answered  is  whether  CLUW's  re- 
lationship to  the  existing  middle-class 
centered  Women's  Movement  will  ul- 
timately be  antagonistic  or  mutually 
supportive. 

Lacking  a  clear  understanding  of  the 
capitalist  system  and  how  women  are 
divided  within  it,  we  will  continue  to 
have  a  women's  movement  and  a  work- 
ing women's  organization  of  limited 
focus,  instead  of  a  revolutionary  out- 
look that  demands  that  women  obtain 
power  and  self-determination.  Without 
this  strong  revolutionary  women's 
movement,  a  working  women's  organ- 
ization cannot  succeed;  and  without  a 
successful  organization  of  working 
women,  the  Women's  Movement  can- 


not be  revolutionary. 


FOOTNOTES 

lThc  inflation  rate  for  low  incomes  is 
much  higher  than  the  escalator  would  ad- 
just, because  the  inflation  rate  for  food, 
especially  for  staples,  low  income  housing, 
and  transportation  is  much  higher  than  the 
rate  for  manufactured  goods  and  luxury 
items.  Furthermore,  the  "equal"  adjustment 
rate  increases  the  income  differential  dras- 
tically. Example:  Family  A  receives  $100/ 
per  week.  Family  B  receives  $200/per  week. 
With  an  annual  escalator  of  10%,  the  income 
difference  between  the  two  families  grew 
from  $100  to  $204,  over  a  six-year  period. 
Combined  with  the  uneven  inflation  rate 
mentioned  above,  the  difference  in  real  in- 
come and  living  standards  is  substantially 
larger  than  the  figures  reveal. 

2Elizabeth  Waldman  and  Beverly  J. 
McEaddy,  "Where  Women  Work— An  Analy- 
sis by  Industry  and  Occupation,"  Monthly 
Labor  Review,  May,  1974,  pp.  3-13. 

3New  York  Times,  March  27,  1974, 
p.  27. 


Anne-Marie  Troger  is  currently  wri- 
ting a  pamphlet  about  CLUW  and  its 
problems. 

Emily  Medvec  is  a  contributing  edi- 
tor of  Quest. 


Plii  mo  nnofii 


A  new  non-profit  distribution  network  offering  a  wide  range  of 
feminist  audio  tapes  covering  feminist  theories,  culture,  and  women's 
organizations.  Ideal  for  radio  stations,  Women's  Studies  departments, 
libraries,  and  political  discussions. 

For  further  information  write  for  a  free  brochure  and  tape  list  or 
call  us  at  202/332-8023.  Please  specify  if  individual  or  institution. 

Tax-deductible  donations  and/or  inquiries  should  be  sent  to: 

P.O.  BOX  5537,  WASHINGTON,  D.C.  20016 


/£  $W7**^ 


by  Alice  Quinn 


Therapy  is  change,  not  adjustment. 
Change  for  us,  as  women,  demands 
that  we  assert  our  strength  collectively 
and  take  control  over  our  personal, 
economic,  and  political  lives.  We  must 
not  adjust  to  male-and  middle-class 
identified  definitions  of  women  as 
passive,  dependent,  and  apolitical— 
these  lead  to  our  continued  oppression 
and  political  stagnation.  Middle -class 
romanticization  of  the  lives  and  ex- 
periences of  lower-and  working-class 
women  is  not  change;  it  denies  the 
political  implications  of  our  lives  as 
lower/working-class  women  and  main- 
tains our  relatively  powerless  position 
in  the  U.S.A. 

Change  is  analyzing  and  confronting 
issues  of  class  and  race  that  are  div- 
iding our  movement  and  oppressing 
Third  World  and  lower/working-class 
women  throughout  America's  insti- 
tutions and  organizations.  Psychother- 
apy, traditional  or  alternative,  is  one 
such  institution.  It  specifically  op- 
presses those  of  us  who  are  not  white, 
middle -class  or  heterosexual. 

Thomas  Szasz,  in  The  Manufacture 
of  Madness ,1  explores  the  parallels  be- 


tween the  persecution  of  women  as 
witches  in  15th  and  16th-century 
Europe  and  the  Inquisition's  modern 
extension,  "institutional  psychiatry." 
Witches  were  easily  located.  Women 
especially  poor  women,  could  be  de- 
nounced as  witches  if  they  had  "witch's 
marks,"  e.g.,  birthmarks,  moles,  or 
scars  anywhere  on  their  bodies.  Some 
women  were  branded  with  an  invisible 
mark.  Spots  on  a  woman's  body  where 
the  Devil  had  left  no  visible  mark 
could  be  located  by  "pricking."  If  a 
pin  stuck  into  any  area  on  her  body 
did  not  produce  blood  or  pain,  the 
woman  was  condemned  as  a  witch. 

"Witch's  marks"  which  obviously 
could  be  located  on  every  woman  were 
used  as  "evidence"  of  witchcraft  to 
condemn  any  woman  who  threatened 
ruling-class,  male-dominated  religious 
and  medical  establishments.  Women 
practicing  within  the  peasant  subcul- 
ture as  healers  and  midwives  opposed 
the  dominant  ethic  of  the  Church  and 
State.  The  issue  was  one  of  control: 
"Male  upper-class  healing  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Church  was  acceptable; 
female    healing   as   part   of  a  peasant 


CLUW/35 


Graphics  by  Jackie  Linard 


subculture  was  not. "2 

Today,  psychiatrists  use  "sexual 
promiscuity,"  rage,  violence,  and  non- 
verbal "acting-out  behavior"  as  diag- 
nostic signs  of  mental  illness  in  lower- 
and  working-class  women.  These  terms 
merely  describe  our  class-based  exper- 
iences. They  are  general  characteristics 
of  lower-  and  working-class  life,  but 
are  selected  as  individual  indices  of 
"mental  illness."  Because  we  threaten 
ruling-class  political  power  and  are  con- 
sidered socially  undesirable  persona- 
lities by  middle -class  standards,  the 
issue  is  still  one  of  control.  Just  as  the 
power  and  wealth  of  the  witch  hunters 
rose  with  the  increased  "locating"  of 
poorer  women  as  witches,  the  power 
and  wealth  of  psychiatrists  today  rises 
with  the  increased  "incidence"  and 
labeling  of  lower/working-class  wom- 
en as  mentally  ill. 

As  lower-  or  working-class  women, 
we  are  not  denying  the  reality  of  em- 
otional conflicts  in  our  lives.  But  to 
focus  primarily  on  individual  solutions 
to  sexism,  racism,  and  classism  is  a 
gross  distortion  of  our  life  in  America 
today. 

When  a  lower/working-class  wom- 
an enters  or  is  coerced  into  therapy,  it 
is  the  therapist's  job  to  find  evidence 
of  psychological  malfunctioning  rather 
than  to  confront  the  political  and 
economic  issues  of  sex,  race,  and  class. 
Their  earning  power  as  psychiatrists  is 
based  on  the  number  of  "identifiable" 
cases  of  "mental  illness"  they  can  lo- 
cate or  manufacture.  Therapists,  by 
virtue  of  their  training  and  class  back- 
ground, are  always  searching  for  path- 


36/Quest,  vol.  I  no.  2,  fall,  1974 


ology  and  deviance  from  heterosex- 
ual, middle-class  standards.  Since  they 
do  not  affirm  the  validity  of  other 
experiences,  they  perpetuate  the  dich- 
otomy between  "normal"  middle-class 
behavior  and  "sick"  lower-  or  working- 
class  behavior. 

Since  many  women  are  involved  in 
psychotherapy  as  therapists  or  patients, 
I  will  examine  this  white,  upper-  and 
middle-class,  male  institution  from  my 
experience  and  perspective  as  a  work- 
ing-class lesbian  and  ex-mental  patient. 
Therapy  is  one  of  the  largest  industries 
in  the  U.S.  Almost  two  million  people 
flock  to  out-patient  clinics;  over  one 
million  a  year  enter  mental  hospitals, 
occupying  half  the  country's  hospital 
beds;  another  half  million  are  in  private 
therapy;  larger  numbers  visit  psycho- 
logically oriented  clergymen,  welfare 
workers,  and  teachers.  Such  a  system 
is  costly;  about  four  billion  a  year,  and 


about  75%  of  it  for  outdated  services.* 
The  Heterosexual  Bias 

Psychotherapy  is  heterosexist.  Het- 
erosexuality  is  never  viewed  as  a  prob- 
lem. The  attempt,  subtle  or  blatant,  is 
made  to  convert  lesbians  into  "happy 
heterosexuals."  We  are  commonly 
asked  questions  such  as,  "But  don't 
you  want  to  get  married  and  have 
children?"  Our  sexuality  is  always  de- 
nied or  distorted.  When  I  told  one  doc- 
tor that  I  was  a  lesbian,  he  asked  me  if 
I  was  attracted  to  men.  After  I  an- 
swered that  I  guessed  I  was  sometimes, 
he  ran  out  of  the  room,  came  back 
with  a  psychiatric  text  and  read  the 
definition  of  lesbian.  Since  lesbians, 
according  to  his  book,  are  only  at- 
tracted to  other  women,  he  insisted  I 
was  not  a  lesbian. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  they  decide 


Insanity  and  Control/37 


that  we  are  lesbians,  then  all  our  be- 
havior is  viewed  in  terms  of  our  sexual- 
ity. The  morning  after  I  was  admitted 
to  a  state  hospital,  the  chief  psychia- 
trist called  me  into  his  office.  When  I 
refused  to  talk  about  my  relationships 
with  women,  he  got  angry  and  de- 
manded to  know  how  extensive  my 
"homosexual  tendencies"  were  in  or- 
der to  predict  my  behavior  on  the 
ward.  When  he  looked  at  me,  all  he 
could  see  was  his  own  fantasy:  rape 
and  plunder  of  women. 

During  my  fifteen  months  of  hos- 
pitalization, I  occasionally  stole  my 
record  from  the  nurse's  office  in  order 
to  keep  up  with  "current  psychiatric 
thought."  My  admitting  notes  said 
that  I  was  "hostile,  non-communicative 
and  dressed  as  a  man."  Comments  such 
as  "extensive  genital  contact"  were 
used  to  describe  my  relationship  with 
my  lover.  "Homosexual  panic"  indi- 
cated their  perception  of  my  friend- 
ships with  other  women  on  the  ward. 
Notes  were  made  on  "looking  very 
feminine  today,"  "refused  to  dance 
with  man  from  day  hospital,"  and 
"recommend  cooking  and  sewing  ther- 
apy to  increase  femininity."  At  other 
times,  I  was  accused  of  "refusing  to 
deal  with  homosexual  feelings  for  staff 
members."  (Of  course,  since  physical 
contact  was  not  allowed  on  the  ward, 
I  could  hardly  be  expected  to  deal 
with  it  my  way.) 

They  saw  lesbianism  everywhere! 
Once,  when  I  was  angry  and  smashed  a 
music  box  against  my  wall,  an  atten- 
dant peeked  into  the  room  ,went  back 
to  the  office  and  wrote  a  lengthy  entry 


about  "lesbian  activity"  in  the  room. 
This  was  written  simply  because  there 
was  another  woman  in  my  room  at  the 
time.  To  them,  I  was  a  hotbed  of  un- 
controllable lesbian  passion,  whose 
sexual  energy  and  identification  needed 
to  be  channeled  and  transformed  into 
acceptable  middle-class  heterosexuaHty. 

The  Class  Bias 

Psychotherapy  is  classist.  Tradition- 
al psychoanalytic  literature  focuses  on 
the  problems  of  the  white  middle 
class.  The  major  theorists,  e.g.,  Freud, 
Jung,  Adler,  and  Deutsch,  all  spring 
from  middle-  to  upper-class  back- 
grounds. In  the  study,  Social  Class  and 
Mental  Illness,  95%  of  the  psychia- 
trists interviewed  identified  themselves 
as  upper  class  and  the  remaining  5%  as 
upper  middle  class.  An  analysis  of 
their  preferences  revealed  that  they 
liked  patients  who  came  from  the  up- 
per two  classes  and  disliked  those  who 
came  from  the  working  and  lower 
class.  They  were  "irritated  by  these 
people's  inability  to  think  in  their 
terms.  .  .They  were  repelled  by  their 
crude,  vulgar  language,  their  outbursts 
of  violence,  at  times  by  their  apathy 
or  indifference,  and  their  endurance  of 
poverty  and  economic  security."  The 
study  also  confirmed  the  often  denied 
fact  that  in  the  psychiatric  profession 
the  ideal  patient  must  have  "sensiti- 
vity, intelligence,  social  and  intellec- 
tual standards  similar  to  the  psychia- 
trist's, a  desire  to  improve  one's  per- 
sonality and  status  in  life,  youth, 
attractiveness  and   charm. "4  Stress  is 


3S/Quest 


placed  on  verbal,  intellectual,  insight- 
oriented  therapy,  and  individual  solu- 
tions to  emotional  conflict. 

As  lower-  and  working-class  wom- 
en, we  are  expected  to  compartmen- 
talize our  lives  into  intellectual/emo- 
tional divisions,  and  then  spit  out,  on 
demand,  meaningless  abstract  state- 
ments. During  my  confinement  in  the 
hospital,  their  biggest  goal  was  to  get 
me  to  separate  thoughts,  feelings  and 
action.  "Don't  act  on  it,"  "sit  with 
your  feelings,"  "talk  about  it,"  echoed 
through  the  hallways. 

A  month  after  I  was  hospitalized,  I 
was  presented  at  a  case  conference. 
These  are  barbaric  arena  spectacles 
reminiscent  of  the  early  Christian-eat- 


ing lion  extravaganzas.  The  staff  and 
assorted  visiting  voyeurs  were  grouped 
in  a  semi-circle  facing  the  victim  and 
my  inquisitor.  After  I  sat  down,  the 
examining  psychiatrist  told  me  that  I 
spoke  a  language  different  from  theirs, 
thus  setting  me  apart  from  everybody 
else  in  the  room.  Seeing  the  confused 
look  on  my  face,  he  explained  that  he 
wasn't  talking  about  foreign  languages, 
Greek  or  French; rather,  my  "different 
language"  was  speaking  in  actions, 
rather  than  in  feelings  or  words.  If  I 
expected  to  be  helped,  I  had  to  learn 
to  speak  in  a  language  that  was  com- 
prehensible to  them.  Later,  he  asked 
me  if  I  was  uncomfortable  and  wanted 
to  leave  the  room.  I  said,  "Yes."  He 


^U5jr^ — ■^A^^^^i_^2s^^- 


Insanity  and  Control/39 


replied,  "Well,  then,  why  don't  you 
leave."  As  I  got  up  to  leave,  he  laughed 
and  said,  "See,  you  interpreted  that  as 
permission  to  leave.  I  was  only  asking 
you  a  question."  The  whole  room 
laughed.  I  felt  like  a  fool. 

As  lower/working-class  women,  we 
should  distrust  and  abhor  middle -class 
therapy.  It  doesn't  meet  our  needs. 
Our  experiences,  ways  of  interacting, 
and  values  are  outside  most  therapists' 
narrow  class  experience.  Instead  of 
acknowledging  and  affirming  our  dif- 
ferences, they  attach  diagnostic  labels 
to  our  behavior.  When  lower-  or  work- 
ing-class women  are  in  therapy,  our 
class-based  expectations  and  experi- 
ences   are    examined,    as    well  as   our 


"problems  in  living."  If  we  don't  react 
in  a  passive  and  verbal  fashion,  we  are 
viewed  as  hostile,  paranoid,  overly  anx- 
ious and  defensive.  In  fact,  we  are  in 
a  hostile,  alien  situation  and  it  is  the 
middle-class  therapist  who  defines  our 
reactions  as  deviant,  rather  than  seeing 
them  as  part  of  our  class  background. 

It  is  difficult,  indeed  virtually  im- 
possible, to  muster  the  strength  re- 
quired in  therapy  to  "delve  into  our 
unconscious,"  "scrutinize  latent  dream 
content,"  or  "re-experience  traumatic 
childhood  experiences"  when  the  bulk 
of  our  energy  is  directed  to  the  strug- 
gle for  food,  housing,  and  decent 
employment. 

Our  insecurity  reflects  the  fact  that 
we  are  always  in  economic  difficulty. 
The  daily  demands  placed  on  us  by 
the  inequities  of  this  society  don't 
allow  us  the  middle-class  mistake  of 
constant  examination  of  our  inner 
lives.  If  we  don't  act,  we  don't  getl 
Our  employers  generally  don't  pay  us 
for  what  we  think  but  for  what  we  do. 
Our  life  is  one  of  action  and  produc- 
tion, not  abstraction.  We  understand 
life  from  living  with  its  harshness, 
not  from  perceiving  it  through  intellec- 
*  '.al  theories. 

The  study  on  Social  Class  and  Men- 
tal Illness  notes  that  people  who  exhi- 
bit obsessive  and  compulsive  personal- 
ity traits  are  concentrated  in  the  upper 
classes. 5  Since  psychiatrists  are  experts 
at  circular,  indirect  reasoning,  and  rig- 
id, exacting  modes  of  thinking  and 
acting,  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  like 
the  people  in  the  upper  classes:  both 
patient    and    shrink    can   just    sit— ab- 


40/Quest 


stract  minds  in  rigid  bodies— say  noth- 
ing concrete,  and  yet  have  it  make 
perfect  sense  to  both  of  them.  Once 
they  finally  do  get  hold  of  a  thought, 
they  strangle  it  to  death  under  cross- 
examination. 

During  a  conference  with  my  thera- 
pist's supervisor,  I  was  asked  what  I 
did  the  preceding  weekend  at  my  moth- 
er's house.  I  mentioned  that  I  had 
hung  some  draperies  for  my  mother. 
Her  eyes  lit  up.  She  grabbed  that  one 
statement  for  a  full  half-hour.  "What 
color  were  the  draperies?"  "Did  I  en- 
joy hanging  them  up?"  "Was  my  mo- 
ther telling  me  what  to  do,  step  by 
step?"  "Why  didn't  my  mother  hang 
them  herself?"  I  kept  telling  this  wom- 
an that  I  hung  them  because  it  needed 
to  be  done.  I  hadn't  analyzed  the 
whole  procedure.  But  there  was  no 
way  she  was  going  to  let  go  of  this 
topic.  Perhaps  the  "hidden  meaning  of 
draperies"  was  that  week's  subject  in 
her  teaching  seminar.  I  was  aware,  cer- 
tainly, that  she  was  trying  to  deter- 
mine how  I  felt  about  my  mother.  But 
couldn't  she  just  ask  me  outright?  No, 
that  is  too  simple  and  direct. 

Our  problems  are  not  those  of  the 
middle  class.  They  approach  life  from 
a  fairly  secure  economic  base  and  their 
problemsare  for  the  most  part  beyond 
economics.  Also,  since  they  generally 
conform  either  to  the  traditional, 
dominant  middle -class  culture  or  to 
the  cultural  patterns  of  the  "alienated" 
middle  class,  their  behavior  is  more 
often  "acceptable."  Topics  for  them 
in  therapy  include  internal  blocks  to 
creativity  and  occupational  or  scholas- 


■A& 


^ 


£ 


■^ 


7-> 


\^^^*P^ 


or 

tic  achievement;  tension  and  conflict 
in  interpersonal  relationships;  bore- 
dom, isolation,  general  dissatisfaction 
with  life;  and  LOVE. 

In  contrast— and  of  primary  impor- 
tance—we, as  lower-  or  working-class 
women,  are  faced  with  external  blocks 
to  achievement:  our  social  and  politi- 
cal oppression.  Since  we  are  not  oper- 
ating from  a  secure  economic  base, 
money  and  the  means  of  obtaining  it 
are  our  prime  concern.  Lack  of  money, 
political  power,  decent  housing,  food, 
employment,  access  to  universities  and 
professional  training,  and  the  constant 
middle-class  invalidation  of  our  experi- 
ences and  expectations  are  concrete 
problems  for  us. 

We  are  strong,  independent  women 
because  of  our  class  backgrounds.  But 
we  still  have  to  deal  with  the  political 
and   economic    oppression    of  ruling- 


Insanity  and  Control/41 


class  organized  and  middle -class  staffed 
institutions.  Some  individuals  from 
the  lower  or  working  class  do  master 
financial  problems  and  are  a  "success," 
but  most  of  us  are  still  struggling  for 
more  than  just  survival.  Our  task  is  to 
change  those  oppressive  institutions, 
not  to  force  ourselves  to  conform  to 
middle-class  standards  so  that  we  can 
pass  for  "one  of  them"  and  be 
accepted. 

Psychiatrists,  psychologists,  and  so- 
cial workers  all  find  it  inconceivable 
that  we  don't  want  to  know  them  per- 
sonally nor  do  we  spend  a  lot  of  time 
contemplating  their  existence.  During 
the  case  presentation  I  cited  previous- 
ly, the  interrogating  psychiatrist  asked 
me  if  I  knew  the  people  in  the  room.  I 
said  that  I  knew  a  couple  of  them,  such 
as  "Dr.  N.,  my  therapist."  The  endless 
questioning  began:  "How  did  I  know 
him?"  "Did  I  know  what  kind  of 
shaving  lotion  he  used?"  "Did  I  know 
what  he  did  outside  the  hospital?" 
All  I  knew,  or  cared  to  know,  was 
that  he  was  my  therapist  and  had  total 
control  not  only  over  my  life  on  the 
ward  but  also  over  the  duration  of 
my  hospitalization.  His  personal  life 
couldn't  concern  me  less.  I  had  prob- 
lems enough  of  my  own. 

I  find  this  same  arrogance  in  mid- 
dle-class women  who  assume  that  I 
immediately  want  to  know  their  emo- 
tional histories.  Most  of  the  middle 
class  is  employed  in  occupations  that 
value  them  for  what  others  think  of 
them,  so  they  are  overly  concerned 
with  the  impact  they  make  on  people. 
Their  money  is  made  by  influencing 


others,  making  contacts,  selling  ideas, 
and  impressing  each  other  with  tons 
of  bullshit. 

On  "Class  Analysis" 

Mirra  Komarovsky,  in  her  study  of 
Blue  Collar  Marriage, 6  realized  that 
she  was  "uncomfortable"  with  the 
mode  of  thinking  of  the  working-class 
respondents.  These  women  were  not 
interested  in  her  personally,  did  not 
exhibit  the  self-conscious  awareness 
characteristic  of  the  middle-class  wom- 
en, and  were  generally  less  concerned 
with  the  interviewer's  reactions  to 
their  stories  of  family  life.  She  stated 
that  self-consciousness  and  an  interest 
in  the  interviewer  require  a  "complex 
mental  organization,"  including  the 
capacity  to  be  an  "object  to  oneself." 
According  to  her,  working-class  wom- 
en lack  this  sophistication.  It  is  self-in- 
dulgent arrogance  to  equate  a  working- 
class  woman's  indifference  to  a  middle- 
class  interviewer  with  lack  of  sophis- 
tication. 

There  is  a  difference  in  thinking 
styles  between  the  working  and  middle 
class.  We  don't  hassle  over  semantics; 
we  may  use  the  same  word  or  expres- 
sion to  describe  a  variety  of  emotional 
experiences.  Emotions  are  not  named, 
described,  and  reflected  upon  at  length 
as  in  the  middle  class.  Our  emotional 
outlets  are  often  non-verbal;  we  are 
physical  and  action-oriented;  our  emo- 
tions and  behavior  are  integrated. 

Contrary  to  sociological  and  psy- 
chiatric opinion,  this  does  not  mean 
that  we   suffer  from  "mental  incapa- 


42/Quest 


city,"  or  from  an  "inability  to  delay 
impulse  gratification."  We  have  a  dif- 
ferent style  of  interaction;  it  should 
be  appreciated  as  such  and  not  evalu- 
ated by  middle-class  standards.  It 
amazes  and  angers  me  that  middle- 
class  studies  see  and  judge  our  life  pat- 
terns as  destructive  because  we  don't 
communicate  within  their  context.  For 
example,  why  is  the  "therapeutic  value 
of  talking"  deemed  healthier?  Some 
people  are  destroyed  by  physical  vio- 
lence, but  more  are  destroyed  by  the 
endless  psychological  violence  of  the 
upper  and  middle  classes. 

When  Komarovsky  questioned  work- 
ing-class women  about  what  would 
ease  tension  within  their  marriages, 
many  replied  that  they   needed  con- 


are  willing  to  give  us  what  we  say  we 
need.  The  following  example  bears 
witness. 

When  I  was  about  to  be  discharged 
from  the  hospital,  I  needed  help  in 
finding  a  job  or  training  program.  I 
agreed  to  attend  a  rehabilitation  con- 
ference. Rehabilitation  counselors  are 
supposedly  available  to  help  us  deter- 
mine interests  and  skills,  and  to  find 
jobs.  However,  as  usual,  this  middle- 
class  counselor  needed  to  practice  his 
interviewing  skills.  He  repeatedly  asked 
me  if  I  would  like  to  talk  about  my 
relationship  with  my  family.  I  said, 
"No,  I  wouldn't.  I  need  a  job."  From 
that  point  on,  he  tried,  but  failed  to 
impress  his  colleagues  with  his  sup- 
posedly   subtle,    caring    attitude    and 


crete  aid,  better  homes  and  jobs  rather 
than  psychological  services.  But  she 
considered  this  to  be  a  "primitive" 
approach  to  interpersonal  problem 
solving.  Expensive  talk  is  not  going  to 
change  our  economic  position.  We  are 
struggung  with  life's  necessities.  The 
middle  class  needs  to  practice  their 
psychological  acumen  on  us;  but  none 


axmsj^i.--  ■•■•"' 

technique  of  "leading  questions  that 
encourage  a  resistant  patient  to  dis- 
close information."  I  remained  "resis- 
tant." Later,  when  I  told  him  the  kind 
of  training  I  wanted  and  asked  him  if 
he  knew  of  any  programs,  he  replied, 
"Oh,  I  can't  help  you.  I'm  just  in 
training  and  don't  know  anything 
about  the  Boston  area." 


Insanity  and  Control/43 


In  a  study  on  suicide, 7  the  authors 
note  a  marked  class  difference  in  sui- 
cide notes.  The  lowest  income  groups 
focus  primarily  on  instructions,  mate- 
rial possessions,  the  notification  of 
others,  and  disposition  of  the  person's 
body.  We  die  as  we  lived,  dealing  with 
basics  and  assuming  responsibility.  In 
contrast,  the  notes  from  the  middle 
income  groups  contain  a  great  deal  of 
feeling  dealing  with  love  and  hostility, 
affection  and  rejection.  Since  this 
group's  suicides  concern  LOVE  and  the 
resolution  of  conflicts  of  feelings,  the 
authors  conclude  that  the  middle  class 
could  most  be  helped  by  therapeutic 
intervention.  Indeed,  traditional  psy- 
chotherapy is  limited  to,  and  depends 
on,  an  individual's  having  the  capacity 
and  need  to  discuss  interpersonal  rela- 
tionships within  a  middle-class  context. 

Alternative  Therapies 

Classismis  not  limited  to  traditional 
psychotherapy.  The  class  values  of  the 
"alienated"  middle  class  are  utilized 
and  expounded  in  current  humanist 
and  feminist  therapies.  In  this  "Age  of 
Total  Awareness,"  they  are  into  free- 
ing the  tensions  of  their  bodies,  ex- 
ploring the  recesses  of  their  minds, 
crushing  their  psyches  in  the  false 
emotionalism  of  the  Encounter  Group, 
screaming  their  lungs  out  in  Primal 
Therapy,  or  regressing  into  childhood 
through  Intense  Feeling  Therapy. 

"All  of  these  varied  therapies  share 
an  approach— against  the  psychoanaly- 
tic tradition  and  for  a  new  mind/body 
integration,  and  permissiveness,  and  for 


the  affirmation  of  self-actualization. "8 
They  promise  self-knowledge  and  indi- 
vidual solutions  for  those  who  can 
afford  their  weekends  and  groups.  Of- 
ten it  is  self-centered  and  self-indul- 
gent awareness.  The  mighty  Ego  is 
their  totality;  nothing  exists  outside 
the  self. 

These  alternative  therapies  focus  on 
middle-class  personal  and  interpersonal 
issues  and  ignore  sexism  and  the  reali- 
ties of  lower-  and  working-class  life. 
Dropping-out,  turning-on,  or  maintain- 
ing one's  own  counter-culture  within 
an  individual  context  does  not  end 
women's  oppression.  While  the  middle 
classes  are  off  "doing  their  own  thing," 
lower-  and  working-class  women  are 
still  fighting  political  and  economic 
oppression.  We  can't  drop-out  of  a 
society  in  which  we  don't  even  have 
the  political  power  to  be  recognized. 
And  we  don't  have  the  class  privilege 
of  the  back-to-the-land  movement.  It's 
their  land.  "Free  access"  to  land  im- 
plies prior  ownership;  it  is  not  free  to 
us.  We  have  no  escapes;  we  have  to 
deal  with  our  oppression. 

It  concerns  some  lower-  and  work- 
ing-class lesbian-feminists  that  many 
middle-class,  feminist  consciousness- 
raising  groups  parallel  and  reflect  the 
aims  and  behavior  of  Intense  Feeling 
Therapy.  The  aim  of  this  therapy  is  to 
get  the  person  to  express  her  inner- 
most feelings.  Treatment  begins  inten- 
sively with  a  three-week  program  dur- 
ing which  the  woman  has  prolonged 
daily  sessions  with  the  therapist.  She 
lives  isolated  in  a  hotel  and  is  prohi- 
bited from  indulging  in  her  usual  an- 


44/Quest 


xiety-relieving  tactics— smoking,  drink- 
ing, watching  T.V.,  or  taking  tranqui- 
lizers. With  the  aid  of  the  therapist, 
she  learns  to  allow  her  deepest  feelings 
to  take  over  her  whole  being  and  en- 
ters into  a  state  in  which  she  regresses 
to  childhood.  She  talks  or  babbles  and 
vents  in  screams  the  rage  she  could 
never  before  allow  to  reach  conscious- 
ness. After  a  time,  the  woman  enters 
this  regressed  childlike  state  without 
assistance  from  the  therapist  (or  CR 
group)— to  achieve  "voluntary  regres- 
sion." Invoking  these  intense  feelings 
from  the  past  is  supposed  to  bring  the 
woman  to  experience  herself  as  a  whole 
person.  But  the  therapy  ignores  the 
political  and  economic  forces  deter- 
mining her  behavior. 

When  CR  groups  have  tailed,  mid- 
dle-class women  have  invented  Femi- 
nist Therapy  as  their  individualistic, 
emotional  salvation.  Feminist  Therapy 
is  another  sub-cultural  institution  that 
serves  the  needs  of  the  privileged  with- 
in our  movement.  Middle-class  women 
now  have  their  own  private  corps  of 
"professional"  non-professionals  to 
band-aid  their  emotional  problems. 
Counter-culture  and  feminist  therapists 
are  notorious  for  encouraging  their 
clients  to  get  in  touch  with  their 
feelings,  especially  anger.  I  wonder 
how  many  of  them  would  deal  with 
our  lower/working  class  conscious  an- 
ger. Very  few! 

Phyllis  Chesler,  in  Women  and  Mad- 
ness,*) examines  "mental  illness"  and 
psychotherapy  from  a  middle-class  fem- 
inist perspective.  She  asserts  that 
sex-role    stereotyping    and    the    treat- 


ment of  women  as  dependent,  self- 
sacrificing,  maternal,  and  unadventu- 
rous  is  the  basis  for  much  of  what  is 
labeled  "mental  illness"  in  women.  She 
advocates  women  gaining  power  and 
control  in  social  and  political  institu- 
tions, but  feels  that  women  first  must 
undergo  psychological  change: 
Women's  ego-identity  must  somehow 
shift  and  be  moored  upon  what  is  nec- 
essary for  her  own  survival  as  a  strong 


individual.  .  .Only  such  a  radical  psy- 
chological act  will  make  it  possible  for 
women  to  begin  to  try  their  hands  at 
solving  the  issues  of  division  among  us 
based  on  class,  race,  and  age.  1 0 

Her  analysis  of  "mental  illness"  is 
limited  mainly  to  the  life  experiences 
of  middle-class  women.  Her  primary 
prescription  for  change  and  an  end  to 
women's  oppression  is  psychological 
rather  than  economic,  even  though  she 
later  acknowledges  that  "perhaps  the 
majority  of  women  in  America  will  be 
able  to  effect  such  psychological  chan- 
ges only  after  crucial  changes  in  their 
economic  and  reproductive  lives  have 


Insanity  and  Control/45 


already  occurred."!  1 

This  "radical  psychological  act" 
sounds  like  another  tactic  to  avoid 
dealing  with  class/race  issues.  Feminist 
therapy  is  an  insidious  trend  within 
our  movement  which  creates  a  demand 
for  individual  middle-class  emotional 
solutions  and  denies  the  political  and 
economic  aspects  of  lower-  and  work- 
ing-class women's  experience  with 
"mental  illness. " 

"Going  Crazy" 

Another  radical  rip-off  that  denies 
the  experience  of  lower-  and  working- 
class  women  as  ex-mental  patients,  is 
the  popular  notion  that  going  crazy  is 
a  positive  growth  experience.  It  is  true 
that  the  so-called  "mentally  ill"  are 
scapegoats  for  societal  dysfunctions. 
We  are  sensitive  to  the  pressures  en- 
gulfing us  in  this  "insane"  world  and 
we  do  react  to  them  instead  of  be- 
coming automatons  like  many  "nor- 
mal" individuals. 

But  romanticization  of  "craziness" 
is  the  crudest  parody  of  those  people 
who  have  been  oppressed  and  then  in- 
carcerated in  mental  hospitals.  Because 
we  are  different  and  live  in  a  self  or 
class  defined  reality,  we  are  ostracized, 
thrown  into  hospitals,  denied  our  con- 
stitutional rights,  and  ridiculed  by 
society.  Since  we  live  in  a  society  that 
coerces  everyone  into  minimizing  our 
rage  and  grief,  our  reactions  against 
middle -class  passivity  are  quickly  de- 
tected. For  this,  we  are  labeled  sick. 
The  brutalizing  effects  of  hospitaliza- 
tion  often  insure   that  we   are  recog- 


nized as  such  when  we  are  released. 
Glorifying  "craziness,"  without  dealing 
with  the  societal  prohibitions  and  po- 
litical implications  of  "mental  illness," 
is  both  disgusting  and  an  easy  escape 
from  the  issues  that  confront  women 
as  ex-mental  patients. 

Being  "crazy,"  depressed,  etc.,  is 
not  fun  and  it  certainly  should  not  be 
a  goal  in  life.  Yet,  many  middle -class 
women  talk  about  how  "crazy"  they 
are,  and  that  it's  a  fine,  easily-crossed 
line  between  them  and  the  "mentally 
ill."  They  read  accounts  of  a  person's 
"journey  into  madness,"  and  then, 
when  upset  about  something,  talk 
about  their  "madness."  It  requires  en- 
ormous class  privilege  to  sit  in  your 
own  shit  for  three  years,  without  final- 
ly ending  up  on  a  back  ward  in  a 
state  hospital. 

Too  many  lower-  and  working-class 
women  are  in  state  hospitals  where 
they  are  physically  and  psychologically 
abused  with  shock  treatments,  psycho- 
surgery, and  massive  doses  of  tranqui- 
lizing  drugs.  Visit  these  places  and  see 
for  yourself.  (Better  yet,  sign  yourself 
in  and  get  abused  first-hand.)  Spend  a 
few  months  on  the  back  ward  with  its 
smashed  windows,  filthy  excrement- 
covered  walls,  and  its  women  lying 
asleep  on  hallway  floors  from  over- 
medication.  Watch  women  scream  in 
horror,  tormented  by  hallucinations, 
or  sitting  immobilized  by  depression. 
See  how  they  have  to  beg  for  the  barest 
necessities  from  their  keepers.  If— and 
when— you  are  discharged,  notice  how 
everyone  diverts  their  gaze  from  you, 
and   then  oversees  everything  you  do 


46/Quest 


after  you  tell  them  you  were  in  a 
hospital.  Finally,  after  being  hospital- 
ized, we  lose  all  legitimacy  in  talking 
about  social  and  political  issues;  we 
can  always  be  dismissed  as  that  "crazy 
lady." 

Class  status  is  a  real  factor  in  deter- 
mining how  your  behavior  is  diagnosed; 
in  what  institutions  (private  or  state 
hospitals)  you  are  incarcerated;  what 
kind  of  treatment  you  will  receive 
(psychoanalysis,  intensive  psychothera- 
py, supportive  therapy,  custodial  care, 
or  organic  therapy);  and  length  of  treat- 
ment time. 

Diagnoses  are  all  too  often  political 
statements.  Working/lower-class  wom- 
en are  more  often  diagnosed  as  "psy- 
chotic" and  carted  off  to  state  mental 
hospitals  and  treated  with  organic  ther- 
apy (e.g.  shock  treatments  and  drugs) 
or  custodial  care.  The  upper  and  mid- 
dle classes  on  the  other  hand  are  more 
often  diagnosed  as  mildly  disturbed  or 
"neurotic;"  they  are  offered— and  can 
afford— psychoanalysis  and  intensive 
psychotherapy.  When  hospitalized  as 
"psychotic,"  they  are  referred  to  pri- 
vate psychiatric  hospitals.  12 

A  typical  lower-class  diagnosis  is 
"socio  pathological  personality"— the 
patient  engages  in  "acting-out  behavi- 
or" that  is  politically  and  socially 
damaging  to  the  ruling  class.  For  this, 
patients  are  shocked  in  institutions  or 
incarcerated  in  prisons  as  criminals. 
This  is  our  punishment  for  our  non- 
verbal communication  patterns  and  for 
our  "violence." 

When  we  do  see  therapists,  our  life 
situations  are  blamed  on  us  and  we  are 


encouraged  to  investigate  our  psycho- 
logical states  at  the  expense  of  denying 
our  social  realities.  If  we  do  not  res- 
pond to  treatment,  it  is  because  we  are 
"uncooperative,"  "intellectually  un- 
able to  examine  destructive  life  pat- 
terns," or  lazy  and  impulsive.  The  list 
of  excuses  for  therapists'  failure  is 
endless.  It  does  not  include  an  analysis 
of  their  destructive,  classist  attitudes 
and  approaches.  These  "poverty  pimps" 
practice  their  skills  on  us,  and  then 
move  on  to  their  private  practice  with 
the  white  middle  class. 


feminist  newspaper 


MAKE  CHECKS  PAYABLE 
T0:       Herself,  225  E.  Liberty 
Ann  Arbor.  Mich.  48108 

lame 

address 

ity 

State 

Zip 

Enclosed  is: 

(     )  $5.00  subscription  (1  year) 
(     )  50tf  sample  copy 


Insanity  and  Control/47 


And  they  leave  many  victims.  My 
father's  life  is  over.  He  has  been 
shocked  into  submission  so  many  times 
that  he  can't  fight  any  more.  My  sister 
was  arrested  for  "disorderly"  conduct 
and  when  she  dared  to  fight  with  the 
judge  about  the  cop  who  arrested  her, 
she  was  committed  to  a  state  hospital 
for  observation.  There,  she  was  diag- 
nosed as  a  "character  disorder"  be- 
cause of  her  involvement  with  prostitu- 
tion and  heroin.  Now  she  is  considered 
a  "whore,"  but  those  middle-class  wom- 
en who  "did  it"  in  the  privacy  of 
homes  or  motels,  or  for  LOVE  are 
"pure"  and  morally  superior.  If  my 
family  had  had  money  or  influence,  I 
doubt  that  this  would  have  happened 


C©WT 

AW0MA1FS 


fkwmmmm 

\W©MHt 

$5.95 


UtfN* 


NAAAE 

SaS  Xk  J  ADOOTSS 

CITY 

STATE    ZIP 


217  12th  St.,  S.E. 

Washington,  D.C. 

20003 


to  her. 

Like  many  working-class  children 
whose  behavior  clashes  with  the  mid- 
dle-class norm,  I  was  sent  by  the  school 
authorities  to  a  psychiatrist  for  refu- 
sing to  go  to  school  at  age  16.  This 
man,  a  kind,  Catholic  father  type,  de- 
cided I  was  "promiscuous"  and  recom- 
mended to  my  mother  that  she  send 
me  to  the  House  of  Good  Shepherd,  a 
home  for  "wayward  girls."  Fortunate- 
ly, my  mother,  believing  in  my  "per- 
petual virginity,"  refused. 

The  behavior  problems  of  my  mid- 
dle- and  upper-class  counterparts  are 
more  often  seen  as  "eccentricities." 
This  privilege  of  being  "eccentric,"  is 
dependent  on  their  financial  security 
and  freedom  from  the  energy-con- 
suming tasks  ot  life-supporting  labor. 
Therefore,  the  upper  class  creates  the 
middle  class  to  control  the  lower  class 
work  force  which  provides  society 
with  these  basic  needs.  Freed  from  the 
tasks  of  service  and  production-orien- 
ted occupations,  the  middle  class  is 
employed  in  jobs  where  they  are  val- 
ued for  what  they  think  and  for  their 
ability  to  manipulate  consumers.  Indi- 
viduality is  not  tolerated  in  the  lower- 
class  work  force  because  it  cuts  down 
on  the  upper  class'  profit  margin  and 
leads  to  a  work  stoppage;  individuality 
in  the  upper  classes  promotes  "produ- 
ctive" thinking  which  leads  to  better 
ways  of  selling  "goods."  They  value 
independence  and  individuality  when 
it  conforms  with  their  class-based  ex- 
periences and  expectations.  If  it 
doesn't,  then  it  is  a  sign  of  "emotional 
immaturity"  or  "mental  illness." 


4S/Quest 


Conclusion 

As  feminists,  we  must  examine  and 
change  the  sexist,  racist,  and  classist 
structures  which  create  emotional  pro- 
blems and  cause  women  to  be  labeled 
mentally  ill.  Instead  of  encouraging 
women  to  dwell  on  the  feelings  caused 
by  middle-class  female  oppression,  de- 
pendency and  isolation,  we  should  en- 
courage each  other  to  act.  Let  us 
develop  a  "therapeutic  network"  am- 
ong women  in  which  we  share  our 
skills  and  access  to  resources  and  pow- 
er, examine  our  sexist,  racist,  and 
classist  attitudes,  give  emotional  sup- 
port to  each  other  for  our  strengths, 
support  the  economic  struggle  of  low- 
er- and  working-class  women,  and  or- 
ganize to  end  male  supremacy  and 
women's  oppression. 

Alice  Quinn  writes  a  column  on 
feminism  and  mental  health  for  Major- 
ity Report  and  is  working  with  the 
Lesbian  Therapy  Research  Project  in 
Boston  on  a  book  about  lesbians  and 
therapy. 

FOOTNOTES 

1  Thomas  Szasz,  The  Manufacture  of 
Madness  (New  York:  Dell  Publishing  Co., 
1970),  pp.  32-33. 

^Barbara  Ehrenreich  and  Deirdre  English, 
Witches,  Midwives  and  Nurses  (New  York: 
The  Feminist  Press,  1973),  p.  11. 

^Michael  Glenn  and  Richard  Kunnes, 
Repression  or  Revolution  (New  York:  Har- 
per and  Row,  1973),  p.  3. 

^August  B.  Hollingshead  and  Frederick 
G.  Redlich,  Social  Class  and  Mental  Illness 
(New  York:  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  1958), 
p.  344.  Phrases  and  sentences  are  direct 
quotes;  italics  added. 


5Ibid.,    p.   226. 

^Mirra  Komarovsky,  Blue  Collar  Mar- 
riage (New  York:  Random  House,  1967), 
passim. 

^Edwin  S.  Schneidman,  Norman  L.  Fab- 
erowand  Robert  E.  Litman,  The  Psychology 
of    Suicide     (New    York:     Science    House, 
1970),   passim. 
8Glenn,    p.    150. 

"Phyllis  Chesler,  Women  and  Madness 
(New  York:  Doubleday  and  Co.,  1972), 
passim. 

10Ibid.,    p.   300. 

11  Ibid.,    p.   302.   Italics  added. 

l^See   Hollingshead. 


Insanity  and  Control/49 


Put  Your 

where 
Your  Movement 

is! 

by  Beverly  Fisher 


Money  is  harder  for  women  to  talk 
about  than  orgasm.  The  much  flaunted 
concept  of  collectivity  in  the  Women's 
Movement  has  not  reached  into  the 
bottom  seams  of  women's  pockets. 
Feminists  have  discussed  nearly  every 
topic  imaginable,  but  rarely  do  we  dis- 
cuss what  we  do  with  our  money,  as 
individuals  and  as  groups. 

We  must  recognize  the  importance 
and  potential  power  of  money  for  us 
as  a  movement  committed  to  challen- 
ging power  relationships.  Money  is 
leverage  for  gaining  the  power  to  be 
self-sufficient  and  autonomous  in  both 
the  short  and  long  run. 

Money  and  Attitudes 

To  sound  a  horn  in  this  money  si- 
lence, this  article  begins  by  examining 
how  our  attitudes  and  behavior  about 
money  often  reflect  our  class  back- 
grounds as  well  as  our  present  econo- 
mic   situations*    A    woman   who    has 


learned  to  live  on  an  income  that  just 
barely  allows  her  to  pay  for  essentials- 
rent,  food,  and  utilities— considers  any 
additional  money  as  extra.  On  the 
other  hand,  a  woman  with  a  more  sub- 
stantial income  may  also  see  car  pay- 
ments, gas,  charge  accounts,  insurance, 
clothes  allowance  and  gift  allowance, 
as  essentials;  she  will  spend  twice  as 
much  yet  see  herself  as  having  no 
extras. 

This  basic  difference  manifests  itself 
in  many  ways.  When  a  woman  says  "I 
haven't  got  any  money,"  she  may 
mean  she  doesn't  have  cash  because 
she  hasn't  cashed  a  check  or  she  may 
mean  she  doesn't  have  any  money  at 
all,  not  even  in  the  bank.  What  consti- 
tutes "pocket  money"  can  vary  as 
much  as  $5  to  $55  a  week.  Going  out 
to  lunch  and  dinner  three  or  four  times 
a  week  is  a  life  style  that  many  pro- 
fessional women  practice,  without 
considering  how  much  money  they 
consume    above    and    beyond  normal 


50/ Quest,  vol.  I  no.  2,  fall,  1974 


food  spending. 

While  visits  to  doctors  and  dentists 
are  included  in  many  women's  budgets, 
for  others  it  is  rarely  possible.  Teeth 
go  bad,  illnesses  hopefully  get  better 
by  themselves  and  preventative  medi- 
cine is  an  impossibility.  Women  who 
never  had  credit  or  charge  accounts 
have  no  concept  of  spending  more 
money  than  they  have  at  any  given 
moment.  Their  ability  to  buy  is  only 
immediate.  Planning  often  is  impos- 
sible because  next  week's  living  ex- 
penses will  eat  up  any  extra  they  have 
now. 

Women  who  make  enough  to  save 
money  out  of  their  regular  income 
have  options  for  planning  vacations 
and  buying  investments  toward  their 
future.  They  consider  this  planning 
essential  to  their  psychic  survival.  But 
women  who  have  no  extra  money  after 
living  expenses  have  no  choices  about 
planning  or  buying.  They  live  from 
paycheck  to  paycheck.  Life  takes  on  a 
very  different  perspective  with  no  es- 
cape or  release  to  look  forward  to. 

Being  able  to  live  on  past  privilege 
is  another  asset  for  some  women. 
Those  who  have  accumulated  goods 
over  the  years,  such  as  clothes,  house- 
hold furnishings  and  appliances,  type- 
writers, cameras,  and  tv's,  are  way 
ahead  of  many  women  who  had  no- 
thing to  start  with  and  often  never 
get  these  things  or  have  to  purchase 
them  out  of  their  present  incomes. 

During  my  four  years  in  the  Wom- 
en's Movement,  I  have  observed  many 
friends  move  from  typing  and  secre- 
tarial    pay    to     professional    salaries. 


Along  with  an  increased  salary  there  is 
an  inevitable  rising  spiral  of  economic 
need.  New  categories  of  needs  inevita- 
bly arise;  air  conditioning  and  a  car 
become  necessities  where  once  they 
weren't  possibilities.  What  at  first  was 
a  huge  increase  in  income  is  soon 
eaten  up  by  galloping  consumption. 

The  different  economic  experiences 
of  women  are  acted  out  in  the  politics 
of  the  Movement.  For  example,  while 
equal  pay  for  equal  work  is  practically 
a  holy  principle  to  feminists,  the  prin- 
ciple is  often  forgotten  when  a  wom- 
an is  doing  work  for  the  Movement. 
There  is  an  unspoken  expectation  that 
women  can  and  should  work  for  pure 
political  satisfaction.  This  assumption 
may  have  originated  out  of  a  predomi- 
nance of  women  in  the  movement  who 
were  not  faced  with  the  necessity  of 
work  for  survival;  as  such,  it  is  an  im- 
portant manifestation  of  individuals' 
economic  situation  being  reflected  in 
movement  politics.  (See  Coletta  Reid's 
article,  "Taking  Care  of  Business," 
for  more  on  this  subject.)  Similar- 
ly, the  heavily  emphasized  cam- 
paign for  promoting  women  to  high 
level  well-paying  positions  over- 
looks the  widened  gap  created  be- 
tween them  and  lower-  and  working- 
class  women. 

The  Movement's  Need  for  Money 

The  Women's  Movement  often  ide- 
alistically  assumes  things  will  happen 
without  attending  to  the  practical  as- 
pects of  accomplishment,  particularly 
when  it  comes  to  money.  To  change 


Put  Your  Money  Where  Your  Movement  Is/51 


this  assumption,  we  must  define  our 
goals  and  their  relationship  to  money. 
If  our  goal  is  ending  the  oppression  of 
women  and  creating  a  humane  society 
for  all  people,  we  must  develop  and 
undertake  strategies  for  achieving  this. 
Confronting  and  eliminating  the  in- 
stitutions of  capitalism,  sexism,  racism, 
classism,  heterosexism,  and  imperia- 
lism requires  a  powerful  social,  poli- 
tical and  economic  movement.  We 
have  to  develop  strategies  and  institu- 
tions on  many  different  fronts.  On  all 
fronts,  we  need  movement  resources 
to  achieve  these  ends.  We  cannot  ex- 
pect traditional  funding  sources  to 
underwrite  us. 

Money  is  important.  It  can  buy 
survival  for  movement  projects  and  the 
individuals  who  give  their  time  and 
energy  to  them.  Money  enables  us 
financially  to  support  leaders,  organi- 
zers, thinkers,  writers,  printers,  office 
workers,  etc.  who  are  essential  person- 
nel of  any  social  movement.  By  pro- 
viding them  with  decent  salaries  they 
can  put  all  their  energy  and  time  into 
the  movement  rather  than  having  to 
split  themselves  into  several  chunks  in 
order  to  survive.  As  salaried  personnel 
we  can  develop  structures  and  systems 
for  accountability  of  all  our  work.  No 
more  "tyranny  of  structurelessness." 

Money  to  pay  for  movement  work 
could  also  help  alleviate  the  class  bias 
of  the  movement.  For  example,  at 
present,  only  those  who  have  accum- 
ulated savings  or  are  supported  by  hus- 
bands can  afford  to  work  full-time  in 
movement  activities.  We  must  be  able 
to  offer  women  jobs  in  the  Movement 


as  a  means  of  support  at  a  reasonable 
level.  We  need  women  of  all  back- 
grounds and  experience,  including 
those  whose  salary  must  support  chil- 
dren or  a  household. 

Money  and  other  resources  are 
basic  to  the  survival  of  and  control 
over  our  programs  and  projects.  Lack 
of  financial  resources  should  not  be 
the  deciding  factor  in  determining  our 
priorities.  If  we  decide  that  it  is  essen- 
tial to  begin  a  new  publication,  we 
should  be  able  to  do  so  without  jeop- 
ardizing our  purpose  and  politics  in  or- 
der to  make  the  publication  financially 
feasible.  For  example,  advertising  in- 
come, often  essential  to  continued 
publication,  can  be  cancelled  at  any 
time  as  a  feminist  newspaper  learned 
when  a  publisher  who  did  not  appre- 
ciate a  bad  review  of  one  of  its  books 
cancelled  their  ad. 

As  the  development  of  a  women's 
culture  and  its  institutions  becomes  a 
reality,  the  necessity  for  equipment 
and  capital  resources  becomes  more 
crucial.  We  need  to  purchase  major 
equipment  that  will  make  us  more  self- 
sufficient  and  bring  us  more  capital  for 
further  growth.  Buying  buildings  and 
houses  provides  a  permanent  base  of 
operation  and  insures  our  existence 
beyond  the  expiration  of  a  lease.  Con- 
trol of  communication  resources  is 
key  to  building  mass  support  for  fem- 
inism. Owning  our  own  media  and 
communication  resources  increases  our 
visibility  and  impact;  we  can  reach 
women  who  never  go  to  underground 
bookstores  or  listen  to  movement 
radio  stations.  Radio,  television,  film, 


52/Quest 


and   publishing  all  require  capital  in- 
vestment and  technical  skills. 

As  we  create  feminist  institutions 
we  will  provide  jobs  for  women.  This 
is  vital  for  women's  economic  self-suf- 
ficiency. Yet,  too  often  the  old  maxim 
holds  true— "It  takes  money  to  make 
money".  If  we  do  not  have  the  re- 
sources to  purchase  new  equipment 
and  expand  our  operations,  we  will  not 
be  able  to  provide  these  jobs.  To  the 
extent  that  the  present  system  pro- 
vides women  with  economic  survival, 
most  will  resist  the  destruction  of 
capitalism.  Only  when  we  can  offer 
women  an  alternative  system  with 
new  principles  and  actions,  which  also 
guarantee  economic  survival,  will  we 
have  generated  a  substantial  source  of 
power. 

Changing  Our  Attitudes  and  Politics 

Once  we  recognize  that  money  is 
essential  to  our  movement  and  exam- 
ine our  attitudes  toward  it,  we  can 
analyze  how  to  change  our  values  and 
action  about  money  in  order  to  build 
a  new  political  perspective  on  money 
and  feminism.  We  must  acknowledge 
that  as  long  as  money  is  solely  in  indi- 
vidual feminists'  control,  it  divides  us. 
It  creates  privileges  and  security  for  a 
few  thereby  leading  to  conflicting 
ideas  about  movement  priorities. 

We  have  been  dealing  with  money 
in  capitalist  ways  by  not  discussing  it 
as  a  movement  issue.  We  have  allowed 
it  to  remain  an  individual's  right,  as 
sacred  as  the  right  to  religion  or  free 
speech.  It  is  time  to  create  programs 


and  strategies  growing  out  of  a  com- 
mon political  ideology  that  develop 
means  for  controlling  money  collec- 
tively and  redistributing  privilege  and 
security. 

We  must  discuss  money  openly  and 
honestly,  not  just  in  abstract  discus- 
sions of  the  ruling  class  and  their 
money,  but  in  real  gut  discussions  of 
who  has  what  in  our  particular  groups. 
We  should  be  aware  of  each  other's 
resources— including  money  and  pro- 
perty—as well  as  whether  we  can  type 
or  prepare  incorporation  papers.  We 
must  examine  our  values  and  see  how 
we  deal  with  money  as  well  as  talk 
about  our  financial  backgrounds. 

Too  often  women  react  with  guilt 
or  downward  mobility  whenever  a 
discussion  of  economic  differences 
arises.  Neither  reaction  gets  us  any- 
where. Guilt  only  immobilizes;  quit- 
ting a  $15,000/year  job  wastefully  de- 
nies money  to  all  women.  What  is 
essential  is  understanding  our  econo- 
mic differences  so  that  we  begin  to 
develop  ideology  and  strategies  which 
take  these  differences  into  account. 
We  must  realize  that  our  money  is 
going  to  make  a  vital  difference  in  the 
movement.  Without  it  the  Movement 
will  rise,  then  fall,  as  the  money  runs 
out.  It  is  not  necessary  to  become 
lower  or  working  class— in  fact,  that 
can't  be  done.  What  can  be  done  is  to 
recognize  that  our  individual  money 
can  make  the  Movement  something 
that  is  important  to  each  of  us  and  to 
all  women.  Put  your  money  where 
your  Movement  is! 

We   need  to  develop  strategies  for. 


Put  Your  Money  Where  Your  Movement  Is/53 


54/Quest 


acquiring  money  as  well  as  for  using  it. 
Our  strategies  should  rest  on  these 
assumptions:  l)Money  is  a  necessary 
resource  for  building  a  revolutionary 
women's  movement.  2)Money  is  a 
means  to  an  end.  3)There  is  a  reason- 
able living  standard  which  can  be  es- 
tablished and  adhered  to  by  all.  4) No 
individual  should  have  more  money 
than  is  needed  for  her  to  live  at  this 
reasonable  level.  5)  Any  individual 
whose  income  exceeds  that  reasonable 
level  shares  the  excess.  All  of  these 
assumptions  challenge  the  values  of 
capitalism. 

As  a  movement  dedicated  to  eradi- 
cating inequities,  building  new  systems 
that  correct  the  present  ones  is  essen- 
tial. Experimenting  with  new  ideas 
and  programs  which  incorporate  these 
assumptions  will  lead  to  new  economic 
relationships  and  will  prepare  us  for 
our  task  of  creating  a  new  economic 
system. 

Some  Proposals  for  Redistributing 
Money 

Movement  activities  fall  into  rough- 
ly two  categories— projects  that  can  be 
done  in  a  financially  self-sustaining 
manner  and  those  that  cannot.  The 
approaches  for  financing  the  two  cate- 
gories vary  according  to  this  essential 
difference. 

The  majority  of  projects  within  the 
Women's  Movement  are  not  presently 
self-sustaining  but  can  and  should  be. 
For  example,  our  women's  centers 
offer  free  services  to  women  with  little 
planning  as  to  how  we  will  pay  for  the 


Put  Your  Money  Where  Your  Movement  Is/55 


operating  expenses,  such  as  salaries  for 
staff.  Story  after  story  of  women's 
centers  folding  because  of  lack  of 
funds  should  be  lesson  enough.  Usu- 
ally such  centers  wait  too  long  to  get 
financial  backing  and  when  they  do, 
too  much  time  and  energy  is  devoted 
to  it  to  the  detriment  of  the  quality 
of  the  services. 

Women's  centers  usually  consist  of 
a  loose  association  of  autonomous 
service  projects.  If  these  projects  oper- 
ated as  "feminist  businesses",  offering 
the  same  essential  services  for  reason- 
able fees,  they  could  pay  for  their 
operating  expenses,  pay  their  staffs, 
and  at  the  same  time,  continue  to 
grow. 

I  suggest  that  we  offer  services  at  a 
standard  pay  and  fee  scale  that  both 
permits  low-cost  services  and  provides 
a  reasonable  income  to  the  women 
supplying  the  services.  In  setting  a 
pay/fee  scale,  groups  should  evaluate 
carefully  what  constitutes  a  reasonable 
standard  of  living,  taking  into  account 
their  own  geographic  area  and  the 
special  needs  of  individuals,  such  as 
health  and  dependents.  Department  of 
Labor  statistics  on  what  constitutes  an 
adequate  income  for  an  individual 
may  be  a  helpful  guide.  In  this  area, 
a  figure  between  $3  to  $4  per  hour 
would  represent  a  reasonable  wage. 

We  have  worked  hard  within  the 
movement  to  provide  free  services  for 
women,  and  yet,  anytime  we  seek  a 
woman's  professional  service,  we  can 
expect  to  pay  the  same  rate  that  we 
would  pay  a  male  professional.  Defen- 
sive statements  from  the  women  pro- 


fessionals range  from  "I  paid  to  get  the 
degrees  to  do  this  work,  why  shouldn't 
I  charge  these  rates?"  to  "This  is  the 
first  time  I've  had  an  opportunity  to 
make  money".  This  kind  of  blindness, 
which  ignores  the  perpetuation  of  the 
class  system,  is  an  intolerable  practice 
for  anyone  who  professes  to  be  a  fem- 
inist. Therefore  one  strategy  to  be 
considered  involves  the  commitment 
of  feminists  to  give  up  their  profes- 
sional salary  privilege  and  live  on  a 
reasonable  wage.  Since  the  pay  scale 
would  be  equal  no  matter  what  the 
particular  job  performed,  this  policy 
involves  a  considerable  reduction  in 
income  for  some  women,  while  for 
others  it  means  an  increased  standard 
of  living. 

If  the  group  providing  the  service 
sets  a  pay  scale  at  this  reasonable  level, 
they  in  turn  will  be  able  to  offer  their 
services  for  a  reasonable  charge.  This 
system  is  one  way  in  which  feminists 
can  begin  to  make  money  work  for 
each  other. 

Another  advantage  of  such  a  pro- 
posal is  that  it  begins  to  free  feminist 
projects  from  the  hold  of  male  money- 
granting  institutions.  So  far  these  insti- 
tutions have  demonstrated  that  they 
will  fund  only  those  projects  which 
are  not  threatening  to  the  status  quo, 
that  is,  those  groups  espousing  goals  of 
equality  rather  than  power  for  wom- 
en. Projects  relying  on  such  funding 
must  keep  their  politics  and  activities 
acceptable  to  the  funder.  This  reliance 
on  male-controlled  funding  exercises  a 
conservative  influence  on  the  entire 
Women's  Movement. 


56/Quest 


Political  Action  Groups 

Not  all  the  necessary  projects  and 
organizations  of  the  women's  move- 
ment, however,  can  become  entirely 
self-sustaining.  These  include  those 
groups  which  engage  in  political  or- 
ganizing and  action,  the  ideological 
and  strategic  core  of  our  movement. 
With  this  financial  support,  they  could 
carry  out  mass  and  grassroots  organi- 
zing, act  as  the  political  education 
branch  of  the  movement,  and  plan 
and  execute  actions  which  confront 
the  institutions  of  patriarchy  and  cap- 
italism. If  we  examine  existing  political 
organizations  for  women,  we  find  that 
most  are  primarily  reformist  groups 
which  seek  equality  for  women  within 
the  existing  system;  e.g.,  groups  such 
as  NOW,  National  Women's  Political 
Caucus,  and  the  Women's  Equity  Ac- 
tion League.  There  are  few  organized 
groups  with  radical  or  revolutionary 
ideology;  what  exists  are  mostly  city- 
wide  coalition  groups  and  socialist 
feminist  action  groups. 

One  reason  that  more  radical  groups 
have  not  formed  is  that  many  feminists 
have  disdained  money  and  believe  we 
will  destroy  capitalism  by  totally 
avoiding  it.  Meanwhile,  reformist 
groups  have  grown  and  survived  be- 
cause they  have  dealt  with  money. 
Early  in  the  radical  women's  move- 
ment, I  remember  repeated  derogato- 
ry remarks  about  NOW's  $15.00  mem- 
bership fee.  Since  then,  NOW  has 
changed  its  position  and  makes  provi- 
sion for  women  who  cannot  afford  to 
pay  the  fee;  the  radical  movement  sits 


in  the  same  place.  Membership  dues 
can  provide  some  basic  income  for  a 
political  organization  as  well  as  a  defi- 
nitive membership  (see  Jo  Freeman's 
"Tyranny  of  Structurelessness"  for 
discussion  on  need  for  definitive  mem- 
bership). Still,  unless  the  dues  are  pro- 
hibitive or  the  membership  in  the 
millions,  dues  do  not  guarantee  viable 
financial  security  for  any  political  or- 
ganization that  has  paid  organizers  and 
staff,  and  the  expense  of  printed  and 
other  media  propaganda.  While  the 
sale  of  some  publications  and  litera- 
ture can  be  another  source  of  income, 
here  again  the  income  is  limited. 

Radical  political  organizations  are 
necessary,  but  given  their  inability  to 
be  self-sufficient,  how  can  we  fund 
them?  And  how  can  we  develop  a  sys- 
tem of  income  sharing  and  redistribu- 
tion of  privilege  within  them?  I  pro- 
pose a  personal  income  tax  on  each 
woman's  income  in  excess  of  the  reas- 
onable standard  of  living  described 
earlier.  Taxing  ourselves  provides  a 
means  of  ensuring  political  commit- 
ment with  our  money  as  well  as  our 
lives.  This  proposal  particularly  is  dir- 
ected to  those  career  women,  often 
single,  who  comprise  the  movement 
rank  and  file,  both  the  reformist  and 
radical.  These  women  have  been  suf- 
ficiently aware  of  female  oppression 
to  join  feminist  groups  and  volunteer 
time  and  energy  to  projects  but  rarely 
consider  giving  their  money  to  the 
movement  as  well.  This  proposal  pro- 
vides a  mechanism  for  doing  so. 

Such  a  tax  should  not  only  be  paid 
by     the    individual    woman.    Female- 


Put  Your  Money  Where  Your  Movement  Is/57 


owned  businesses  as  well  can  pay  taxes, 
and  have  a  responsibility  to  do  so. 
Feminist  businesses  which  cannot  pro- 
duce excess  income  can  benefit  by  re- 
ceiving tax  revenue.  Services  rendered 
should  be  part  of  a  political  program 
determined  by  a  feminist  political 
organization. 

Political  Organizations: 
The  Redistributing  Agent 

Eventually  we  must  develop  politi- 
cal organizations  to  which  we  entrust 
the  important  task  of  redistributing  in- 
come through  a  tax,  as  well  as  estab- 
lishing a  system  of  accountability  for 
those  projects  and  businesses  that 
practice  on  a  standard  pay/fee  scale 
basis.  We  can  begin  by  establishing  the 
political  goals  and  principles  for  such 
an  organization.  Then,  decisions  about 
how  money  is  used  and  redistributed 
can  be  made  on  the  basis  of  these 
principles  and  goals.  The  following 
questions  provide  a  guide  for  evalua- 
ting an  organization's  political  prin- 
ciples and  goals,  and  its  money  values 
and  strategies. 

1.  Does  the  organization  include  an 
analysis  of  how  the  program  or  pro- 
ject will  affect  power  relationships  in 
our  society,  both  personal  and  insti- 
tutional? 

2.  Does  it  contain  the  elements 
which  make  it  an  instrument  for  elim- 
inating sexism,  racism,  and  capitalism? 

3.  Does  the  program  understand 
and  examine  its  relationship  to  other 
movement  programs  and  strategies  and 
have  an  analysis  of  how  its  goals  relate 


to  them? 

4.  Does  it  support  the  development 
of  the  feminist  community? 

5.  Does  it  build  mutually  suppor- 
tive systems  among  women  and  not 
promote  further  class  divisions  and 
distinctions? 

6.  Does  it  promote  economic  self- 
sufficiency  for  women? 

7.  Does  it  provide  experience  for 
women  in  management  of  resources 
for  feminist  interests? 

8.  Does  it  disperse  control  of  mon- 
ey among  women  of  different  econo- 
mic, cultural,  and  social  positions  and 
provide  accountability  for  uses  of 
money? 

9.  Does  it  encourage  women  to 
grow  in  their  feminist  commitment 
and  level  of  participation? 

10.  Does  it  lead  to  a  new  econom- 
ics based  on  shared  resources? 

11.  Does  it  reach  out  to  women 
who  have  not  yet  been  involved  in  or 
touched  by  the  women's  movement? 

12.  Does  it  examine  the  relation- 
ship between  its  strategies  and  its  goals? 

There  are  many  difficulties  facing 
us  in  implementing  these  proposals 
without  initially  developing  correlative 
organizational  structures  and  systems 
of  accountability  for  members  and 
leaders.  They  are  vital  areas  to  ex- 
plore before  undertaking  any  proposal 
as  radical  as  an  income  tax  or  standard 
pay /fee  scale.  However,  since  my  prin- 
cipal concern  in  this  article  is  money 
rather  than  the  formulation  of  politic- 
al organizations,  I  have  limited  this 
discussion.  Many  women  must  do  the 
thinking,  discussing,  planning,  writing 


5S/Quest 


and  experimenting  in  other  areas, 
keeping  this  article's  proposals  in  mind. 

As  one  approach  to  the  interlocking 
questions  for  the  coordination,  ad- 
ministration, and  implementation  of 
these  two  proposals,  I  would  like  to 
look  at  Feminist  Credit  Unions  as  a 
possible  resource. 

Feminist  Credit  Unions  are  new  to 
the  movement;  women  in  Detroit  es- 
tablished the  first  one  and  many  wom- 
en elsewhere  are  now  forming  their 
own,  based  on  that  model.  In  order  to 
obtain  federal  insurance,  a  federal  cre- 
dit union  must  establish  membership 
through  a  common  bond.  The  Femin- 
ist Credit  Union's  bond  is  based  on 
women's  organizations  which  become 
the  charter  subscribers.  For  an  indivi- 
dual woman  to  buy  shares  in  the  credit 
union  itself  she  must  be  a  member  of 
one  of  the  charter  subscriber  organiza- 
tions. These,  organizations  could  be  the 
same   political  organizations  this  sec- 


tion of  the  article  discusses.  The  FCU's 
could  administer  the  income  tax  and 
standard  pay/fee  scale  by  acting  as  a 
conduit  for  collecting  and  distributing 
funds  between  individuals,  businesses, 
and  organizations. 

In  addition,  they  could  provide 
financial  counselors  to  women.  The 
training  of  these  counselors  should  be 
carried  out  jointly  by  the  credit  unions 
and  the  subscriber  political  organiza- 
tions. 

This  training  should  be  viewed  as 
both  a  political  and  a  practical  task. 
Training  programs  should  be  developed 
by  women  from  all  class  backgrounds 
with  clear  principles  and  goals  much 
in  line  with  the  questions  outlined 
above.  With  trained  financial  counse- 
lors from  the  FCU,  women  could 
develop  budgets  and  comprehensive 
pictures  of  their  financial  status. 
Having  "extra"  money  for  feminist 
groups  generally  is  not  going  to  happen 
without  careful  budget  planning  and 
practice. 

Local  FCU's  with  the  experience  of 
handling  many  different  women's  bud- 
gets could  aid  in  ascertaining  what 
"reasonable"  expenses  are  and  in  dev- 
eloping a  reasonable  budget  for  all 
salary  levels.  From  these  figures,  joint 
committees  of  representatives  from  the 
FCU's  and  the  respective  political  or- 
ganization could  determine  fair  tax 
percentages  and  a  reasonable  pay/fee 
rate.  These  figures  could  be  discussed 
between  each  woman  and  a  Feminist. 
Credit  Counselor.  In  the  case  of  the 
tax,  an  agreed  upon  percentage  would 
then  be  deducted  by  the  credit  union 


Put  Your  Money  Where  Your  Movement  Is/ 59 


from  each  regular  deposit,  and  trans- 
ferred to  the  organization  designated 
by  the  woman.  The  possible  role  of 
the  Feminist  Credit  Union  speaks  to 
the  necessity  of  women  in  every  city 
and  area  organizing  their  own  financial 
institutions  controlled  by  their  mem- 
ship. 

A  Transition:  Privilege  Sharing 

While  aspects  of  both  these  ap- 
proaches can  and  should  begin  right 
now,  essentially  they  are  long-range 
strategies  that  require  further  develop- 
ment. I  would  like  to  urge  immediate 
attempts  at  privilege  sharing  among 
defined  groups  to  serve  as  a  transition 
to  these  long-term  plans.  Privilege 
sharing  is  based   on   a  basic  commit- 


ment to  each  other's  survival,  and  to 
the  survival  and  building  of  a  strong 
women's  movement.  Groups,  whether 
existing  project/program  groups,  living 
collectives,  or  defined  communities  of 
women,  can  institute  various  ways  to 
pool  individual  money  and  resources. 
Too  much  of  present  privilege  sharing 
is  tied  only  to  personal  relationships, 
such  as  between  friends  or  lovers,  ra- 
ther than  to  political  goals  or  groups. 
In  addition,  if  the  proposals  I  have 
made  are  going  to  be  instituted,  they 
will  require  some  women  getting  used 
to  living  on  less  and  others  readjusting 
to  having  more  than  they  have  ever 
had.  Transition  attempts  at  privilege 
sharing  will  teach  us  more  about  the 
problems  that  will  be  encountered  in 
the  long-range  proposals— such  as  who 
makes  the  decisions  of  allocation  and 
by  what  means? 

On  an  individual  level,  one's  decis- 
ion on  how  to  use  her  money  is  not  in 
the  control  of  the  group.  If  one  wom- 
an spends  it  on  art  objects  and  another 
for  going  out  to  the  bar  that  is  her 
choice.  On  an  organizational  level, 
however,  we  must  determine  how  it  is 
going  to  be  spent,  and  there  will  be 
no  simple  formula  for  these  decisions. 
The  work  before  us  is  immense,  but  I 
feel  anxious  to  begin  so  we  can  get  to 
the  future  we  are  setting  about  to 
realize. 


Beverly  Fisher,  community  and 
women's  movement  organizer,  is  com- 
mitted to  developing  feminist  ideology 
and  strategy  about  class. 


60/Quest 


How  Quest  Uses  Its  Money 

Paying  feminist  printers 58% 

Production  work  and  design 9% 

Paying  authors  &  artists 9% 

a,  Office  Supplies 15% 
44&&*  Mailing .4% 
Ml/dl  Advertising 0% 
^0                 %                       Staff  salaries 0% 

Office  Rental 0% 

Fundraising  &  Misc 5% 

Quest  Intends  To  Grow 

Building  politically  strong  organizations  which  develop  and 
act  on  issues  takes  money.  Quest  staff  would  like  to  rise  above  ^  AgjA^|j|i 

"meeting   expenses"   to    participate    in    the    creation  of  money  wWWwrfr^WW 

sources  to  establish  these  organizations  and  ideological  confer- 
ences. Quest  also  has  future  directions.  .  .  ^ 

•  Vital  material  for  each  issue  is  available,  making  it  desirable  X^A 
to  expand  beyond  our  80-pagfe  format.                                                                                       WWW 

•  Our  readership  through  subscriptions  is  very  diverse,  but 

through  a  continuous  promotional  campaign  will  grow.  ^   _^^ 

•  One  of  our  starting  principles  is  that  contributors  to  Quest  GrmW^k 
are  paid.  We  also  need  paid  staff  to  carry  out  our  future 

goals.  If  we  expect  quality  and  efficiency  in  our  work,  we  ^ 

must  understand  that  payment  is  necessary.  &4Mm'AM4l4H 

•  Distributors   (hopefully  feminist)   will   help  get  Quest  out  J    Irvlrl     ir 
beyond   our   own    public   relations.   Using  them  also  will  ^W 

increase  our  income  considerably. 

•  Publication  of  additional  literature  outside  the  journal 
framework  is  also  being  discussed.  Information  and  re- 
sources could  be  distributed  through  our  network,  but  the 
cost  of  printing  must  be  considered. 

These  Are  Not  Only  Dreams, 
But  Our  Future  Plans 


Work  with  us  to  make  these  possible.  Additional  income  is 
needed  to  get  these  goals  rooted  and  growing.  As  Quest  readers, 
subscribers  and  supporters,  we  ask  for  your  input.  Show  Quest  to 
friends,  workers,  and  contacts  who  might  not  have  seen  it.  Ask 
libraries  if  they  subscribe  and  bookstores  if  they  order  Quest. 
Tell  people  what  we  are  about.  In  academic  settings,  suggest  that 
Quest  be  utilized  as  a  text  in  women's  studies,  political  science, 
economic  and  sociology  classes.  Get  our  address  out,  tell  people 
to  write  for  more  information.  You  can  get  promotional  material 
from  us  and  distribute  it  in  your  location.  We  are  in  a  good 
situation  and  want  to  make  it  better-for  all  of  us.  Support 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly.  .  .It's  an  investment  in  our  future. 


EKA 


year 

cf  the  Cabbie 


62/ Quest,  vol.  I  no.  2,  fall,  1974 


y  Vicki  Gabringer 


Let  me  tell  you  right  off  the  bat 
why  I  wrote  this  article— to  encourage 
young  women,  radical  women,  socialist 
women,  lesbian  women,  and  campus 
women,  to  make  the  Equal  Rights 
Amendment  our  issue  in  the  upcoming 
legislative  session.  The  ERA  does  not 
belong  to  the  legislatures,  nor  to  the 
establishment  organizations  like  the 
League  of  Women  Voters,  nor  even  to 
the  National  Organization  for  Women. 
It  belongs  to  all  women. 

The  fight  for  the  ERA  represents  a 
national  forum  on  the  status  of  wom- 
en. A  victory  will  positively  affect 
most  women,  and  a  defeat  would  re- 
present a  tremendous  setback,  both 
materially  and  psychologically. 

Like  the  call  for  abortion  on  dem- 
and, black  civil  rights,  or  potential 
action  to  repeal  sodomy  laws,  the  ERA 
is  an  important  component  of  a  mas- 
sive social  movement  to  change  the 
conditions  in  which  we  live.  These 
issues  can  be  dismissed  as  reformist 
and  bourgeois  or  they  can  be  used  to 
bring  us  closer  to  an  ultimate  resolu- 
tion of  the  basic  contradictions  of  the 
American  patriarchal  system.  In  the 
short  run,  concrete  issues  like  the  ERA, 
which  will  establish  a  constitutional 
basis  for  the  legal  equality  of  women 
and  materially  improve  the  lives  of 
women  can  provide  handles  for  increa- 
sing women's  economic  and  political 
power. 

The  important  question  is  how  you 
work  on  such  reforms:  which  consti- 
tuencies you  speak  to,  the  kinds  of 
structures  you  build,  and  the  political 
education  accompanying  the  struggle. 


ERA/63 


For  instance,  you  can  lobby  and  focus 
your  attention  on  the  few  who  have 
power,  or  you  can  organize  a  mass- 
based  constituency  and  speak  to  the 
many  who  should  have  the  power;  you 
can  build  a  hierarchal  structure  that 
creates  an  elite  or  you  can  build  a  de- 
mocratic structure  where  everyone 
works  and  makes  decisions;  you  can 
avoid  uncomfortable  issues  or  you 
can  confront  them  honestly.  Ultimate- 
ly, independent  mass  movements,  of 
women,  of  lesbians,  of  black  people,  of 
lower  and  working  class  people,  are 
our  best  instruments  for  social  change. 

In  struggling  for  the  ERA,  we  can 
build  women's  organizations  and  wom- 
en who  are  politically  astute.  We  can 
better  define  our  politics,  goals  and 
tactics  by  having  to  test  our  ideas 
against  the  daily  demands  of  organiz- 
ing. It  is  a  self-validating  process  to 
translate  our  instincts  into  political  re- 
alities by  testing  our  strengths,  endur- 
ance, and  creativity,  instead  of  fanta- 
sizing, or  being  frustrated  by  what 
isn't  being  done.  From  here  women 
learn  not  only  to  grapple  with  the 
ERA,  but  with  other  issues  and  with 
the  larger  question  of  re-structuring 
society. 

Working  on  the  ERA  and  other  re- 
forms will  often  place  radicals  in  the 
position  of  working  in  coalitions  with 
groups  whose  politics  start  and  stop 
with  reform.  Grappling  politically  with 
these  groups  can  be  draining,  but  it 
can  also  work  to  our  advantage.  We 
must  have  a  strong  sense  of  ourselves 
as  we  work  inside  a  coalition.  Other 
people  will  come  to  respect  our  politics 


either  because  they  see  it  work  or  be- 
cause they  understand  that  they  can- 
not get  rid  of  us.  We  will  come  to  res- 
pect ourselves  for  the   same  reasons. 

Our  position  will  be  strengthened  as 
we  develop  allies  and  work  with  other 
people.  Further,  our  politics  strengthen 
these  coalitions  by  making  them  come 
to  terms  with  building  a  mass  base  and 
dealing  with  constituencies  they  would 
likely  ignore:  lesbians,  students,  poor 
women,  and  black  women. 

For  many  women,  the  ERA  is  not 
an  issue  since  they  live  in  one  of  the 
33  states  where  it  has  already  been 
ratified.  Like  the  victory  with  abortion, 
however,  there  are  attempts  to  undo 
the  Yes  votes.  Further,  there  are  and 
will  be  other  issues  which  have  similar 
characteristics  to  the  ERA:  nation-wide 
reform  issues  with  potential  mass  ap- 
peal. Although  the  strategies  and  tac- 
tics for  each  must  be  worked  out 
according  to  its  particulars,  my  exper- 
ience with  the  ERA  can  be  relevant  in 
a  general  way. 

The  ERA  in  Georgia 

I  have  been  working  on  the  ERA 
over  the  past  year  and  a  half  in  Atlanta, 
Georgia,  and  want  to  share  with  you 
how  it  has  been  an  energy  source,  a 
learning  experience,  a  self-affirmation 
for  me  as  a  lesbian,  as  well  as  a  struggle 
to  accomplish  a  meaningful  goal.  I  also 
want  to  discuss  the  political  relation- 
ships among  the  pro-ERA  organizations 
and  the  entrance  onto  the  scene  of  the 
"Rabble."  (The  rabble  as  I  have  come 
to    call    them/us    are    all    the    women 


64/Quest 


whom  the  conservatives  would  like  to 
keep  in  the  closet:  the  lesbians,  cam- 
pus, radical,  socialist,  black,  and  un- 
educated women  and  even  women's 
libbers.) 

I  was  drawn  to  the  ERA  late  in  1972 
because  I  felt  a  lot  of  energy  there- 
energy  created  by  a  combination  of 
subjective  and  objective  realities.  I  was 
coming  back  to  women's  politics  after 
a  post-sixties  withdrawal,  following 
participation  in  civil  rights,  campus 
anti-war  activity,  Weatherman,  a  five- 
year  heterosexual  marriage,  and  lately 
in  the  lesbian/feminist  community  in 
Atlanta.  I  was  ready  to  act  again. 

I  found  a  loose  coalition  of  organi- 
zations working  toward  the  common 
end  of  winning  passage  of  the  ERA. 
Women  of  different  lifestyles,  politics, 
sexual  preference,  age,  color,  and  class 
were  trying  to  overcome  their  differ- 
ences to  effect  change.  When  there  is 
an  attempt  at  communication,  there  is 
usually  energy  generated. 

In  January  of  1973,  the  coalition  in 
Atlanta  ranged  from  fairly  conservative 
organizations  like  the  League  of  Wom- 
en Voters  (LWV),  Church  wo  men  Un- 
ited (CU),  Business  and  Professional 
Women  (BPW),  and  the  American  As- 
sociation of  University  Women  (AA- 
UW)  to  more  activist  groups  like  the 
National  Organization  for  Women 
(NOW)  and  the  Georgia  Women's  Poli- 
tical Caucus  (GWPC).  There  was  at  this 
time  no  participation  from  out  lesbians 
or  socialists. 

Lobbying  the  legislature  was  the 
most  important  strategy  of  the  coali- 
tion;   however,    even    then    there    was 


friction  over  tactics.  NOW  felt  ham- 
strung by  more  conservative  groups 
but  played  down  their  activist  tenden- 
cies to  preserve  a  working  relationship. 
Most  of  the  conservative  organizations, 
having  lobbied  for  the  ERA  for  years 
by  themselves  were  distressed  at  the 
entrance  onto  the  scene  of  new  people 
with  different  ideas.  In  particular,  they 
did  not  identify  themselves  as  feminists 
..nd  did  not  want  to  link  the  ERA  with 
women's  liberation. 

At  first  I  went  to  meetings  of  the 
ERA  coalition  as  an  observer  for  my- 
self and  the  Atlanta  Lesbian/Feminist 
Alliance  (ALFA).  I  went  with  Cheryl 
who  represented  an  independent  radi- 
cal women's  group.  We  were  both 
fascinated  and  intimidated  to  find  our- 
selves in  meetings  with  women  who 
had  been  politically  active  for  20 
and  30  years. 

I  was  excited  by  the  possibility  of 
a  mutual  exchange  of  ideas,  although 
the  excitement  was  not  shared  by  most 
members  of  the  coalition.  There  was 
not  much  receptivity  to  the  dungarees, 
no  make-up,  impatience,  and  uncons- 
cious casualness  which  is  part  of  my 
counterculture  style.  Nor  was  anyone 
too  happy  about  my  lesbianism.  Be- 
cause I  was  turned  on  by  the  ERA  and 
its  potential,  I  persevered.  I  was  turned 
on  much  as  I  have  been  to  new  lovers. 
That's  how  politics  should/can  be:  a 
release  for  one's  full  creative  potential. 
Energy  in  politics  can  be  explained  in 
economics,  theory,  and  other  rational 
terms,  but  it  is  also  something  irration- 
al coming  from  the  life  force  within 
and  outside  of  us. 


ERA/65 


In  the  beginning,  I  went  along  with 
the  unspoken  notion  that  it  would  not 
be  helpful  to  the  ERA  movement  if 
lesbians  or  radicals  took  an  out-front 
role.  When  a  letter  was  drafted  to  the 
legislative  committee  considering  the 
ERA,  Cheryl  and  I  voluntarily  offered 
not  to  sign.  I  have  since  come  to  regret 
that  decision,  but  at  the  time,  I  felt 
that  I  was  stepping  back  in  the  interest 
of  the  "larger  community."  I  said  that 
when  lesbians  needed  support,  I  hoped 
the  other  groups  would  come  to  our 
defense.  Some  of  the  NOW  members 
nodded  their  heads  in  agreement;  most 
of  the  other  women  were  only  per- 
terbed  that  I  was  there  at  all. 

The  "Rabble"  was  not  very  active 
during  that  year,  but  by  the  end  of  it  I 
realized  that  I  could  no  longer  function 
from  the  back  of  the  bus.  I  decided  to 
enter  wholly  and  fully  onto  the  ERA 
scene.  That  decision  did  not  come 
easily.  I  was  scared  that  I  would  make 
myself  vulnerable,  if  I  exposed  not 
only  my  lesbianism  but  also  my  past 
radical  political  activity. 

The  Rabble  Comes  Out 

The  ERA  was  not  brought  out  of 
committee  in  1973.  The  coalition 
formed  again  for  the  1974  legislative 
session  in  May,  1973.  The  first  year's 
coalition  had  been  completely  unstruc- 
tured and  without  any  written  guide- 
lines. This  time  a  loose  structure,  called 
the  Forum,  was  established,  primarily 
for  inter-organizational  communication. 

Quite  a  few  socialist  and  out-front 
lesbian  women  were  active.  (There  had 


been  many  closet  sisters  active  from 
the  beginning.)  After  a  few  meetings  of 
the  Forum,  we  realized  that  it  was  not 
going  to  develop  public  activities  that 
would  make  the  ERA  visible,  nor 
would  it  draw  in  the  many  women 
who  were  not  affiliated  organization- 
ally. 

We  believed  that  basic  social  change 
would  be  made  by  mass  pressure,  and 
that  if  the  ERA  was  to  be  more  than  a 
limited  piece  of  reform  legislation, 
thousands  of  women  in  Georgia  needed 
to  be  informed,  mobilized,  and  part  of 
the  movement  to  insure  its  passage. 

To  put  into  practice  our  tactics  and 
strategies  a  core  of  women  from 
ALFA,  the  Socialist  Workers  Party 
(SWP),  and  independent  radicals, 
formed  Georgians  for  the  ERA  (G- 
ERA).  Now,  rather  than  responding  to 
other  people's  politics,  I  could  work 
with  women  of  like  mind.  We  decided 
to  concentrate  our  energies  on  devel- 
oping a  mass  movement  of  women  in 
the  state.  We  saw  our  constituency  as 
young  women,  students,  independent 
women,  and  lesbians.  We  wanted  to 
establish  ties  with  black  organizations, 
and  when  the  Coalition  of  Labor 
Union  Women  (CLUW)  formed,  we 
also  saw  them  as  important  allies.  We 
understood  that  while  it  was  the  Leg- 
islature which  would  vote  on  the  ERA, 
it  was  large  numbers  of  active  women 
who  would  make  them  vote  yes.  We 
continued  to  participate  in  the  Forum, 
but  began  independent  activites  of  our 
own. 

G-ERA  had  our  first  open  meeting 
in  late  June,  1973,  and  held  a  public 


66/Quest 


forum  on  the  ERA  to  celebrate  Nat- 
ional Women's  Day,  August  26th.  In 
the  early  Fall  we  got  an  office,  a  tele- 
phone, a  staff  person  (me),  and  rolled 
into  full  gear.  In  November,  we  spon- 
sored a  one-day  conference  on  the 
ERA  attended  by  a  diverse  crowd  of 
200  women  and  men. 

In    late    November,    G-ERA  began 
work  on  an  ERA  march  we  had  been 


fluential  individuals  and  organizations 
for  endorsement;  but  with  our  new 
found  success,  we  decided  to  initiate  a 
full-fledged  coalition  effort  for  the 
march. 

We  began  to  work  with  groups  and 
individuals  whom  we  knew  to  be  com- 
mitted to  a  march— G-ERA,  Atlanta 
NOW,  and  the  Northwest  Council  of 
Girl   Scouts.   At   our   first    meeting  in 


We  saw  a  mass  action  as 

both  a  symbol  of  change 

and  a  cause  of  it. 


planning  since  our  inception.  We  sche- 
duled it  for  January  12,  1974,  the 
Saturday  preceding  the  opening  of  the 
State  Legislature.  The  march  was  to 
make  the  ERA  an  unavoidably  public 
issue,  thus  pressuring  the  representa- 
tives to  a  "yes"  vote.  Some  groups 
charged  that  a  demonstration  would 
alienate  the  legislature,  but  we  saw  a 
mass  action  as  both  a  symbol  of  change 
and  a  cause  of  it.  We  also  wanted  to 
encourage  the  women  of  the  State  by 
showing  that  there  was  mass  support 
for  the  Amendment.  Since  there  had 
been  a  pro-suffrage  parade  of  500 
women  in  Atlanta  in  1915,  we  felt 
that  we  were  following  in  their  foot 
steps  and  sinking  roots  into  our  his- 
tory. We  asked  Eleonore  Raoul,  the  87- 
year  old  women  who  had  led  that  pa- 
rade on  a  white  horse  to  lead  ours,  and 
she  agreed  to  do  so. 

With  the  success  of  our  November 
conference,  G-ERA  had  established  it- 
self as  a  real  force  on  the  ERA  scene. 
For  the  conference  we  had  asked  in- 


November,  we  decided  to  invite  Gloria 
Steinem  to  be  the  speaker  at  the  rally, 
and  later  that  week  she  agreed  to 
come.  We  opened  the  coalition  to  all 
groups  supporting  the  ERA  and  agreed 
to  call  the  march  a  Parade  to  defuse 
the  emotional  responses  to  the  word 
march  or  demonstration. 

Bebe,  the  NOW  representative, 
warned  us  that  some  conservative  or- 
ganizations might  try  to  undermine 
the  march.  I  dismissed  that  possibility. 
I  turned  out  to  be  dead  wrong. 

At  the  first  open  coalition  meeting, 
there  were  representatives  from  G- 
FRA,  NOW,  GWPC,  LMV,  AAUW, 
CU,  YWCA,  Georgia  Nurses  Associa- 
tion, Black  Women's  Coalition,  Femi- 
nist Action  Alliance  (FAA),  Commun- 
ications Workers  of  America  (CWA), 
Socialist  Workers  Party  (SWP),  and 
student  groups  from  Georgia  State 
University  and  the  University  of  Geor- 
gia. The  United  Automobile  Workers 
(UAW)  and  the  Atlanta  Labor  Council 
(ALC)— which   is  a   part  of  the  AFL- 


ERA/67 


CIO— were  unable  to  attend,  but  had 
already  committed  themselves. 

The  split  which  had  been  brewing 
for  a  year  over  how  to  win  the  ERA 
came  to  a  head.  The  conservatives  did 
not  want  to  march  at  all,  since  mass 
demonstrations  are  not  a  part  of  their 
politics.  They  also  argued  against 
Gloria  Steinem,  saying  that  she  would 
turn  off  the  legislators  and  many  Geor- 
gians because  she  was  an  outspoken 
feminist,  and  that  furthermore,  she 
was  an  out-of-stater.  The  last  straw 
was  the  open  participation  of  lesbians 
and  socialists,  even  though  it  was  never 
discussed  at  the  meeting.  The  woman 
from  the  SWP  sat  quietly  in  the  corner, 
but  evidently  her  presence  hovered 
over  the  gathering.  It  was  open  infor- 
mation that  many  of  the  women  in 
G-ERA  were  lesbians  and  that  NOW 
"supported"  the  lesbian  movement. 

The  LWV,  AAUW,  and  CU  told  us 
that  they  would  not  join  the  march 
coalition.  Actually  that  was  a  uni- 
lateral decision  made  by  certain  indi- 
viduals who  were  in  positions  of  pow- 
er. Given  the  history  of  ERA  work  in 


ing,  those  of  us  who  had  initiated  the 
march  spent  hours  debating  the  ques- 
tion of  open  lesbian  and  socialist  par- 
ticipation among  ourselves.  We  had 
never  actually  discussed  it  before.  My 
first  inclination  was  to  avoid  the  pro- 
blem and  go  for  the  prestigious  labor, 
civic  and  women's  organizations.  Du- 
ring that  week  we  talked  and  yelled 
and  thought  and  finally  realized  that 
an  open  coalition  was  the  only  way.  I 
knew  that  I  didn't  want  to  do  all  the 
work  and  not  be  part  of  the  political 
decision-making  as  the  whole  me,  nor 
was  I  willing  to  encourage  my  socialist 
and  lesbian  sisters  to  do  the  same. 
Other  G-ERA  and  NOW  women  agreed. 
As  Eva,  who  had  joined  the  G-ERA 
staff  as  a  fundraiser,  put  it,  "How  can 
we  have  a  struggle  for  equal  rights  and 
discriminate  internally  to  achieve  it?" 
At  the  second  coalition  meeting, 
the  women  from  the  CWA  told  us  that 
they  could  not  stay  in  a  coalition  with 
lesbians  and  socialists  because  that 
would  ruin  their  clout  with  the  Legis- 
lature. We  had  never  actually  commu- 
nicated   our    decision,    but    she    had 


How  can  we  have  a   struggle 
for  equal  rights  and  discriminate 
internally  to  achieve  it? 


Georgia,  we  felt  that  it  would  have 
been  almost  impossible  to  have  a  pro- 
ductive working  relationship  with  them 
anyway.  Their  participation,  however, 
certainly  would  have  been  impressive. 
Most  of  the  other  groups  at  the  meet- 
ing voted  to  support  the  march. 

The  week  following  that  first  meet- 


assumed  it.  Her  decision  was  upsetting 
not  only  because  of  the  politics,  but 
also  because  the  CWA  was  very  com- 
mitted to  the  ERA  and  would  have 
been  able  to  turn  out  a  lot  of  people. 
By  that  time  both  the  SWP  and  ALFA 
had  indicated  support  for  the  march, 
and  we  were  not  about  to  be  pressured 


68/Quest 


into  a  compromise  on  something  so 
crucial.  During  the  next  few  weeks  we 
lost  a  few  more  supporters  for  similar 
reasons— Girl  Scouts,  the  ALC  and  the 
United  Farm  Workers  (who  were  pres- 
sured by  the  ALC  and  CWA  who  give 
them  lots  of  support). 

The  ERA  struggle  had  now  devel- 
oped into  a  four-sided  affair:  the  State 
Legislature,  the  anti-ERA  forces,  the 
march  coalition,  and  the  other  pro- 
ERA  groups,  some  of  whom  formed 
their  own  new  coalition.  They  were 
not  only  committed  to  the  passage  of 
the  ERA  but  also  to  the  destruction  of 
the  march.  The  most  active  members 
represented  the  CWA,  LWV,  CU,  FAA, 
AAUW,  and  BPW. 

They  were  not  content  merely  to 
pressure  local  groups  to  stay  away 
from  us.  They  also  decided  to  get  to 
Gloria  Steinem.  They  succeeded  in 
that  effort,  through  a  campaign  of 
long  distance  phone  calls  to  Ms.  maga- 
zine not  only  from  Atlanta,  but  also 
from  the  national  offices  of  some  of 
the  anti-march  organizations.  The  coup 
de  grace  was  a  letter  to  Steinem  signed 
by  representatives  of  nine  well-esta- 
blished and  prestigious  organizations, 
asking  her  not  to  come. 

We  were  upset  that  many  of  our 
plans  were  hinging  on  how  Steinem 
would  respond  to  the  pressure  and 
what  her  final  decision  would  be.  She 
was  being  thrust  into  a  position  of 
power  over  our  march  which  was  disa- 
greeable to  us.  One  month  before  the 
march,  she  wrote  to  all  the  pro-ERA 
groups  saying  she  didn't  think  she 
could    participate    in    something    that 


was  so  controversial.  She  offered  to 
come  to  Atlanta  at  our  convenience  to 
meet  with  all  involved  parties.  She  also 
made  it  clear  that  she  did  not  like  the 
idea  of  excluding  "unpopular"  listers 
from  coalitions. 

We  made  up  a  new  list  of  speakers 
and  distributed  new  posters  and  leaf- 
lets around  the  State.  The  SWP  and 
ALFA  appeared  on  the  written  mater- 
ial among  the  list  of  sponsors.  Some 
of  the  NOW  contacts  in  small  cities 
and  towns  in  Georgia  were  apprehen- 
sive, but  when  I  spoke  on  the  tele- 
phone to  people  in  Rome,  Savannah, 
Athens,  and  Albany,  they  agreed  that 
although  an  open  coalition  was  a  diffi- 
cult position  to  maintain,  it  was  the 
best,  most  principled  way  to  organize 
the  march. 

These  were  difficult  times  for  us. 
The  normal  task  of  giving  birth  to  a 
demonstration  was  made  infinitely 
more  difficult  by  having  to  deal  with 
the  other  ERA  coalition  and  their  dirty 
tricks.  They  no  doubt  believed  that 
the  march  was  a  bad  idea,  but  why 
couldn't  they  spend  their  energies 
working  on  their  plans,  and  let  us  work 
on  ours?  I  felt  that  our  strength  lay  in 
our  diversity,  and  that  if  we  covered 
all  tactical  fronts— lobbying,  letter- 
writing,  marching— we  would  be  that 
much  stronger. 

On  the  plus  side,  our  difficulties 
were  forging  strong  ties  of  determina- 
tion among  those  of  us  working  for 
the  march.  Groups  like  NOW,  GWPC 
and  the  UAW  were  strong  allies.  G- 
ERA  meetings  were  30  and  40  strong 
and  people  were  excited  and  willing  to 


ERA/69 


work.  We  were  an  embattled  group 
and  that  drew  us  closer  together  and 
gave  us  energy. 

The  meeting  among  the  pro-ERA 
groups  and  Steinem  occurred  as  we 
were  in  the  final  throes  of  planning  for 
the  demonstration.  After  much  chat- 
ting and  wine  drinking  as  if  it  were  a 
cocktail  party,  the  meeting  started  late 
and  only  a  few  people  were  able  to 
speak.  A  few  individuals  and  groups 
who  had  not  been  supporting  the 
march,  changed  their  position  after 
listening  to  our  side.  (This  included 
the  head  of  the  ALC  and  women  from 
the  Georgia  Commission  on  the  Status 
of  Women.)  In  general,  the  meeting 
was  another  step  toward  forcing  the 
establishment  groups  to  come  to  terms 
with  the  insurgents,  because  although 
they  had  succeeded  in  keeping  Steinem 
from  the  march,  they  realized  they 
were  not  keeping  us  down. 

The  meeting  did  not,  however,  pull 
the  divergent  views  into  one  united 
pro-ERA  effort,  or  even  lessen  the  ef- 
forts of  the  anti-march  groups  to  stop 
the  march.  The  dirty  tricks  continued 
until  the  day  before  the  march,  when 
somehow,  news  of  the  split  and  Stein- 
em's  withdrawal  leaked  to  The  Atlanta 
Journal,  which  printed  a  page  two 
article  on  it.  That  was  picked  up  by 
some  of  the  radio  stations,  and  the 
Saturday  morning  of  the  march  the 
radio  news  made  it  sound  as  though 
the  whole  march  was  canceled. 

Nothing  could  have  been  further 
from  the  truth.  We  had  hoped  in  our 
wildest  dreams  for  500  people.  Over 
1,000  women  and  men  marched,  with 


87-year  old  Eleonore  Raoul  leading  us 
in  a  1930's  open  touring  car,  almost 
re-tracing  the  steps  she  had  made  on  a 
white  horse  in  1915. 

In  spite'  of  the  obstacles  the  march 
had  faced,  it  succeeded  in  demonstra- 
ting that  there  was  tremendous  grass 
roots  support  for  the  ERA.  It  was  one 
of  the  largest  political  demonstrations 
ever  held  in  Atlanta  and  the  largest 
one  for  women's  rights.  There  were 
people  from  all  over  the  state,  and  a 
significant  number  of  men.  The  energy 
was  high.  Not  only  had  socialists  and 
lesbians  not  destroyed  the  march,  they 
had  gotten  out  many  of  the  people 
who  were  in  it.  The  march  demon- 
strated to  us  the  power  of  the  idea  we 
were  working  for,  not  just  the  Equal 
Rights  Amendment,  but,  more  broadly 
defined,  the  liberation  of  women. 
1,000  people  gave  a  reality  to  the  ERA 
which  individual  lobbying  alone  could 
not  have  accomplished. 

People  have  asked  me  whether  the 
participation  of  socialists  and  lesbians 
hurt  the  ERA  effort  in  Georgia.  I  say 
NO!  We  not  only  maintained  a  prin- 
cipled position  but  also  came  out  ahead 
in  the  realm  of  practical  politics.  The 
ERA  lost  in  Georgia  by  a  vote  of  104 
to  70,  not  a  terrible  margin  given  the 
politics  of  this  state.  During  the  House 
debate,  only  the  most  backward  and 
conservative  representatives  mentioned 
socialists  and  lesbians  as  arguments  to 
defeat  the  ERA.  I  do  not  fool  myself 
into  believing  that  those  who  voted 
for  the  ERA  are  in  favor  of  socialism 
or  lesbianism.  They  voted  for  the 
Amendment  in  spite  of  the  socialists 


70/Quest 


and  lesbians  because  they  have  some 
conscience,  or  they  think  their  consti- 
tuency favors  it,  or  they  have  some 
sense  that  nationally  it's  a  winner. 

Those  who  voted  against  it,  on  the 
other  hand,  were  motivated  by  deep- 
seated  prejudice  and  fear  of  all  women. 
Lesbians  and  socialists  may  be  the 
scariest  kind,  but  any  vision  of  women 
organizing,  demanding  full  payment 
for  their  labor,  and  full  respect  for 
their  personhood,  is  threatening.  As 
Tom  Tucker,  representative  from  Chat- 


like media  work  and  running  an  effi- 
cient office  and  others  like  sticking  to 
our  guns  in  the  face  of  big  problems. 
The  march  was  a  show  of  force  for 
women  around  the  state,  both  those 
who  are  isolated  from  the  Movement 
and  those  in  it.  It  made  clear  the  ex- 
tent of  support  there  really  is  for  the 
ERA,  which  encouraged  not  only  those 
of  us  who  had  been  through  the  nitty- 
gritty  of  organizing  the  march  but  also 
those  who  had  hung  back  from  it. 
Many  of  the  latter  had  just  not  believed 


1,000  people  gave  a  reality  to  the 

ERA  which  individual  lobbying 

alone  could  not  have  accompolished. 


sworth  put  it,  "When  Eve  gave  that 
apple  to  Adam  she  started  the  whole 
mess;  she  was  trying  to  get  power." 
(Amen)  Furthermore,  the  extensive 
media  coverage  of  the  ERA  debate  in 
the  House  infuriated  many  women  and 
men  who  now  work  with  us. 

For  the  Future 

Looking  back  over  this  past  year, 
we  can  evaluate  how  far  we  have  come. 
We  have  created  a  viable  organizational 
structure,  initiated  and  functioned 
within  a  coalition,  gained  political 
allies,  made  the  Equal  Rights  Amend- 
ment a  visible  issue  in  Georgia,  affirm- 
ed our  power  as  women,  and  particu- 
larly affirmed  the  position  of  socialists 
and  lesbians. 

The  march  and  other  activities  of 
G-ERAgave  us  new  strength  as  women. 
We  learned  new  skills— some  utilitarian 


that  we  (and  the  "we"  means  women, 
not  just  G-ERA)  could  do  it. 

G-ERA  was  particularly  a  validating 
process  for  the  socialist  and  lesbian 
women  who  were  involved  with  it.  No 
one  has  to  tell  a  lesbian  that  her  sex- 
uality is  not  popular,  but  neither  does 
she  have  to  be  told  how  painful  it  is 
to  have  to  hide  her  sexuality,  especial- 
ly inside  the  feminist  movement. 

Somewhere  along  the  line  I  realized 
that  when  particiapnts  in  the  women's 
movement  ask  lesbians  to  take  a  back 
seat  they  make  it  seem  as  though  it  is 
a  tactical  question,  when  actually  it  is 
not.  They  want  us  to  disappear \  Most 
of  them  would  not  come  to  our  sup- 
port, and  have  not  come  to  our  sup- 
port when  we  need  it  because  we  are 
too  threatening,  too  embarrassing,  too 
"sick."  They  want  us  out  of  their 
politics,  out  of  their  lives,  and  often  I 
suspect,  out  of  their  fantasies. 


ERA/71 


garland: 


A  1975  Women's 
Calendar 


graphics:  Nancy  Myron  &  Casey  Czarnil 

A    large,    colorful   graphic    for   each 
month.  Spiral  bound,  IV2  x  9Vi        $2.50 

THE  DAY  BEFORE 


A  graphic  datebook  of  our  female 
ancestors.  120  pages  6V2  x  4Vi,  spiral 
bound.  Black-red-gold  glossy  cover. $3. 50 

Include  1 5%  extra  for  pos  tage.  In  Mary- 
land include 
4%  sales  tax. 


diana 
press 

12  w  25th  St  ILL 
I baltimore  md  21218 


Both  calendar 
and  datebook 
can  be  order- 
ed from: 


Even  some  of  the  people  we  worked 
with  did  not  completely  accept  us. 
But  we  did  get  a  working  relationship, 
we  did  get  a  commitment  to  our  open 
participation,  and  we  did  get  respect 
for  our  work.  I  keep  reminding  myself 
that  change  does  not  come  all  at  once, 
but  is  the  result  of  hard  work,  risk- 
taking,  and  one-step-at-a-time  progress. 

I  have  a  fantasy  that  for  one  week 
all  the  lesbians,  in  the  closet  and  out, 
would  cease  their  participation  in  the 
women's  movement,  so  that  our  heter- 
osexual sisters  could  understand  what 
a  role  we  play,  how  much  would  be 
lost  without  us,  and  how  much  more 
energy  we  could  be  pouring  into  the 
movement  if  we  were  not  having  to 
deal  with  1,001  ways  to  appear 
straight. 

We  need  to  learn  that  lesson  also, 
for  in  the  end,  we  validate  ourselves 
and  must  not  depend  on  other  people 
for  acceptance.  The  experience  of  G- 
ERA  taught  us  that  and  allowed  many 
of  us  to  do  it. 

Through  our  organizing,  we  learned 
a  lot  about  coalitions  and  found  new 
allies.  Although  there  were  many  dif- 
ferences among  the  groups,  there  was 
enough  agreement  to  get  us  through 
the  one  specific  action  that  we  had 
organized  around. 

The  UAW  worked  with  us  from  the 
beginning  and  was  the  only  labor  or- 
ganization to  stick  it  out.  There  are 
strong  indications  that  there  will  be 
increased  cooperation  with  organized 
labor,  not  only  with  the  state  and  city 
apparatus,  but  also  with  CLUW,  which 
formed    too    late    to    be    part   of  last 


72/Quest 


year's  ERA  struggle. 

NOW  also  proved  to  be  a  strong 
ally.  When  the  proverbial  shit  hit  the 
fan,  the  leadership  of  NOW,  particular- 
ly in  Atlanta  but  also  around  the 
state,  affirmed  the  right  of  socialists 
and  lesbians  to  openly  participate  in 
the  ERA  coalition  and  supported  the 
concept  of  mass  action.  The  GWPC 
also  remained  members  of  the  coal- 
ition, but  because  of  internal  dissen- 
sion, their  support  was  shakier.  And 
the  Georgia  Nurses  Association  hung 
in  there  the  whole  time.  Many  people 
were  really  put  to  the  test  and  their 
responses  were  not  only  politically  in- 
spiring but  also  touched  many  of  us 
personally. 

The  third  year  of  the  ERA  struggle 
in  Georgia  has  already  begun.  G-ERA 
swung  back  into  action  in  late  June  of 
1974.  We  are  planning  another  ERA 
conference  in  November  and  a  march 
in  January. 

Although  G-ERA  will  remain  open 
to  working  with  all  groups,  the  likeli- 
hood is  that  we  will  not  be  able  to 
work  with  the  more  conservative  or- 
ganizations very  well.  Trial  by  fire  has 


shown  us  with  whom  we  can  work. 
Many  of  last  year's  political  lines  are 
still  drawn  and  I  only  hope  that  those 
groups  which  disagree  with  our  politics 
develop  their  own  strategies  and  do 
not  try  to  sabotage  our  actions. 

The  ERA  has  proved  to  be  one 
vehicle  through  which  we  bring  about 
a  concrete  improvement  in  the  lives  of 
women  and  also  create  a  strong  and 
ongoing  mass  movement  of  women 
that  puts  us  in  touch  with  our  own 
power  and  energy.  I  would  like  to  see 
1975  the  "year  of  the  Rabble"  in  the 
ERA  and  elsewhere. 

We  are  getting  together  an  organi- 
zing manual  to  explain  what  we  did 
and  how  we  did  it.  if  you'd  be  inter- 
ested in  getting  a  copy  ($.50  postage 
and  handling)  or  in  writing  to  us  for 
some  moral  or  organizational  support, 
our  mailing  address  is  G-ERA,  P.O. 
Box  1964,  Atlanta,  Georgia  30301. 

Vicki  Gabriner,  a  member  of  At- 
lanta Lesbian  Feminist  Liberation  and 
2nd  base  wo  man  on  its  soft  ball  team, 
was  on  the  staff  of  G-ERA. 


ERA  Amendment 

Section  1.  Equality  of  Rights  under  the  law  shall  not  be  denied 
or  abridged  by  the  United  States  or  by  any  State  on  account 
of  sex. 

Section  2.  The  Congress  shall  have  the  power  to  enforce,  by  ap- 
propriate legislation,  the  provisions  of  this  article. 

Section  3.  This  amendment  shall  take  effect  two  years  after 
the  date  of  ratification. 


ERA/73 


I  am  tired  and   I  am  weary, 

I  haven't  sat  down  for  500  years. 

I  have  had  to  take  care  of  my  children 

and  all  the  others. 

I  had  to  come  home  from  working  in 
one  hot  kitchen,  and  too  tired  to 
work  in  my  own.   I  had  to  come  in 
and  watch  my  children  grow  up  and 
out  of  the  same  pair  of  shoes. 

I  am  tired  and  I  am  weary,  but  I've 
been  told  that  I  am  like  a  symbol 
to  my  people. 

I've  heard  tell  of  this  and   I  only 

hope  that  a  new  symbol  is  coming  soon 

cause  I  am  tired.  Tired  to  the  bone. 


My  boss  lady  has  gotten  a  receipe  for  a 
new  thing  called  "Liberation   Revolution  Cake" 
and  it  comes  in  vanilla,  as  well  as  chocolate. 
I  know  it  sure  sounded  good  to  me  and  I  think 
I  would  like  to  have  some. 

I  have  been  the  backbone  of  my  family  and 
I  have  been  the  breadwinner,  that  is  not 
the  slice  of  cake  I  want,  1  want  the  piece 
that  says  I  am  Ms.  Smith  and  not  Aunt   Fanny. 
I  want  the  piece  that  says  I  am  a  whole  in- 
dividual and  not  a  hole  individual. 

I  want  recognition  as  being  a  part  of  the  human  race 
and  not  its  caretaker.   I  am  tired  of  taking 
care  of  everyone  but  myself.   I  don't  need  the 
whole  cake  just  a  couple  of  slices,  but  if 
fighting  for  the  whole  thing  will  give  me  my 
hard  earned  share,  then   I  am  ready  to  fight. 


The 
Cake 

by  Ms.   K. 


An  Interview  on  Women  s 
Health  Politics  part  ii 


by  Frances  Hornstein 


Editors'  Introduction:  The  follow- 
ing is  Part  II  of  Quest's  interview  with 
Frances  Hornstein,  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  the  L.A.  Feminist  Women's 
Health  Center.  (Q  is  for  Quest  ques- 
tions, and  A  is  the  FWHC's  response  as 
related  to  us  by  Frances  Hornstein.) 

There  are  important  inter-relation- 
ships between  organization,  structures, 
money,  political  analysis,  power,  etc. 
Part  I  of  this  interview  presented  the 
relationship  between  the  FWHC's  or- 
ganization and  their  political  processes 
of  change.  Part  I  discussed  FWHC 
goals  and  its  strategy  of  confronting 
the  male-dominated  institutions  which 
control  women's  health  care,  the  role 
of  self  help  in  political  cliange,  the  role 

Q.  Does  the  FWHC  receive  money 
from  outside  sources  such  as  founda- 
tions or  government  grants?  What  is 
your  policy  towards  such  sources  of 
income? 

A.  We  have  not  adopted  a  policy  of 
refusing  to  receive  funding,  but  we 
have  decided  that  we  would  not  sacri- 
fice any  time  or  energy  searching  for 
funding  agencies.  Even  more  impor- 
tant, we  will  only  accept  a  grant  which 
gives  us  total  control  over  the  ways  in 
which  the  money  or  supplies  are  used. 
Some  Free  Clinics  receiving  county, 
state,    or    federal    grants    spend    more 


of  leadership  and  structure  in  a  fem- 
inist organization,  and  the  need  for 
women  to  build  on  our  own  strengths 
and  to  use  our  power.  Part  II  of  the 
interview  focuses  on  the  role  money 
plays  in  a  feminist  organization,  par- 
ticularly the  FWHC,  and  how  money 
helps  to  guide  the  direction  of  pro- 
jects. In  addition,  it  discusses  how  the 
presence  of  money  forces  a  group  to 
take  itself  seriously  and  develop  meth- 
ods for  financial  decision  making. 
Quest  believes  it  is  important  to  exa- 
mine action-oriented,  politically-rooted 
programs  in  the  women's  movement 
and  to  raise  questions  pertaining  to 
money,  organization,  and  the  creation 
of  a  power  base.* 

time  filling  out  forms  than  they  do 
delivering  health  services.  Some  were 
destroyed  when  their  grants  ran  out. 

Unlike  most  Free  Clinics,  our  goal 
is  not  to  provide  an  alternative  health 
delivery  system,  although  our  Women's 

*The  editors,  for  readers'  clarification, 
wish  to  note  that  both  parts  of  this  inter- 
view were  essentially  completed  early  last 
spring,  prior  to  the  controversy  which  sur- 
faced in  other  publications  at  the  time  of 
the  release  of  Quest's  first  issue.  The  con- 
troversy has  been  covered  by  many  wom- 
en's publications,  in  particular  in  the  June 
and  August,  1974  issues  of  Off  Our  Backs 
and  the  May,  1974  issue  of  Sisters,  which 
are  easily  obtainable. 


Women's  Health  Politics/75 


Choice  Clinics  are  a  very  productive 
means  to  an  end.  We  are  providing  ex- 
cellent health  care  for  women  while 
establishing  an  economic  base  from 
which  to  continue  our  other  work.  We 
do  not  want  to  co-exist  with  the  medi- 
cal establishment,  we  want  to  take  it 
over.  If  receiving  grants  would  bring  us 
closer  to  our  goal  of  taking  over  wom- 
en's health  care,  we  would  do  it.  At 
this  time,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  an 
effective  strategy. 

Having  a  source  of  income  which 
has  no  strings  attached  and  having  con- 
trol over  our  money  are  very  important 
strategies  for  achieving  these  goals. 
Our  income  comes  from  the  Women's 
Choice  Clinics,  the  counselling  service, 
and  the  speakers  program;  the  money 
is  spent  as  we  see  fit.  Had  we  chosen 
to  receive  government  grants  we  would 
not  only  be  at  the  mercy  of  their  bud- 
get priorities  (to  be  changed  at  a  mom- 
ent's notice)  but  as  a  gynecological 
clinic,  we  would  be  obligated  to 
maintain  records  including  private  in- 
formation and  statistics  used  by  the 
government  for  determining  population 
policies.  Moreover,  money  would  be 
limited  to  use  for  purposes  approved 
by  the  funding  sources. 


the  economic  system  which  uses  it  is 
justifiable;  we  all  know  how  our  lives 
have  been  controlled  by  our  economic 
status.  But  our  responses  to  our  con- 
fusion about  money  have  often  been 
incorrect.  The  first  response  of  both 
the  Left  and  the  Women's  Movement 
was  to  reject  money  as  dirty  and  the 
root  of  all  evil.  If  we  had  any  money, 
our  guilt  led  us  to  deny  it  or  give  it  to 
someone  who  was  poor.  This  attitude 
about  money  is  the  first  thing  that 
must  be  changed.  It  is  a  perfect  exam- 
ple of  passive  shrinking  away  from 
something  that  has  oppressed  us. 
Downward  mobility  was  invented  by 
people  who  romanticized  poverty.  But 
there  is  nothing  inherently  superior 
about  being  poor;  we  are  not  going  to 
grow  stronger  by  being  hungry  or  in 
poor  health.  The  work  that  we  feel  is 
so  vital  should  also  support  us  in  a 
way  that  frees  us  to  do  that  work  well. 
In  addition,  the  attitude  in  the  wom- 
en's movement  that  women  will  work 
without  being  paid  has  excluded  wom- 
en who  must  earn  a  living  wage  to 
survive. 

Q.  How  have  your  policies  about 
money  developed? 


Q.  Has  money  been  an  important 
issue  within  the  group? 

A.  The  first  major  confrontation 
we  faced  after  we  set  up  the  FWHC 
dealt  with  our  politics  concerning  mo- 
ney. Many  of  us  entered  political  acti- 
vity with  an  extreme  aversion  to 
money.    Our    disdain   for   money  and 


A.  We  found  that  we  had  to  change 
many  of  the  anti-money  attitudes  we 
began  with.  Some  attitudes  we  had 
learned  as  women,  others  we  had 
learned  working  in  a  movement  that 
was  heavily  influenced  by  the  male 
Left.  Only  by  re-evaluating  and  chang- 
ing these  attitudes  will  we  gain  any 
power   or  bring  about  any  change  in 


7 6/ Quest,  vol.  I  no.  2,  fall,  1974 


society  to  relieve  our  oppression.  We 
saw  that  the  movement's  disregard  of 
the  economic  situation  in  which  we 
live  undermined  our  effectiveness. 
Groups  such  as  women's  centers,  child 
care  centers  and  free  clinics  which  are 
organized  to  provide  free  services  are 


no  longer  consider  working  "part-time" 
on  the  revolution.  How  can  we  take 
an  eight-hour-a-day  straight  job  and 
work  for  our  own  liberation  in  our 
free  time?  Every  minute  we  waste 
working  for  the  enemy  for  "our  own 
survival"    is    really    a    minute   worked 


usually  short-lived.  When  they  do  sur- 
vive, they  are  in  constant  states  of  crisis 
trying  to  meet  the  rent  payments, 
trying  to  find  staff  who  can  work  for 
free,  trying  to  find  grants.  Working 
under  those  kinds  of  conditions,  there 
is  little  room  to  grow  and  become 
strong.  At  first,  groups  like  these  are 
well-meaning  and  idealistic  and  at  the 
end  are  demoralized  and  struggle  to 
provide,  at  best,  mediocre  services. 

At  the  FWHC  we  found  that  there 
are  not  enough  hours  in  the  day  to  do 
all  that  we  have  to  do.  We  work  from 
early  morning  until  late  at  night  and 
have  projects  that  are  still  on  the  draw- 
ing board.  Activities  which  would  bring 
new  women  into  our  ranks  to  increase 
our  collective  strength  cannot  be  begun 
because   of  our  lack  of  time.  We  can 


for  our  own  destruction.  We  must 
create  institutions  where  women  can 
support  themselves  while  doing  fem- 
inist work. 

At  the  FWHC,  our  primary  source 
of  income  is  the  Women's  Choice 
Clinic.  The  funds  are  collected  in  ser- 
vice fees  paid  by  women  who  come  to 
the  clinic  for  health  services  and  by 
Medi-Cal  (a  state  medic-aid  program 
for  people  who  have  low  incomes).  To 
a  much  smaller  extent  we  support 
ourselves  with  money  we  receive  from 
honorariums  for  speaking.  We  saw  that 
we  must  be  aggressive  and  strong  in 
carrying  out  any  strategy  we  develop, 
including  our  strategy  to  gain  money. 
As  long  as  money  is  as  necessary  and 
powerful  as  it  is  now,  we  cannot  dis- 
regard it.  We  should  look  at  it  in  the 


Women's  Health  Politics/77 


same  way  we  look  at  information  and 
skills — as  a  resource  to  be  used  for 
our  own  purposes. 

Q.  How  are  policies,  especially  fi- 
nancial ones,  decided  and  carried  out?' 

A.  Before  answering  how  decisions 
are  made  and  who  makes  them  it  is 
important  to  define  the  different  status 
of  people  on  the  regular  staff  and  the 
contracted  staff.  Regular  people  work 
by  the  job  and  are  paid  varying  am- 
ounts depending  on  the  income  of  the 
center.  Before  working  on  special  pro- 
jects, regular  staff  people  must  be 
familiar  with  all  aspects  of  the  health 
center.  Regular  staff  attend  staff  meet- 
ings, policy  meetings,  and  participate 
in  policy  making  for  all  health  center 
matters. 

Contracted  staff  members  are  paid 
a  specific  amount  for  working  specified 
hours.  The  status  of  contracted  work- 
ers is  a  compromise  between  the  ideal 
of  everybody  being  equally  involved, 
equally  committed,  and  equally  in- 
formed in  a  revolutionary  struggle,  and 
the  realities  that  many  people  have  to 
earn  a  certain  amount  to  survive,  and 
that  different  people  enter  ihe  health 
center  with  different  levels  of  com- 
mitment, consciousness,  and  informa- 
tion. Contracted  staff  attend  meetings 
that  pertain  to  their  particular  work  or 
policies  that  affect  them.  Any  woman 
can  elect  to  be  either  contract  or  regu- 
lar staff. 

Decisions  are  made  at  a  myriad  of 
meetings  which  are  held  throughout 
the  week.  Our  weekly  three-hour  staff 


meetings  are  designed  to  keep  us  in- 
formed of  our  income,  disbursements, 
meetings  with  outside  groups,  self-help 
clinic  presentations,  number  of  women 
seen  at  the  clinic,  etc.  Policy  meetings 
are  used  to  develop  overall  plans,  pro- 
cedures and  decisions  for  our  group 
to  implement.  Topics  have  ranged  from 
childcare  to  staff  fringe  benefits,  to 
who  goes  on  trips  to  deciding  what 
new  projects  we  will  undertake. 

Aside  from  these  two  major  meet- 
ings, there  are  weekly  "colloms"** 
which  deal  with  particular  activities 
such  as  clinic  affairs,  or  the  Institute, 
and  which  are  attended  by  people  who 
spend  a  large  percentage  of  time  in  the 
particular  activities  discussed.  Coordi- 
nation meetings  attended  by  all  full- 
time  regular  staff  members  are  held 
weekly  to  brief  staffers  who  have  pri- 
mary responsibility  for  various  pro- 
jects. At  this  meeting,  "worry  lists" 
are  shared,  and  progress  reports  are 
made.  In  a  typical  Coordination  meet- 
ing, we  may  go  over  each  person's 
worry  list,  discuss  priorities  for  the 
week  and  initiate  discussion  of  im- 
portant matters  which  should  be  dis- 
cussed at  the  week's  policy  meeting. 

Q.  How  do  you  use  the  money 
you  receive? 

A.  Much  of  the  money  we  pay  out 
is  in  maintenance  of  the  FWHC  and 
the  clinic.  Clinic  supplies  take  a  large 
chunk   out    of  our  income.   Rent  and 

**"Colloms"  is  a  word  created  by  Jen- 
nifer Burgess  indicating  a  cross  between  a 
committee  and  a  collective. 


78/Qnest 


taxes,  malpractice  insurance,  health  in- 
surance and  other  employee  benefits 
for  the  staff  are  also  expensive.  In  ad- 
dition, Laura  Brown  was  able  to  go  to 
the  Menstrual  Regulation  Conference 
in  Hawaii  because  we  had  the  money 
to  get  her  there.  We  have  been  able  to 
loan  money  to  other  beginning  wom- 
en's health  groups.  We  pay  ourselves 
salaries  so  that  we  can  include  within 
our  group  women  who  do  not  have 
outside  sources  of  income.  Money 
helps  us  share  our  knowledge  with 
other  feminists:  we  were  able  to  begin 
the  FWHC  Institute  to  train  women  in- 
various  aspects  of  women's  health  care, 
and  we  were  able  to  provide  stipends 
for  women  who  came  to  the  FWHC 
for  training.  The  Institute  provides  an 
opportunity    for    women    to    see    the 


world  producing  powerful  strategics. 
In  addition,  we  have  started  political 
education  sessions  to  pass  along  infor- 
mation we  have  collected  regarding 
population  control,  the  global  picture 
of  the  feminist  struggle,  the  institutions 
that  control  women's  lives  and  other 
topics.  Communication— publications, 
telephone  conversations  and  particular- 
ly travel— has  been  vital  to  our  growth. 
We  have  a  responsibility  to  share  our 
ideas,  skills,  tactics,  plans  and  infor- 
mation with  other  feminists.  All  of  this 
costs  money,  but  we  regard  it  as  an  in- 
vestment in  our  future.  The  self-help 
clinic  tours  we  have  made  in  the  United 
States,  Canada,  Europe,  Hawaii  and 
New  Zealand  have  been  invaluable  in 
terms  of  promoting  communication 
among    feminists,    sharing    ideas    and 


feasibility  of  creating  and  working  in  a 
feminist  organization.  We  not  only 
teach  but  learn  from  the  women  com- 
ing to  the  FWHC  from  different  parts 
of  the  world.  They  are  links  to  what  is 
happening  in  their  communities.  There 
are  brilliant,  strong  women  all  over  the 


skills  and  increasing  our  strength  im- 
mensely. 

We    have    developed  the   following 
criteria    for    proposed    new    projects, 
usually   examined  at   policy   meetings 
by  all  the  regular  staff  people: 
1)   What  is  the  need  for  the  project? 


Women's  Health  Politics/79 


2)  What  is  the  recognized  need- often 
real  needs  are  not  recognized  by  large 
numbers  of  people?  3)  What  personnel 
or  technology  is  needed  to  initiate  and 
sustain  the  project?  4)  Do  we  have  a 
grasp  of  the  correct  political  analysis 
of  the  project?  After  applying  these 
key  questions  there  is  usually  an  ac- 
curate picture  of  what  would  be  in- 
volved in  setting  up  the  project,  and 
we  know  whether,  in  fact,  we  have  or 
could  get  the  resources  to  start  a  pro- 
ject. 

Q.  How  do  the  financial  policies  of 
the  FWHC  affect  staff  accountability 
to  the  organization  as  well  as  women 
in  general? 

A.  Our  decisions  about  money  re- 
flect economic  realities.  First,  there  is 
heavy  competition  in  the  L.A.  area  for 
health  services  for  women.  Even  to  tell 
women  about  the  existence  of  the 
Women's  Choice  Clinic  means  we  com- 
pete with  organizations  that  have  huge 
budgets  for  advertising.  Although  we 
have  no  funding  source,  no  capital, 
and  are  only  beginning  to  acquire 
many  of  the  administrative  skills  nec- 
essary for  our  organization,  women 
who  come  to  us  for  health  services 
hold  us  accountable  for  having  at  least 
everything  establishment  clinics  and 
health  facilities  have:  24  hour  answer- 
ing service,  a  greater  amount  of  person- 
al attention,  and  much  equipment 
and  staff. 

Second,  our  status  as  women,  fem- 
inists, people  who  do  not  want  to 
uphold    professionalism    for    its    own 


sake,  made  each  step  in  setting  up  the 
clinic  more  difficult.  We  could  not 
easily  sit  down  over  a  congenial  lunch 
and  make  a  deal  with  someone  to 
smooth  our  way  to  a  certain  goal.  We 
were  refused  malpractice  insurance  for 
a  year,  and  only  recently  received 
coverage  at  the  highest  possible  price. 
(An  agent  of  the  insurance  company 
told  us  that  the  delay  was  due  to  dis- 
crimination.) The  Oakland  and  Orange 
County  FWHC's  were  made  to  jump 
through  hoops  to  get  clinic  licenses, 
and  the  Orange  County  clinic  still  can- 
not accept  Medi-Cal  because  conserva- 
tive officials  in  the  health  department 
have  held  up  approval. 

The  financial  and  medical  realities 
of  the  FWHC  do  make  women  on  the 
staff  behave  differently.  Since  our  be- 
havior directly  affects  women's  health 
care,  and  since  the  group  depends  on 
having  an  independent  economic  base, 
we  cannot  afford  to  be  liberal  about 
women  who  don't  do  their  share, 
who  demand  special  favors  or  who  are 
irresponsible  in  carrying  out  their 
tasks.  A  staff  member's  laziness  or  un- 
dependability  can  cause  serious  medi- 
cal problems. 

It  is  clear  that  if  we  want  the 
FWHC  to  exist,  if  we  want  to  continue 
to  earn  salaries  while  working  in  a 
woman-controlled  environment  with 
feminist  goals,  then  we  all  have  to 
work  at  maximum  capacity  to  main- 
tain what  has  been  established,  to 
constantly  re-evaluate  what  we  have 
done,  and  to  create  new  projects  to 
sustain  and  increase  our  growth  and 
strength. 


80/Quest 


Notes  for  prospective   contributors 

We  at  Quest  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling 
material  for  each  issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off 
the  presses,  a  small  development  committee  collects  and  develops 
questions  and  ideas  which  we  hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover. 
This  list  is  available  to  anyone  interested  in  the  theme  of  that  issue 
who  is  considering  submitting  ideas  for  the  issue,  outlines  for 
potential  articles,  manuscripts,  poetry,  graphics,  etc.  As  well  as 
accepting  unsolicited  material,  we  seek  out  writers  and  artists 
known  to  have  definitive  political  perspectives  on  issues  related 
to  the  theme. 

Submitted  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members.  If  it 
is  not  appropriate  for  Quest  purposes  the  manuscript  or  graphic 
will  be  returned  to  the  author.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered, 
it  is  then  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible 
for  working  with  the  author  through  whatever  processes  of  re- 
writing and  editing  required.  This  process  includes  soliciting  com- 
ments and  suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and  Advisory 
Committee  members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edited  manuscripts 
for  review  before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8V2  by  11  paper,  using 
a  black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy). 
Where  appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  collected 
and  typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manus- 
cripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  are  requested.  For  information 
concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspon- 
dence to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


future    issues 

The  SELFHOOD  of  WOMEN 

Winter,   1974-75 

The  women's  movement  is  only  as  strong  as  the  selves  upon  which  it 
is  built,  a  selfhood  largely  determined  by  our  sex,  our  class,  our  sexual- 
ity, our  race,  our  ethnic  or  geographic  background.  Areas  for  articles 
include:  ways  to  change  the  image  of  women  in  our  society;  how  self- 
hood relates  to  building  a  political  movement  in  terms  of  leadership, 
committment,  risk,  strength  and  power.    Copy  Deadline:  September  1,  1974 

WOMEN  and   SPIRITUALITY 

Spring,   1975 

The  spiritualism  of  women  has  to  do  with  a  commonality  of  spirit, 
the  affirmation  of  life,  joy,  a  new  world  vision,  and  a  new  self,  a  spiritu- 
ality that  increases  our  power  to  fundamentally  change  human  relation- 
ships and  society's  institutions.  Areas  for  articles  include:  feminist 
theology  and  philosophy;  feminist  visionaries  and  mystics;  religious 
forms  for  women  in  music,  art,  dance,  sports,  witchcraft,  and  astrology. 

Copy  Deadline:  December  1,  1974 

FUTURE  VISIONS  and  FANTASIES 

Summer,  1975 

"What  do  we  want?"— what  are  women's  visions  of  a  new  society, 
what  are  our  projections  for  new  ways  of  living  and  working  that  meet 
our  needs  for  love,  friendship,  security,  growth,  freedom  and  fulfill- 
ment. Areas  for  articles  include:  what  kind  of  political  system  do  we 
want;  what  kind  of  economic  system;  what  cultural  and  spiritual  forms; 
how  should  society  be  reorganized?  Copy  Deadline:  March  1,  1975 

THEORIES  of  REVOLUTION 

Fall,  1975 

How  do  we  get  what  we  want?— will  we  need  a  revolution  to  achieve 
new  political  and  economic  systems,  new  cultural  and  spiritual  forms, 
and  if  so,  what  kind  of  revolution.  Areas  for  articles  include:  defini- 
tions of  revolution;  what  ingredients  are  required  for  revolution  in 
different  societies;  what  is  the  role  of  leaders  and  political  parties  in 
change;  what  are  the  steps  necessary  and  obstacles  to  women  taking 
power  to  change  society.  Copy  Deadline:  May  1,  1975 


