QUEST   "" 

ateminist  quarterly 


KALEIDOSCOPE  ONE 


/^^X  TT^  C  T^  Vol. Ill, No.  1 

fill    r^^     I  Summer,  1976 

a  jFemunLisit  quarterly 

KALEIDOSCOPE 
Contents 

BEYOND  EITHER/OR:  Feminist  Options 

Charlotte  Bunch  2 

FEMINIST  PRESSES  and  FEMINIST  POLITICS 

]une  Arnold 

CRITIQUE  and  COMMENTARY 

]oan  Belknap 

WOMEN,  POWER  and  LABOR  GOVERNMENTS 

Rosemary  Pringle  and  Ann  Game 

THE  CLUB 

Hope  Landrine 

DO  FEMINISTS  NEED  MARXISM? 

Jane  Flax 

CRITIQUE  and  COMMENTARY 

Jeanne  Horbach  Hsu 

ALPHABET  SOUP:  Women  and  Mixed  Movements 

An  Interview  with  Peg  Averill  62 

SHE  WROTE  as  ONE  WHO  LOVED  HER  SEX 

Carol  Adams  70 


18 


27 


30 


40 


46 


60 


Staff 


Editorial  Coordinator 

Charlotte  Bunch 
Managing  Editor 

Beverly  Bsher 
Design  Editor 

Alexa  Freeman 
I^omotion  Editor 

Karen  Kollias 
Editors 

Jane  I>)lkart 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Mary-Helen  Mautner 

Sidney  Oliver 

GerriTraina 

Assistants 


Dorothy  Allison 
DeniseBurch 
Elizabeth  Frazer 
Judith  Jones 
Prudence  MacKinney 
Margaret  Streitenberger 


©  Copyright  1976  by  Quest :a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights  re- 
served. Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  prohibited,  (iciest: 
a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in  January,  April, 
July  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  1909  Que  St. 
N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Second  class  postage  paid  at 
Washington,  D.C.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  is  a  tax-exempt, 
non-profit  organization. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals;  $10.00/ 
year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  surface,  $14.50/ 
year  overseas  air;  $15.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.75  and  .35  postage 
and  handling  for  single  issues.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003.  Bulk 
rates  available  upon  request.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available 
upon  request. 


Cover  Design  by 
Alexa  Freeman 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfenninistqua31wash 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  po- 
litical analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  itself, 
but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the  women's  movement  possi- 
bly including  such  concrete  forms  as  regional  or  national  conferences,  a 
national  organization,  or  a  political  party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  wo- 
men who  have  been  in  the  movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached 
a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been 
through  various  ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feel- 
ing that  our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  strug- 
gle brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power  for 
women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence  against  wo- 
men? Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the 
answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the 
world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


Note:  Change  of  Address 

If  you  have  not  received  a  previous  issue  of  Quest,  it  may  be  because 
youVe  moved  and  never  sent  us  a  change  of  address.  The  post  office  does 
not  forward  Quest  because  it  is  handled  as  third  class  mail;  even  if  you 
check  the  P.O.  box  to  forward  your  mail  and  say  you  will  pay  for  it,  you 
will  not  get  Quest.  The  post  ofHce  does  not  return  the  undelivered  copies 
of  Quest.  We,  therefore,  cannot  be  responsible  for  these  lost  issues.  As 
neither  of  us  can  afford  the  loss,  please  notify  us  of  a  change  of  address 
immediately.  If  possible,  provide  us  with  the  number  which  appears 
above  your  name  on  your  address  label. 


graphic  by  Alexa  Freeman 


Beyond  Either/Or: 
Feminist  Options 


By  CHARLOTTE  BUNCH 

graphics  by  Leslie  Montgomery 


2/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  suminer,  1976 


The  time  has  come  to  reassess  the 
experience  of  the  women's  movement, 
particularly  with  the  left,  and  to  reas- 
sert a  direction  for  feminism  which  is 
both  radical  and  independent,  and 
which  integrates  the  political,  cultur- 
al, economic,  and  spiritual  dimen- 
sions of  women's  lives.  I  have  chosen 
to  call  this  direction  nonaligned  femi- 
nism. Although  the  issues  discussed 
here  affect  all  its  segments,  I  am  pri- 
marily concerned  here  with  the  radi- 
cal portion  of  the  women's  movement 
—by  which  I  mean  those  feminists 
who  are  critical  of  all  patriarchal  sys- 
tems, including  U.S.  capitalism,  who 
tend  to  feel  alien  to  those  systems, 
and  who  are  not  satisfied  only  with 
their  reform.  Much  of  my  analysis  is 
based  on  the  ideas  and  experiences  of 
both  radical  feminists  and  lesbian 
feminists  who  have  most  frequently 
expressed  this  position  in  the  U.S. 
However,  here  I  have  chosen  a  new 
term — nonaligned  feminism — in  or- 
der to  avoid  the  limitations  of  existing 
labels  and  to  suggest  new  grounds  for 
defining  a  movement  that  incorpor- 
ates the  experiences  of  a  wider  variety 
of  women. 

The  need  for  such  a  reassessment 
grows  out  of  the  increasing  pressure 
that  feminists  (as  individuals  and  as  a 


All  of  my  work  is  aided  by  the 
thought  and  help  of  friends,  hut  this 
article  in  particular  could  not  have 
been  written  without  the  help  and 
support  of  the  Quest  staff  -  most  spe- 
cifically Beverly  Fisher,  Alexa  Free- 
man, Judith  Jones,  Mary-Helen  Maut- 
ner,  Sidney  Oliver  -  and  that  of 
Bertha  Harris. 


movement)  have  experienced  over  the 
past  few  years  to  align  ourselves — 
once  and  for  all— either  with  or 
against  the  left,  either  as  "socialists" 
or  as  "reformists"  since  this  mentality 
recognizes  no  other  options.  And 
even  if  we  resist  that  dichotomy,  we 
encounter  another  one:  that  between 
"political/economic"  feminists  and 
"cultural"  or  "spiritual"  feminists. 
Presenting  them  as  mutually  exclusive 
options,  this  dichotomy  distorts  the 
function  of  each  of  these  spheres  and 
ignores  their  interrelatedness.  As  a  re- 
sult, many  feminists  have  begun  to 
feel  that  we  do  not  quite  fit  anywhere: 
that  there  is  little  defined  space  for  the 
pursuit  of  a  feminism  which  is  critical 
of  the  U.S.,  very  much  engaged  in 
politics,  and  yet  independent  of  the 
socialist  movement. 

But  I  have  no  intention  of  succumb- 
ing to  these  choices  as  defined  by 
others.  Although  we  are  not  organ- 
ized around  a  single  goal,  I  believe 
that  many  (if  not  most)  feminists  feel 
limited  and  confined  by  pressures  to 
conform  to  one  or  the  other  of  those 
options.  And  I  believe  that  now,  per- 
haps more  than  ever,  we  must  resist 
pressure  for  a  final  declaration  of  alle- 
giance and  continue  to  pursue  the  full- 
est implications  of  a  nonaligned  but 
committed  and  active  feminism. 

The  pressure  to  choose  one  side  or 
another  of  these  dichotomies  does  not 
come  from  only  one  side  or  any  single 
source,  but  is  the  result  of  many  fac- 
tors: our  lack  of  answers  in  some  situ- 
ations, since  a  feminist  analysis  of  pa- 
triarchy as  it  affects  all  aspects  of  life 
is  still  incomplete;  women's  doubts 
about  our  ability  to  create  and  effect  a 
new  political  direction,  which  often 
results  in  either  a  retreat  from  politics 


Beyond  Either/Qr:  Feminist  Options/S 


or  an  acceptance  of  the  older,  better 
defined  traditions  of  American  re- 
formism or  socialism;  legitimate  but 
often  immobilizing  concerns  about 
the  race  and  class  makeup  of  the 
movement,  which  paralyzes  some 
white  feminists  with  guilt;  and  finally, 
the  difficulties  of  survival  for  inde- 
pendent feminists — since  white  men, 
whether  left,  right,  or  center,  general- 
ly control  most  of  the  resources  in  our 
society,  if  we  either  align  with  one  of 
them  personally,  or  with  their  politics 
or  remain  in  what  they  define  as  wo- 
men's spheres,  we  are  allowed  greater 
access  to  those  resources. 

Under  these  pressures,  the  radical 
portion  of  the  women's  movement 
seems  to  be  fragmenting  into  three 
dominant,  and  often  mutually  exclu- 
sive trends:  socialist-feminism,  politi- 
cal reformism,  and  cultural  or  spiritu- 
al separatism.*  While  each  of  these 
embodies  important  work,  what  is 
disturbing  is  their  general  tendency 
not  only  to  denounce  or  ridicule  the 
work  of  the  others,  but  also  to  deny 
the  necessity  for  an  independent  femi- 
nist framework  that  would  integrate 
aspects  of  each  and  go  beyond  them 
to  create  a  synthesized  feminist  poli- 
tics revolutionary  in  its  implications 
for  all  aspects  of  our  lives. 

In  this  article,  I  begin  to  explore 
some  of  the  questions  raised  by  this 
situation,  primarily  in  terms  of  pres- 
sure to  be  pro-  or  anti-left.  In  particu- 
lar, I  propose  to  look  at  the  concept 
of  nonalignment  and  how  it  can  be 


*  Cultural  feminism  and  the  women's  spiritual- 
ity movement  are  certainly  different  pheno- 
mena, but  the  separatist  tendencies  in  both 
areas  are  similar.  This  is  discussed  further  here 
in  "The  Feminist  Dilemma  Today"  section. 


useful  to  feminists;  to  examine  how 
feminists  have  dealt  with  this  dichoto- 
my over  the  past  decade  and  how  it  is 
re-emerging  today;  and  to  describe 
how  Quest  functions  as  a  nonaligned 
vehicle  for  political  debate  and  analy- 
sis aimed  at  further  developing  a  radi- 
cal, nonaligned  feminism. 

The  Concept  of  Nonalignment 

The  pressure  to  be  for  or  against 
the  "left"  is  neither  new  nor  unique  to 
the  feminist  movement.  It  reflects  the 
polarity  dominating  our  world  for  at 
least  the  past  30  years:  capitalism  vs. 
communism.  In  the  1950's,  when  this 
polarity  was  at  its  height — the  cold 
war  between  "The  Free  World"  and 
"The  Iron  Curtain" — many  of  the  less 
powerful  nations  began  to  act  to  force 
open  the  vice  squeezing  them  into  al- 
legiance to  one  or  the  other.  In  partic- 
ular, leaders  of  some  of  the  newly  in- 
dependent countries  of  Asia  and 
Africa  called  the  Bandung  Conference 
in  1955,  at  which  many  of  the  "devel- 
oping nations"  worked  together  to  es- 
tablish their  nonaligned  status.  As  In- 
dian Prime  Minister  Jawaharlal  Neh- 
ru proclaimed:  "For  anyone  to  tell  us 
that  we  have  to  be  camp  followers  of 
Russia  or  America  or  any  country  in 
Europe  is  not  very  creditable  to  our 
new  dignity,  our  new  independence, 
our  new  freedom,  our  new  spirit."^ 

The  nonaligned  nations  were  not 
always  united  with  each  other  and  did 
not  create  one  single  unifying  ideolo- 
gy, but  they  did  establish  space  out- 
side the  control  of  the  two  dominant 
poles  (US/USSR),  give  legitimacy  to 
the  concept  of  nonalignment,  and 
eventually  alter  the  perception  of 
world  forces  through  the  concept  of 


4/Quest 


the  "Third  World."  These  efforts, 
along  with  the  seismographic  crack 
between  Russia  and  China,  made  new 
alliances  and  new  modes  of  develop- 
ment possible  within  the  nonaligned 
countries,  allowing  them  more  politi- 
cal flexibility  without,  at  the  same 
time,  making  them  irrelevant  to, 
powerless  against,  or  totally  unaffect- 
ed by  the  controls  of  the  major  power 
blocs.** 

**  While  this  polarity  has  diminished  some  in 
the  past  decade,  its  dominance  is  still  evidenced 
in  many  world  issues  and  was  certainly  a  very 


My  purpose  here  is  neither  to  detail 
the  debates  surrounding  the  nonalign- 
ed nations  nor  to  propose  that  femi- 
nists are  in  an  identical  position. 
Rather,  I  want  to  establish  an  histori- 

present  conflict  at  the  United  Nations  Interna- 
tional Women's  Year  Tribunal  in  Mexico  City, 
Summer,  1975.  Feminists  could  gain  from  fur- 
ther study  of  the  experience  of  nonaligned  na- 
tions. A  recent  conference  in  Washington,  DC, 
on  "The  Nonaligned  Movement  in  World  Poli- 
tics Today"  (Howard  University,  April  8-10, 
1976),  revealed  that  the  concept  is  still  evolving 
and  has  had  varying  degrees  of  political  and 
economic  viability  in  different  contexts. 


Beyond  Either/Or/5 


cal  context  for  a  concept  that  can  be 
useful  to  us.  Nonaligned  does  not 
mean  neutral;  it  does  not  mean  unin- 
volved,  inactive,  separated,  or  unin- 
terested. Nonalignment  is  not  a  with- 
drawal from  politics.  It  simply  means 
that  one  is  not  automatically  attached 
to  one  of  the  dominant  lines  or  fac- 
tions, and  hence  it  does  not  preclude 
taking  stands  on  issues,  making  coali- 
tions around  particular  goals,  or  con- 
demning or  commending  the  actions 
of  other  groups  or  governments.  In 
our  context,  nonalignment  means 
simply  that  actions  are  taken  accord- 
ing to  an  assessment  of  the  particulars 
involved  from  an  independent  femi- 
nist perspective,  rather  than  from  an 
already  stated  and  automatic  decision 
for  or  against  the  left  in  general. 

Such  a  concept  may  sound  simple, 
or  to  some,  simple-minded.  It  is  nei- 
ther. To  be  nonaligned  is  difficult 
because  it  requires  careful  attention 
and  debate  to  determine  what  actions 
are  appropriate  in  each  situation.  Our 
positions  are  based  on  an  emerging 
feminist  analysis  of  particular  issues 
and  how  they  affect  women's  interests 
and  long-term  feminist  goals,  rather 
than  on  pre-established  approaches  to 
each  issue.  For  example,  in  the  devel- 
opment of  feminist  theory,  nonalign- 
ment requires  that  we  study  not  only 
Marxism  but  many  other  theories  cri- 
tically, in  order  to  learn  where  and 
how  they  can  contribute  to  the  devel- 
opment of  a  comprehensive  feminist 
analysis.  But  we  neither  seek  to  force 
feminism  into  an  existing  (for  exam- 
ple, Marxist)  framework  nor  reject  a 
given  ideology  out  of  hand,  as  having 
nothing  to  offer  us. 

Nonalignment  is  not  solely  a  reac- 
tion to  the  left /anti-left  pressures;  it  is 


a  positive  stance  for  feminists.  It  is  an 
affirmation  of  our  belief  in  the  future, 
strength,  and  potential  of  our  own 
analysis  and  movement.  We  do  not 
approach  it  without  a  history,  with- 
out principles,  or  without  politics. 

We  start  from  an  analysis  of  patri- 
archy (in  America  and  elsewhere) — 
how  it  manifests  itself  in  capitalism, 
imperialism,  racism,  and  heterosex- 
ism.  We  start  with  a  commitment  to 
start  new  processes  and  to  end  the  op- 
pression of  all  women,  commitments 
which  require  that  we  develop  and 
support  efforts  which  will  lead  to  an 
end  to  all  forms  of  oppression.  Our 
greatest  potential  lies  in  taking  our- 
selves seriously  as  a  powerful,  though 
relatively  new  nucleus  for  profound 
change.  Although  we  may  work  with 
and  learn  from  other  groups  when  it 
is  appropriate,  our  primary  purpose 
must  be  the  expansion  of  our  insights 
and  our  movement  as  feminists,  for  in 
that  process,  we  will  create  new  possi- 
bilities, new  perspectives  on  ending  all 
oppression.  Our  potential  rests  not  in 
being  absorbed  into  existing  ideolo- 
gies or  groups,  but  in  actively  creat- 
ing new  efforts  toward  reshaping  the 
political,  cultural,  economic,  and 
spiritual  structures  of  our  world. 

Our  Recent  Past 

In  the  20th  century,  the  term  "radi- 
cal" has  generally  been  identified  with 
"leftist"  or  "socialist."  Every  political 
group  critical  of  any  or  all  aspects  of 
the  Western  capitalist/imperialist/ra- 
cist/heterosexist  patriarchy  has  been 
forced  to  confront  its  relationship  to 
the  most  developed  opposition:  the 
communist  nations,  the  socialist 
movements,  and  Marxist  thought. 


6/Quest 


In  my  generation,  which  came  of 
age  in  the  1960's,  struggle  with  the 
question  of  the  left  played  a  signifi- 
cant role  in  the  civil  rights,  student, 
anti-war,  and  black  militant  move- 
ments. All  of  these  movements  began 
with  an  essentially  nonaligned  posi- 
tion— critical  of  America  but  aloof 
from  the  "old  left"  debates  of  Marx- 
ism. Yet,  as  they  became  frustrated 
with  the  limitations  of  reformism  in 
the  US,  they  discovered  that  the  only 
available  alternative  model  for 
change  seemed  to  be  Marxism.  Over 
time,  they  therefore  became  engaged 
in  those  issues:  many  became  intri- 
cately involved  in  the  nuances  and 
warfare  of  the  left;  some  rejected  the 
left  entirely,  either  returning  to  work 
"in  the  system"  or  "dropping  out"; 
and  a  few  others,  most  notably  some 
black  leaders,  began  searching  for 
and  are  still  developing  other  ideolo- 
gies not  primarily  oriented  around 
Marxism,  such  as  Pan-Africanism. 
While  this  phenomenom  requires 
more  careful  study,  still  it  shows  fem- 
inists clearly  that  many  of  our  prob- 
lems are  not  entirely  new  and  that  we 
should  seek  to  avoid  mistakes  made 
by  other  groups. 

My  own  resistance  to  the  socialist /- 
anti-socialist  polarity  presently  facing 
feminists  is  not,  therefore,  simply  a 
question  of  male  vs.  female  politics. 
Women  can  learn  from  the  experi- 
ences of  socialist  and  other  move- 
ments, and  particularly  from  the 
black  movement's  struggles  with  the 
questions  of  race,  nationalism,  and 
socialism.  (E.g.,  we  should  discuss 
such  questions  as  the  significance  of 
Eldridge  Cleaver's  seeming  rejection 
of  "world  communism"  embodied  in 
his  return  to  America;  why  the  Black 


Panthers  decided  to  enter  electoral 
politics,  and  how  Angela  Davis  views 
her  relationship  to  the  Communist 
Party.  And  certainly  many  of  the  is- 
sues raised  by  socialist  critiques — 
e.g.,  class,  the  domination  of  mono- 
poly capital,  imperialism — are  crucial 
to  any  movement  for  change.)  Rather, 
my  resistance  to  this  polarity  comes 
from  a  conviction  arising  out  of  my 
own  experience  in  and  analysis  of  the 
'60's,  that  the  terms  in  which  the  pro- 
or  anti-left  were  argued  then  did  not 
prove  adequate  to  and  were  often  de- 
structive of  those  movements. 

To  be  sure,  debate  with  the  left  is 
not  new  to  feminists.  In  fact,  the  wo- 
men's liberation  movement  and  much 
of  feminism's  rebirth  in  the  '60's  came 
out  of  that  debate:  women's  caucuses 
in  left  organizations  fought  first  for 
our  right  to  exist,  andthen  joined  with 
the  more  radical  elements  from  such 
establishment  women's  groups  as 
NOW  to  create  an  autonomous  wo- 
men's movement,  and  hence  estab- 
lished women's  liberation  and  radical 
feminism.  As  important,  during  this 
struggle,  analysis  of  patriarchy  as  the 
root  cause  of  female  oppression  de- 
veloped, and  it  pointed  the  way  to- 
ward both  theory  and  process  that  go 
beyond  the  confines  of  the  capitalist/- 
socialist  polarity. 

But  feminist  theory  is  still  young, 
still  evolving  toward  a  total  analysis, 
and  thus  we  are  repeatedly  subject  to 
pressure  that  it  be  subsumed  by  some 
pre-existing  "larger,  more  complete" 
perspective.  Consequently,  in  the 
early  '70's,  after  several  years  of  ex- 
perience with  women's  liberation, 
many  feminists  became  impatient 
with  our  lack  of  complete  answers. 
This  impatience,  combined  with  con- 


Beyond  Either/Qr/7 


8/Quest 


cern  over  the  Vietnam  war  and  our 
class  and  race  privileges,  led  many  of 
us  to  consider  working  with  the  left 
again.  At  the  same  time,  moreover, 
some  left  groups  began  a  concerted  re- 
cruitment effort  to  win  back  "their 
women"  and  to  tap  a  now  large  wo- 
men's constituency. 

The  resulting  upsurge  of  socialist 
debate  in  the  independent  feminist 
movement  took  two  primary  forms: 
women's  anti-imperialist  study  and 
action  groups,  and  attempted  take- 
overs of  women's  centers  and  organi- 
zations by  left  groups,  particularly 
the  Socialist  Workers  Party.  The 
take-overs,  when  perceived  by  inde- 
pendent feminists,  led  not  only  to  re- 
sistance but  also  to  resentment  of  the 
left.  The  women's  anti-imperialist 
movement  (of  which  I  was  initially  a 
part)  included  women  of  many  politi- 
cal backgrounds,  but  was  dominated 
then  by  strife  between  "socialism" 
and  an  emerging  female  separatism. 
Those  tensions  eventually  led  to  splits 
in  groups  all  over  the  country,  sym- 
bolized in  dramatic  battles  over  the 
planning  and  execution  of  a  North 
American  Indochinese  Women's  Con- 
ference in  the  spring  of  1971 .2 

Thus,  out  of  this  resistance  to  the 
left— in  both  its  male  and  female 
forms— grew  female  separatism.  In 
the  early  1970's,  female  separatism 
was  widely  discussed  and  became  the 
prevailing  means  for  maintaining  a 
feminist  stance  that  was  neither  re- 
formist nor  leftist.^  Simultaneously, 
lesbians  who  were  oppressed  by  radi- 
cal feminists  as  well  as  by  reform  and 
socialist  feminists,  began  to  articulate 
lesbian-feminist  theory  and  separa- 
tism. By  1974,  lesbian-feminism  e- 
merged  as  the  predominant  separatist 


position  and  led  not  only  to  new  femi- 
nist theory  but  also  to  a  flourishing  of 
feminist  culture,  enterprises,  and 
communities.  Separatism  in  both 
these  forms  represented  the  indepen- 
dent and  radical  posture  previously 
articulated  by  women's  liberation. 
This  period  paralleled  a  similar  period 
in  the  black  liberation  movement — a 
time  when  establishing  one's  indepen- 
dence, identity,  and  ideology,  and  so- 
lidifying a  base  of  power  were  the  pri- 
orities. 

Separatism,  then,  arose  out  of  the 
instinctive  need  of  feminists  to  remain 
nonaligned,  in  order  to  maintain  our- 
selves as  a  distinct  interest  group  and 
to  create  new  political  theories  and 
strategies.  But  we  learned  that  separa- 
tism has  its  limits.  Perhaps  inevitably, 
separatism  seemed  to  lead  to  isolation 
and  powerlessness,  rather  than  to  the 
politically  engaged,  but  independent, 
stance  we  had  envisioned:  ultimately, 
women's  interests  are  not  totally  sep- 
arate from  the  problems  being  strug- 
gled with  universally.  We  are  affected 
by  all  systems  and  divisions  (e.g., 
class,  race)  and  by  all  the  practical  is- 
sues (unemployment,  housing,  wel- 
fare, and  police  surveillance)  and 
have  a  stake  in  how  these  issues  are 
resolved. 

The  Feminist  Dilemma  Today 

Emerging  out  of  lesbian-feminist 
separatism  over  the  past  couple  of 
years,  I  and  others  sought  new  ap- 
proaches that  would  embody  an  inde- 
pendent, radical  but  non-aligned  fem- 
inist position.  In  that  search,  I  have 
become  distressed  by  the  movement's 
fragmentation,  its  wide-spread  pessi- 
mism, introspection  and  dogmatism. 


Beyond  Either/Or/9 


I  want  now  to  examine  this  phenome- 
non in  terms  of  the  dominant  trends 
mentioned  earlier:  cultural  and  spirit- 
ual separatism,  political  reformism 
and  socialist  feminism. 

First,  while  cultural  and  spiritual 
feminism  are  not  the  same,  they  have 
in  common  a  recent  flourishing  and 
seem  to  be  the  most  independent  of 
the  left /anti-left  debates.  Yet  many, 
although  certainly  not  all  of  the  acti- 
vities associated  with  both  of  these 
trends  are  increasingly  detached  from 
questions  of  political  and  economic 
change  and  their  interaction  with  cul- 
tural and  spiritual  change.  Thus,  the 
energy  generated  in  both  of  these 
areas,  which  if  combined  with  a  new 
feminist  politics  could  be  a  powerful 
force  for  change,  is  instead  becoming 
more  "separatist" — that  is,  more  iso- 
lated from  other  struggles.  Since  cul- 
ture and  spirit  are  integral  parts  of  all 
movements  for  change  (culture,  for 
example,  reflects  the  best  and  the 
worst  of  what  is  happening  political- 
ly), and  since  a  politics  which  does 
not  express  itself  culturally  and  spirit- 
ually is  necessarily  weakened,  then 
the  growing  polarization  and  hostility 
from  both  sides  of  the  "political"  and 
"cultural"  camps  is  disastrous  for  fem- 
inism. Thus  the  issue  is  not  whether 
you  work  in  the  cultural,  political, 
economic,  or  spiritual  arena,  but 
what  perspective  and  analysis  you 
bring  to  your  work  and  how  you  un- 
derstand its  relationship  to  the  other 
three  areas.  The  problem  I  perceive 
with  both  present-day  popularized 
"cultural  feminism"  and  "women's 
spirituality,"  then,  is  their  tendency 
to  embrace  the  most  negative  aspects 
of  separatism  and  to  isolate  them- 
selves from  other  areas  of  struggle:  ul- 


timately, this  stance  contributes  to  al- 
lowing the  patriarchal  status  quo  con- 
tinued domination  over  most  wo- 
men's lives.  Moreover,  while  my  pri- 
mary focus  in  this  article  is  not  on  cul- 
tural or  spiritual  feminism,  I  believe 
that  their  tendency  to  separate  them- 
selves from  politics  is  related  to  the 
pressures  from  many  "politicos"  to 
define  pro-  or  anti-left  as  the  sole  poli- 
tical options  for  feminists.^ 

Second,  for  their  part,  independent 
feminists  who  are  not  primarily  in- 
volved in  cultural  or  spiritual  activi- 
ties seem  increasingly  divided  be- 
tween those  who  are  moving  toward 
traditional  political  reformism,  those 
who  are  moving  toward  socialist-fem- 
inism, and  those  who,  like  myself,  are 
not  aligned  with  either.  Again,  the 
problem  in  radical  feminists'  involve- 
ment in  reform  activities  is  certainly 
not  in  the  work  being  done — it  is  both 
useful  and  logical  for  radicals  to  en- 
gage in  a  variety  of  reforms,  such  as 
rape  crisis  centers,  legislative  changes, 
credit  unions,  and  the  like.  The  prob- 
lem is  that  in  building  feminist  strate- 
gies around  reform  goals  dependent 
on  existing  political  and  economic 
structures,  feminists  often  come  not 
only  to  accept  the  limitations  of  re- 
form but  also  to  defend  existing  insti- 
tutions instead  of  continuing  to  work 
toward  feminist  alternatives. 

This  may  occur  when  feminists' 
work  becomes  so  dependent  on  liber- 
al or  governmental  agencies  (e.g., 
those  rape  crisis  centers  which  are 
funded  only  through  LEA  A),  that 
their  identities  and  political  futures 
become  tied  to  maintaining  the  estab- 
lishment base  for  their  work,  thus 
precluding  their  developing  a  base  for 
radical  changes  that  might  eliminate 


lO/Quesf 


the  need  for  their  own  feminist  insti- 
tution as  well.  Another  cause  for  this 
shift  in  politics  may  simply  be  that 
working  on  any  feminist  reform  or  in- 
stitution requires  so  much  energy  that 
longer-range  questions  get  put  aside 
in  the  struggle  to  survive.  Whatever 
its  causes,  many  once  radical  femi- 
nists seem  to  defend  the  system  more 
and  to  accept  the  argument  that  if  you 
are  not  satisfied  with  socialism  or  the 
U.S.  left,  you  must  necessarily  en- 
dorse capitalism.  The  pressure  to  say 
that  if  you  aren't  pro-left  you  must  be 
anti-left,  or  vice-versa,  is,  then,  com- 
ing not  only  from  socialists  but  also 
from  women  engaged  in  political  re- 
formism. While  there  are  exceptions, 
the  general  trend  is  nevertheless  so 
strong  that  we  must  examine  what  is 
happening  to  feminists  engaged  in  re- 
form activities  and  determine  better 
how  to  maintain  radical  politics  and 
goals  during  that  process.  Otherwise, 
both  political  reformists  and  socialist- 
feminists  end  up  denying  the  revolu- 
tionary possibilities  in  feminism, 
including  its  potential  to  go  beyond 
the  old  capitalist/socialist  polarity. 

This  brings  me  to  socialist-femi- 
nism which  (even  though  generally 
the  new  left  in  the  U.S.  is  in  decline), 
is  having  a  resurgence.  The  problem 
again  is  not  feminists'  desire  to  discuss 
socialism  or  to  examine  issues  of 
class,  race  and  money  from  that  per- 
spective; they  are  important  issues. 
But  socialism  does  not  have  a  mo- 
nopoly on  their  solution.  In  fact,  the 
women's  movement  has  begun  to  con- 
front them  both  theoretically  and 
practically,  and  in  some  instances, 
more  successfully  than  the  left.  The 
problem  is  that  since  socialist-femi- 
nism lacks  a  radical  feminist  perspec- 


tive, what  emerges  is  primarily  an- 
other effort,  frequently  guilt-laden,  to 
contort  female  reality  and  feminist 
concepts  into  some  existing  socialist 
framework.  Like  all  contortions,  this 
process  is  limiting  because  it  pre- 
cludes the  emergence  of  a  powerful 
feminist  analysis  that  could  lead  to 
new  approaches  to  the  questions  of 
oppression  and  change. 

As  Nancy  Hartsock  noted  in  "Fun- 
damental Feminism:  Process  and  Per- 
spective, "^  several  of  us  from  Quest 
went  to  the  Socialist-Feminist  Confer- 
ence last  summer  eager  to  see  what 
new  directions  in  feminist  thought /- 
action  were  being  developed.  We 
went  because  we  recognized  the  im- 
portance to  feminists  of  many  ques- 
tions raised  by  a  socialist  analysis. 
But  to  our  dismay,  the  framework  of 
discussion  was  rarely  feminism,  and 
instead  was  the  U.S.  white  male  left. 
Hartsock  analyzed  why  this  approach 
does  not  further  our  understanding  of 
what  socialism  can  offer  feminist  de- 
velopment. Let  me  only  add  that  for 
me  it  was  also  too  familiar,  too  like 
the  earlier  feminist /socialist  conflicts 
of  1968  or  1971. 

Finally,  I  am  disturbed  that  many 
socialist-feminists  are  demanding 
once  more  that  independent,  nona- 
ligned  feminists  curtail  our  political 
explorations  by  choosing  to  be  pro- 
left,  by  declaring  that  socialism  is 
THE  WAY,  just  as  other  feminists  are 
demanding  that  we  renounce  social- 
ism, or  that  we  embrace  spirituality 
as  THE  WAY.  In  public  speaking,  for 
instance,  I  am  often  asked  what  I  am, 
in  such  a  tone  that  I  know  immediate- 
ly that  my  answer  will  condemn  or  re- 
deem me,  no  matter  what  else  I  say  or 
what  /  mean  by  the  terms  in  question. 


Beyond  Either/Or/ll 


Although  the  pressure  to  align  with 
one  another  of  these  mutually  exclu- 
sive options  is  not  always  stated  in 
these  terms,  it  is  there  implicitly,  if 
not  explicitly,  in  almost  all  the  recent 
big  debates  in  the  women's  move- 
ment: e.g.,  in  Albert  vs.  Swinton;  in 
the  Sagaris  split,  and  in  the  Feminist 
Economic  Network/Feminist  Econo- 
mic Alliance  rupture.  These  debates 
are  characterized  by  a  fanatical  insis- 
tence that  one  choose  between  two 
opposing  forces,  and  that  to  align 
with  the  other  side  (not  to  mention,  to 
consider  other  factors  involved),  is  as 
much  a  moral  as  a  political  disaster. 
The  Alpert-Swinton  controversy  em- 
bodied this  mentality  quite  clearly. 

From  the  beginning  there  seemed  to 
be  only  two,  very  hard,  moral  lines 
on  the  Alpert-Swinton  issue:  1)  you 
were  pro-Swinton  (and  therefore  anti- 
Alpert),  or  you  were  a  government 
collaborator  (and  therefore  not  a  reli- 
able feminist);  or,  2)  you  were  pro-Al- 
pert  (and  therefore  anti-Swinton),  or 
you  were  a  dupe  of  the  left  (and  there- 
fore hardly  a  real  feminist).  The  first 
problem  was  the  absence  of  facts  on 
which  to  base  action.  Thus,  while  I 
personally  sympathized  with  Alpert, 
who  seemed  to  have  been  condemned 
without  any  reliable  proof,  I  felt  that 
an  impartial  investigation  (or  at  least 
one  made  up  of  advocates  on  both 
sides)  to  establish  just  what  had  hap- 
pened should  have  been  the  first  order 
of  business.  (Several  individuals  did 
ferret  out  data,  but  without  the  re- 
sources or  the  political  legitimacy  of 
an  agreed-upon  national  investiga- 
tion, the  success  of  that  effort  was  se- 
riously hampered.) 

In  addition  to  the  factual  void,  the 
self-righteousness  on  both  sides  and 


the  rigid  dichotomy  it  set  up  ob- 
scured, rather  than  explored,  impor- 
tant political  issues  raised  by  the  situ- 
ation. What  should  have  been  dis- 
cussed was  not  whom  you  trusted — 
Jane  or  Pat — but  what,  if  any,  genu- 
ine common  interests  exist  between 
the  left  weather  underground  and 
feminism — such  questions  as  whether 
independent  feminists  have  some- 
thing to  gain  by  helping  left  groups  to 
survive  and  grow,  and,  if  so,  what? 
Which  groups,  politics,  and  people  on 
the  left  embody  it?  What  are  the  spe- 
cific politics  of  the  weather  under- 
ground (which,  by  the  way,  is  avail- 
able in  their  publications,^  but  which 
I  almost  never  heard  discussed),  and 
how  does  it  coincide  or  conflict  with 
feminist  politics?  Is  it  important  for 
all  radical  groups  to  protect  the  exist- 
ence of  an  anti-government  under- 
ground, regardless  of  its  actions  or  its 
politics,  and  if  so,  why,  and  how?  In- 
stead of  discussing  such  critical  politi- 
cal issues,  we  were  urged  to  condemn 
or  extol  Alpert,  most  often  in  the 
form  of  demanding  whether  we  were 
prepared  categorically  to  support  or 
oppose  the  left. 

I  do  not  argue  that  feminists  should 
never  ally  with  other  oppressed 
groups  or  with  a  left  faction;  on  the 
contrary,  I  favor  enlightened  coali- 
tions with  a  variety  of  groups  at  dif- 
ferent times.  But  alliance— or  with- 
drawal— should  grow  out  of  careful 
political  analysis  of  feminist  goals  and 
an  assessment  of  our  common  inter- 
ests, not  out  of  generalized  moral 
mandates.  The  irony  here  is  that  so- 
cialist organizations  or  black  political 
groups  do  not  automatically  support 
one  another,  unless  they  are  clear 
why  they  want  that  group  to  survive 


12/Quesf 


Beyond  Either/Or/13 


and  what  alliances  they  want  to  make 
with  it.  (Even  the  Chinese  Communist 
Party,  in  its  30  years  of  socialist  de- 
velopment prior  to  taking  state  power 
in  1949,  sometimes  allied  with  the 
Chinese  Nationalist  Government — its 
bitter  enemy — against  other  groups, 
including  other  leftists.)  Yet  the  Al- 
pert-Swinton  debate,  often  because  it 
was  posed  in  moral  terms,  allowed  lit- 
tle space  for  political  examination  of 
how  different  options  would  affect 
the  future  of  a  radical  but  nonaligned 
feminism. 

Some  individual  women,  acting 
from  their  feminist  principles,  have 
expressed  dismay  over  the  left /anti- 
left  polarity  and  have  asserted  their 
right  to  make  distinctions  about 
which  politics  and  which  people  on 
the  left— Saxe,  Swinton,  Raymond, 
for  example — they  would  support. 
Such  efforts  to  respond  case  by  case 
have  often  been  sneered  at  as  apoliti- 
cal or  as  a  refusal  to  take  a  stand.  I 
believe,  however,  that  they  represent 
the  best  sort  of  active  but  nonaligned 
feminism.  Further,  I  believe  that  we 
must  assert  ourselves  more  forcefully 
in  just  such  a  manner,  not  only  in 
cases  involving  specific  individuals, 
but  also  in  all  issues  posed  in  terms  of 
these  dichotomies. 

,  A  Manifesto  for 

Nonaligned  Feminism 

Despite  the  present  fragmentation 
in  the  women's  movement,  we  believe 
many  feminists  are  uncomfortable 
with  the  growing  division  between 
pro-  and  anti-left,  and  between  poli- 
tics, and  culture  or  spirituality.  We 
seek  a  movement  that  goes  beyond 
those  confinements.  We  are  critical  of 


the  U.S.  political,  cultural,  economic,  " 
and  spiritual  structures.  But  as  femi- 
nists, we  are  also  not  satisfied  with 
any  existing  ideological  or  strategic 
model  for  change.  We  are  prepared  to 
learn  from  social  democratic  thought, 
revolutionary  experience,  Marxism, 
and  other  efforts  for  change.  But  our 
primary  task  is  to  develop  feminist 
theory,  process,  strategy,  and  direc- 
tion. Too  many  issues  are  not  ans- 
wered by  the  contemporary  left, 
right,  or  center  stance  of  the  patriar- 
chal world;  it  is  the  job  of  nonaligned 
feminists  to  explore  those  issues. 

Our  assertion  of  nonaligned  femi- 
nism involves  keeping  the  feminist 
struggle  and  perspective  at  the  fore  as 
we  evaluate  all  questions,  coalitions, 
and  issues.  It  also  recognizes  the  need 
to  expand  what  is  called  "feminist," 
so  that  the  term  responds  to  the  reali- 
ties of  all  women,  across  class,  race, 
sexuality,  and  national  boundaries  in 
order  to  avoid  merely  reflecting  the 
interests  and  needs  of  only  one  group. 

It  requires  a  willingness  to  explore 
every  possible  source  for  analysis — 
not  only  the  works  of  women  but  also 
of  men  like  Fanon,  Freud,  Galbraith, 
Mao,  Marx,  and  Proust — regardless 
of  how  others  have  used  their  insights 
and  without  compulsion  to  declare 
ourselves  a  priori  for  or  against  any 
of  their  theories.  It  implies  an  open- 
ness to  explore  coalitions  with  other 
forces  for  change,  to  evaluate  and  re- 
assess them  constantly,  according  to 
how  they  affect  women  and  our  long- 
range  goals.  As  we  engage  with 
others,  declare  positions  on  a  wide 
range  of  issues,  and  make  ourselves  a- 
vailable  instead  of  self-segregated,  it 
is  also  crucial  that  we  keep  our  own 
communities,  projects,  and  organiza- 


U/Quest 


tions  intact.  We  must  not  lose  our  in- 
dependent feminist  base;  it  is  the 
source  of  our  political  power.  It  is  the 
inspiration  and  touchstone  for  theory 
and  strategy.  And  it  is  the  source  of 
our  personal  and  communal  suste- 
nance. 

This  is  the  mandate  for  nonaligned 
feminism. 

We  see  Quest  as  one  of  several  vehi- 
cles for  a  nonaligned  feminist  on-go- 
ing debate  and  analysis.  As  our  first 
introductory  article  stated: 
"We  are  about  open  political  for- 
ums. Quest  wishes  to  explore  differ- 
ences and  similarities  in  ideologies 
and  strategies  among  the  various  seg- 
ments of  the  women's  movement.  VJe 
are  a  journal  of  long-term,  in-depth 
political  analysis,  a  searching-ground 
for  answers  to  unresolved  ques- 
tions. "^ 

Quest's  position  as  a  forum  can  per- 
haps best  be  understood  in  terms  of 
the  perspective  for  nonaligned  femi- 
nism I  have  outlined.  We  do  not  have 
a  line  to  push  or  a  final  set  of  conclu- 
sions to  advocate.  But  we  do  have 
politics,  and  we  have  a  particular  per- 
spective on  the  crucial  theoretical  and 
practical  issues  facing  feminists.  In 
our  limited  space,  we  continuously 
make  political  choices  about  what  to 
print.  We  seek  the  best  elucidation  of 
critical  issues  from  a  variety  of  points 
of  view.  In  choosing  material,  we  are 
guided  by  our  nonaligned  and  radical 
perspective  on  feminism.  From  that 
perspective,  we  evaluate  what  we  be- 
lieve will  add  most  to  the  develop- 
ment of  a  strong  feminist  movement 
and  theory  for  all  women.  We  are 
therefore  not  a  liberal  forum  open  to 
airing  all  views  merely  for  the  sake  of 
equal  time.  While  we  do  not  all  al- 


ways agree  with  each  other  or  with 
each  article  that  we  print,  we  do  agree 
that  each  article  in  some  way  builds 
toward  an  understanding  of  our  past 
and/ or  future  theories  and  strategies. 

Because  we  seek  articles  from  dif- 
ferent perspectives,  within  a  certain 
framework,  some  have  been  confused 
about  our  politics  and  our  printing  of 
"contradictory"  views.  For  example, 
one  woman  condemned  us  for  going 
to  the  Socialist-Feminist  Conference, 
yet  when  asked  if  she  read  what  we 
said  about  it,  she  answered  "no":  ap- 
parently our  presence  alone  was  evi- 
dence enough  for  her  conclusions.  At 
the  same  time,  others  have  called  us 
"anti-socialist"  for  our  critique  of  the 
Conference  and  of  other  socialist  stra- 
tegies. I  could  cite  many  such  stories. 
I  mean  only  to  point  out  that  as  a  re- 
sult of  exploring  various  facets  or  po- 
larized questions,  we  have  experi- 
enced the  extent  of  the  pressures  in 
feminists  to  choose  THE  WAY  and  to 
label  others  accordingly. 

Our  search  for  different  perspec- 
tives and  contributors  to  Quest  has 
led  some  of  us  to  travel  to  other  cities 
and  to  attend  as  many  feminist  events 
as  our  time  and  money  allow.***  We 
have  found  that  the  ideas  relevant  to 
a  strong,  nonaligned  feminist  direc- 
tion are  growing  in  many  different 
places  and  under  many  labels.  Out  of 


***  For  example,  members  of  the  Quest  staff 
have  been  at:  Sagaris;  the  National  Congress  of 
Neighborhood  Women;  regional  lesbian-femi- 
nist conferences;  the  Feminist  Eye-Film  and  Vi- 
deo conference;  the  NOW  National  Conven- 
tion; the  Feminist  Economic  Network/ Feminist 
Economic  Alliance  foundings;  the  Gay  Aca- 
demic Union;  the  National  Radical  Feminist, 
Women  and  the  Law,  and  Women's  Spiritual- 
ity Conferences. 


Beyond  Either/Or/lS 


16/Quest 


these  experiences  and  from  our  first 
two  years  of  publication,  we  have 
concluded  that  Quest,  in  its  search  to 
clarify  long-term  questions,  may  have 
remained  too  distant  from  some  of 
the  movement's  immediate  crucial  de- 
velopments and  specific  controver- 
sies. We  have  begun  now  to  solicit 
more  articles  which  comment  directly 
on  these  developments  and  debates, 
but  which  also  attempt  to  clarify  the 
long-term  goals  and  problems  they  in- 
volve. We  hope  that,  rather  than  add- 
ing to  polarization  and  recrimination, 
this  process  will  help  directly  to  link 
theory  and  action. 

We  believe  that  analyzing  current 
events  and  controversies  is  important 
since  analysis  and  debate  provide  the 
groundwork  for  developing  new  syn- 
thesis, new  resolution  of  the  old  con- 
flicts and  problems  still  plaguing  femi- 
nism. With  this  in  mind,  we  welcome 
you  to  the  third  year  of  Quest:  a  femi- 
nist quarterly,  and  to  our  on-go- 
ing struggle  to  help  build  an  indepen- 
dent, nonaligned  feminism  as  a  way 
of  providing  direction  and  hope  for 
women  seeking  to  change  ourselves 
and  the  world  around  us. 


with  who  should  organize  and  go  to  the  confer- 
ence and  what  should  be  presented  there  as  the 
content  of  feminism  here.  Since  this  was  an  in- 
ternational event,  it  interested  many  women 
and  quickly  embodied  all  the  problems  and 
conflicts  among  feminists  in  the  radical  seg- 
ment of  the  movement. 

3.  Two  important  statements  of  Female  Sep- 
aratism were:  "The  Female  State,"  a  journal 
printed  in  Boston  in  1970,  and  'Tourth  World 
Manifesto,"  a  paper  written  by  women  in  De- 
troit in  response  to  the  organizing  of  the  North 
American/Indochinese  Women's  Conferences. 

4.  Thanks  to  Bertha  Harris  and  Beverly  Fisher 
in  particular  for  help  with  the  ideas  in  the  sec- 
tion on  culture  and  spirituality.  For  more  dis- 
cussion of  women  and  spirituality,  see:  Peggy 
Komegger,  "The  Spirituality  Ripoff,"  IV:3  The 
Second  Wave,  pp.  12-18. 

5.  Nancy  Hartsock,  11:2  Quest:  a  feminist 
quarterly  (Fall,  1975),  pp.  67-80. 

6.  In  addition  to  the  communiques  written 
from  the  underground  periodically  and  pub- 
lished in  many  women's  newspapers,  see  par- 
ticularly the  book,  Prairie  Fire:  The  Politics  of 
Revolutionary  Anti-Imperialism,  a  political 
statement  of  the  Weather  Underground,  print- 
ed underground  in  the  USA  (May,  1974). 

7.  Karen  Kollias,  "Spiral  of  Qiange:  An  Intro- 
duction to  Quest,"  1:1  Quest:  a  feminist  quar- 
terly (Summer,  1974),  p. 7. 


Footnotes 


1 .  Prime  Minister  Jawaharlal  Nehru,  Economic 
Review  (New  Delhi,  May,  1955),  as  quoted  in 
O.  Edmund  Qubb,  Twentieth  Century  China 
(New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  1964), 
p.  345. 

2.  The  North  American/Indochinese  Women's 
Conference,  held  in  two  parts — in  Toronto  and 
Vancouver  in  the  spring  of  1971 — grew  out  of 
contact  that  feminists  had  with  North  Vietna- 
mese women  in  1970.  It  was  meant  to  be  the 
first  meeting  between  Indochinese  (North  and 
South  Vietnamese,  Laotian  and  Cambodian) 
revolutionary  women  and  explicitly  feminist 
women  from  Canada  and  the  USA.  The  battles 
that  ensued  in  the  U.S.  had  primarily  to  do 


Errata: 

In  Vol.  II,  No.  4  Qjeadership),  the  article 
"Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother"  should  be 
marked  ©  Copyright  lackie  St.  loan,  1976. 

Quest  regrets  the  misspelling  of  Lorraine 
Masterton's  name  in  "Feminist  Leaders  Can't 
Walk  on  Water,"  (Vol.  II,  No.  4). 


Beyond  Either/Or/17 


eminlst  Pi 
&  FemlnlG 


By  JUNE  ARNOLD 

graphics  by  Jacqui  Linard 


This  article  was  written  with  the 
help  and  criticism  of  Wendy  Cadden, 
Judy  Grahn,  Parke  Bowman,  Casey 
Czamik  and  Coletta  Reid. 

The  independent  women's  commu- 
nications network  began  early  in  the 
women's  movement  as  mimeograph- 
ed newsletters  and  position  papers. 
Very  early,  women  saw  the  need  to 
write  down  for  clarification  and  make 
available  to  other  women  what  femi- 
nism stood  for. 

In  the  last  six  years,  this  communi- 
cations network  has  grown  both  up 
and  out.  There  are  now  more  than  a 
hundred  and  fifty  feminist  presses  or 
journals  in  over  thirty  states.  Includ- 
ing women's  book  stores,  we  have 
created  a  circle  of  media  control  with 
every  link  covered:  a  woman  writes 
an  article  or  book,  a  woman  type- 
sets it,  a  woman  illustrates  and  lays  it 
out,  a  woman  prints  it,  a  woman's 
journal  reviews  it,  a  woman's  book- 
store sells  it,  and  women  read  it — 
from  Canada  to  Mexico  and  coast  to 
coast. 

I  want  to  emphasize  the  importance 
of  having  such  a  network:  the  first 


thing  any  revolutionary  group  does 
when  taking  over  a  government  is  to 
seize  control  of  communications,  and 
we  have  already  set  up  our  own.  We 
can  report  on  struggles  and  victories 
of  women  (our  current  events  which 
rarely  make  or  are  distorted  by  the 
male  papers),  knowledge  of  which  is 
vital  to  understanding  the  ubiquity 
and  interdependence  of  our  oppres- 
sion; we  can  spend  time — years  now 
— developing  an  analysis  by  arguing 
back  and  forth  in  print  across  the  na- 
tion; we  can  deepen  and  broaden  our 
grasp  of  female  life  by  reading  autobi- 
ographies, novels,  stories,  poetry  by 
women  talking  only  to  women;  and 
we  have  our  own  stores  where  our 
words  can  always  be  found. 

There  are  women  in  the  movement 
now  who  weren't  around  in  the  years 
before  1969  when  we  used  to  tele- 
phone (or  argue  about  the  validity  of 
calling)  the  male  press  to  beg /seduce/ 
bully  them  into  covering  an  action  of 
ours  so  other  women  would  know  of 
it,  and  when  the  only  writing  by  wo- 
men you  could  buy  was  published  by 
male  publishers  for  reasons  of  their 
own. 

There  are  women  who  don't  under- 
stand what  it  was  like  to  write  a  novel 
or  a  poem  or  an  essay  and  know, 
even  before  you  began,  that  you  had 
to  pre-program  your  mind  to  work 


18/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  summer,  1976 


ses 
Politics 


from  male  values  (if  you  weren't  al- 
ready programmed  by  life)  or  you 
might  as  well  save  your  pencil  for  the 
grocery  list.  If  you  were  very  clever 
and  managed  to  include  your  voice 
inside  their  language  and  get  publish- 
ed, you  were  misreviewed  by  male 
papers  and  your  work  soon  went  out 
of  print  for  economic  (political)  rea- 
sons. The  words  of  earlier  feminists 
were  lost  because  they  were  the  prop- 
erty of  male  publishers  who  easily 
avoided  reprinting  them. 

But  hasn't  all  this  changed?  Hasn't 
the  feminist  movement  (and  the  femi- 
nist presses  too,  according  to  Jane 
Rule  in  Lesbian  Images)  put  pressure 
on  Madison  Avenue  to  publish  us? 
Madison  Avenue  publishers,  now 
owned  by  such  as  Kinney  Rent-a-Car, 
Gulf  and  Western,  and  RCA,  are  real- 
ly the  hard-cover  of  corporate  Ameri- 
ca, the  intellectuals  who  put  the  fin- 
ishing touches  on  patriarchal  politics 
to  make  it  sell:  what  we  can  call  the 
finishing  press  because  it  is  our  move- 
ment they  intend  to  finish.  They  will 
publish  some  of  us— the  least  threat- 
ening, the  most  saleable,  the  most 
easily  controlled  or  a  few  who  cannot 
be  ignored— until  they  cease  publish- 
ing us  because  to  be  a  woman  is  no 
longer  in  style.  For  a  feminist,  they 
are  truly  the  impermanent  press. 

Since  few  women  would  say  out 


loud,  "All  feminist  work  should  be 
published  by  men,"  why  do  many 
women  still  prefer  to  sell  their  writing 
or  any  form  of  their  art  to  the  big 
male  publishers?  There  are  several 
reasons  usually  given,  all  based  on 
male  myths: 

1.  "If  I  publish  with  them,  I  will 
reach  more  women."  New  York  Uni- 
versity Press  published  Rita  Mae 
Brown's  The  Hand  that  Cradles  the 
Rock  and  sold  650  copies  in  two 
years.  Diana  Press  published  her 
Songs  to  a  Handsome  Woman  and 
sold  5,000  copies  in  two  years.  The 
usual  Madison  Avenue  first  novel  has 
a  printing  of  2500;  a  big  promotion  is 
made  and  all  the  bookstores  order  it. 
If  it  doesn't  catch  on  right  away  (rave 
reviews)  the  bookstores  return  it  in 
three  months  and  the  finishing  press 
remainders  it.*  The  average  sale  of  a 
finishing-press  novel  is  800  copies.  In 
contrast,  the  women's  presses  keep 
the  book  in  print  until  it  finds  its  aud- 
ience: Daughters,  Inc.  has  gone  back 
to  press  (sold  out  the  first  3,000  cop- 
ies) on  every  one  of  its  novels;  the 
Women's  Press  Collective  and  Diana 
Press  have  sold  out  the  first  printings 


*To  remainder  a  book  is  malese  for  getting 
rid  of  all  unsold  copies  at  cost  or  less  to  second- 
hand bookstores.  Some  books  are  remaindered 
even  before  publication  date. 


Feminist  Presses  and  Feminist  Politics/19 


of  almost  all  their  titles.  But  suppose  a 
woman  believes  that  her  book  will 
catch  on.  In  that  case,  won't  she  reach 
more  women  by  publishing  with  the 
finishing  press?  A  conservative  esti- 
mate is  that  every  feminist  press  book 
is  read  by  five  women;  one  woman's 
press  book  that  has  "caught  on"  has 
already  sold  50,000  copies  and  has 
therefore  probably  been  read  by 
250,000  women.  The  combined  titles 
of  the  Women's  Press  Collective,  Di- 
ana Press,  and  Daughters,  Inc.  have 
already  sold  over  150,000  copies  and 
most  of  the  titles  continue  to  sell 
month  after  month. 

2.  "Okay,  but  if  I  publish  with  the 
finishing  press  I  will  make  money  and 
be  able  to  continue  my  work."  If  you 
are  unknown  and  in  the  category  of 
author-who-may-be-remaindered, 
you  will  only  make  your  advance  (an 
average  advance  for  first  novels  or 
nonfiction  is  $2500,  and  less  for  poe- 
try). Ti  Grace  Atkinson  has  to  date 
been  paid  no  royalties  beyond  her 
$4000  advance  on  Amazon  Odyssey. 
One  woman's  press  first  novel  has  al- 
ready made  over  $30,000  for  its  auth- 
or. The  women's  presses  care  about 
the  author  being  paid  for  her  work 
and  you  can  be  sure  that  whatever 
money  is  made  from  the  book  will  be 
shared  with  her.  You  have  a  better 
chance  of  making  money  on  the  same 
book  when  it  is  published  by  a 
woman's  press  than  if  you  sold  it  to 
the  finishing  press.  (The  average 
amount  of  money  that  writers  in  the 
United  States  make  from  their  writing 
is  $500  a  year.) 

3.  "Well,  suppose  I  publish  with 
the  finishing  press  until  I  am  famous 
(have  prestige,  a  name,  power)  and 
then  throw  my  weight  over  to  the  wo- 


men's presses?"  The  women's  presses 
are  busy  developing  feminist  art  and 
political  analysis  and  may  not  accept 
this  latter-day  noblesse  oblige.  The  ^ 
author  may  be  too  out  of  touch  by 
then  to  publish  anywhere,  having 
sold  her  chance  for  a  revolutionary 
artistic  development  in  exchange  for 
Valentine  candy.  Or,  if  she  does  be- 
come famous,  she  may  start  identify- 
ing with,  or  become  obliged  to  the 
finishing  press  and  forget  about 
women's  presses  altogether. 

4.  "But  I  will  have  greater  status  as 
an  author  published  by  the  finishing 
press  than  if  I  published  with  an  alter- 
nate." This  is,  I  think,  the  crucial 
point.  The  women's  presses  are  not  an 
"alternate;"  they  are  in  fact  the  real 
presses,  the  press  of  the  future. 
Through  them,  the  art  and  politics  of 
the  future  are  being  brought  to  flow- 
er. (Literature  has  traditionally  de- 
pended upon  those  willing  to  experi- 
ment: Gertrude  Stein  and  Virginia 
Woolf  were  published  by  presses 
which  did  not  have  stockholders  to 
satisfy.  But  because  the  presses  were 
not  based  upon  political  passion,  they 
sold  out  at  the  first  opportunity  to  the 
business  world.)  For  most  feminists 
right  now,  it  is  impossible  to  take  seri- 
ously fiction  (not  to  speak  of  political 
analysis)  written  according  to  Madi- 
son Avenue  formulae;  in  the  future, 
the  emptiness  and  lack  of  vision  of 
such  fiction  will  relegate  it  to  the  attic 
corner  along  with  male  stories  of  con- 
quest (nature  the  enemy:  the  lion,  the 
shark,  the  vagina).  It  is  important  to 
remember  always  that  the  finishing  i 
press  has  a  big  stake  (survival)  in  ' 
keeping  middle-class  values  around 
and,  since  art  is  politics,  you  should 
check  carefully  to  see  just  what  values 


20/Q4est 


Feminist  Presses /21 


are  being  reinforced  by  the  women 
who  achieve  the  finishers'  status. 

But  the  desire  for  status  is  the  basic 
motive,  I  think,  underlying  a  wo- 
man's decision  to  pubhsh  with  the  fin- 
ishing press,  as  if  we  had  switched  our 
self-identity  from  the  patriarchal 
who-our-father/husband/son  is  to 
the  equally  patriarchal  who-our-pub- 
lisher/ reviewer /reader  is.  Do  we  still 
unconsciously  believe  that  to  be  pub- 
lished by  men  is  validation?  Unfortu- 
nately, even  feminist  periodicals 
sometimes  indicate  this:  book  review 
sections  tend  to  include  long  serious 
analyses  of  finishing-press  books  and 
brief  notices  of  the  products  of  the 
feminist  presses.  Worse,  these  brief 
notices  are  often  condescending- 
ly favorable— praise  given  to  the  ef- 
forts of  a  loved  child.  Women's  peri- 
odicals may  not  want  to  pan  their  sis- 
ters' work,  but  such  a  restriction 
makes  it  impossible  then  to  take  such 
work  seriously.  But  there  is  another 
problem:  a  finisher-published  book  is 
much  easier  to  review.  Its  dust-jacket 
categorizes  it  for  you,  finishing  re- 
views establish  its  existence  (validate 
it?),  other  women  are  talking  about  it, 
and,  by  the  very  fact  that  the  finish- 
ing press  published  it,  its  subject, 
theme,  and  language  are  somewhat 
familiar.  In  contrast,  a  simple,  unvali- 
dated,  dust-jacketless  volume  by  an 
unknown  name,  on  a  subject  not  al- 
ways immediately  clear  (because  it  is 
not  yesterday's  idea),  in  language 
which  reaches  out  to  explore  new  ter- 
ritory, puts  the  burden  on  the  review- 
er to  decide  by  herself  what  the  book 
is  about,  what  it  is  trying  to  say.  Re- 
viewing and  discussing  the  works  of 
our  own  presses  and  journals  has  not 
had  the  priority  it  should  in  feminist 


periodicals— as  if  art  did  not  present 
essential  ideas,  as  if  the  reasons  a  wo- 
man's press  publishes  a  particular 
book  are  not  political,  as  if  we  take  it 
for  granted  that  we  will  always  have  a 
feminist  media  whether  we  support  it 
or  not. 

Why  A  Feminist  Press 

Since  many  women  would  say  out 
loud,  "All  feminist  work  should  be 
published  by  women,"  what  are  the 
reasons  a  woman  could  give  for 
choosing  to  be  published  by  a 
feminist  press? 

1.  If  I  publish  with  a  woman's 
press,  I  reach  the  women  who  need 
and  can  use  what  I  say.  The  desire  to 
share  with  them  is  one  of  the  reasons 
why  I  write  in  the  first  place— my  ■ 
voice  joining  in  the  women's  conver-  I 
sation.  And  women  will  listen  and  an- 
swer, through  their  work,  their  let- 
ters, their  lives.  "To  reach  women" 
will  not  be  a  passive  event — I  don't 
want  to  "reach  women"  if  what  I  have 

to  say  must  be  watered  down  to  make 
it  less  scary  for  some  hypothetical 
common-denominator- woman. 

2.  I  may  need  to  make  money  but 
that  isn't  my  basic  reason  for  writing 
and  the  women's  presses  will  not  try 
to  make  money  at  my  expense.  As  a 
feminist,  I  feel  a  responsibility  to  my 
community  and  refuse  to  compromise 
my  work  in  order  to  make  it  more 
saleable.  All  finishing  press  editors  ex- 
pect compromise — particularly  with- 
in the  writing  itself,  although  what  is 
acceptable  changes  from  year  to  year. 
(In  1966  they  asked  me  to  change  fuck 
to  screw  and  cunt  to  vagina;  Andrea 
Dworkin  had  to  change  her  capitali- 
zation   and    punctuation;    Monique 


22/Qucst 


Wittig's  Lesbian  Body  was  mistrans- 
lated by  a  man;  etc.)  With  a  women's 
press,  I  can  work  with  my  publisher 
instead  of  having  my  book  mindlessly 
packaged  as  a  product,  with  a  jacket 
and  blurbs  that  insult  women. 

3.  If  I  became  famous  publishing 
with  the  finishing  press  I  would  won- 
der what  was  missing  from  my  writ- 
ing to  make  it  so  acceptable.  What 


truth  was  I  avoiding  that  they  liked 
me  so  much?  And  I  would  probably 
succumb  to  the  temptation  to  think  I 
was  hot  shit — until  I  was  finished  and 
they  dropped  me.  Such  status  would 
divide  me  from  my  sisters  and  perpet- 
uate the  same  old  hierarchies  where 
one  woman  is  good/ talented/beauti- 
ful and  others  are  not,  and  it  would 
bring  us  no  closer  to  a  world  where 


Feminist  Presses /23 


women's  art  is  a  total  complex  expres- 
sion of  all  our  voices.  As  a  writer,  my 
greatest  need  is  not  status,  but  criti- 
cism from  women  I  respect,  in  order 
that  my  own  imagination  and  lan- 
guage can  expand. 

4.  If  I  publish  with  the  finishing 
press,  I  throw  my  lot  in  with  publish- 
ers whose  profits  go  to  oppressing 
women  in  South  America  (Gulf  and 
Western,  owner  of  Simon  and  Schus- 
ter); whose  women  workers  are  fired 
if  they  try  to  organize  for  better  work- 
ing conditions  (Macmillan);  whose 
advertising  and  promotion  methods 
manipulate  women  into  buying  some- 
thing they  don't  want  or  need.  I  want 
to  add  whatever  strength  I  have  to 
building  a  feminist  press  as  one  aspect 
of  controUing  our  own  lives.  In  1970 
we  marched  wearing  aprons  which 
read:  Is  this  uterus  the  property  of 
New  York  State?  In  1976  we  should 
wear  headbands  which  state:  My 
words  will  not  be  sold  to  "his  master's 
voice." 

It  is  essential  for  authors  whose  po- 
litical commitment  is  to  publish  with 
the  women's  presses  that  their  art  and 
their  politics  be  recognized,  treated 
seriously  (not  necessarily  praised)  so 
that  their  work  can  grow,  and 
through  that  work,  we  all  can  grow. 
It  is  equally  important  that  readers  of 
feminist  periodicals  have  an  ongoing 
political  analysis  of  the  art  and  the 
political  theory  that  we  are  creating, 
and  be  encouraged,  through  the  depth 
and  completeness  of  the  review,  to 
buy  and  read  our  own  writing  from 
the  source. 

Feminist  studies  teachers  too, 
should  realize  that  when  they  assign 
readings  from  the  finishing  press  they 
are  guaranteeing  that  their  own  jobs 


will  not  be  permanent:  by  turning 
over  their  students'  minds  to  the  fin- 
ishers they  are  saying  quite  clearly 
that  what  men  think  is  good  is  good 
and  what  men  won't  publish  is  bad 
(amateurish,  strident,  vanity-based. 
As  Judy  Grahn  puts  it,  "To  publish 
your  own  poetry  is  not  vanity,  it's  ag- 
gression ").  Feminist  studies  teachers 
also  undermine  the  feminist  presses 
by  xeroxing  articles  or  poems  from 
feminist  press  books  and  journals 
while  requiring  students  to  buy  the 
books  of  the  finishing  press.  If  they 
want  students  to  read  what  the  finish- 
ers publish  (for  contrast,  or  for  its  val- 
ue in  analysing  the  political  motive 
behind  its  publication),  those  books 
should  be  xeroxed  or  borrowed  and 
women's  limited  money  used  to  sup- 
port the  feminist  media. 

Lately  there  has  arisen  a  competi- 
tiveness, a  clear  hostility,  between 
women  who  work  for  the  finishing 
press  (or  hope  to  be  published  by 
them)  and  the  independent  women's 
presses.  For  one  thing,  a  woman  who 
wants  to  be  senior  editor  at  a  finishing 
press  depends  for  her  rise  up  the  lad- 
der upon  getting  the  best  women's 
writing  for  "her"  house;  the  growth  of 
the  feminist  presses  threatens  the 
availability  pile.  And,  the  woman 
who  writes  (or  hopes  to  write)  for  the 
finishing  press  is  frightened  deep 
down  that  all  the  other  "feminists" 
may  publish  only  with  their  own,  and 
redefine  feminist  to  exclude  her— 
thus  leaving  her  without  a  publisher 
at  all,  since  the  finishing  press  only 
took  her  to  cash  in  on  the  sales  value 
of  feminism.  These  women,  either 
consciously  or  not,  see  their  very 
survival  threatened  and  try  to  belittle 
the  products  of  the  women's  presses 


2A/Quest 


(or  steal  them  away)  and  sow  discord 
among  us.  These  women  use  their 
prestige  to  discourage  other  women 
from  publishing  with  women  only, 
saying  such  things  as,  "Those  little 
presses  are  fine  for  the  young  women 
just  finding  their  way  (or  the  real  poli- 
ticos)  but  your  art  deserves  the  very 
best."  It  is  in  whose  interest  to  keep 
"those  little  presses"  little  and  to 
equate  big  with  quality,  like  men  do? 
And  the  flattery,  again,  is  playing  up- 
on our  fear  that  men  really  do  know 
best.  There  also  seems  to  be  a  tempta- 
tion for  a  women's  press  to  feel  flat- 
tered when  a  finishing  press  offers  to 
buy  one  of  their  books— usually  one 
that  has  been  selling  well.  In  this  case 
I  think  the  finishing  press  sees  a 
chance  to  make  money  without  doing 
any  work  (the  women  already  have 
put  together  the  book  and  proved  its 
audience)  but  I  want  to  repeat  that  the 
finishing  press  is  the  hard-cover  of 


corporate  America  and  absolutely 
does  not  want  the  independent  wo- 
men's presses  to  survive.  Each  time  he 
takes  a  feminist  book  from  us  he 
weakens  us  all. 

The  feminist  presses  are  not  step- 
ping stones  to  being  published  by  the 
"real"  (artificial  and  false)  male  pub- 
lishers. The  feminist  newspapers  are 
not  training  grounds  so  women  can 
get  jobs  at  The  New  York  Times  nor 
are  the  magazines  preparation  for 
writing  for  Saturday  Review.  Togeth- 
er, we  are  engaged  in  the  essential 
struggle  to  develop  our  politics, 
strengthen  our  voices,  and  make  cer- 
tain our  movement  prevails.  Publish- 
ers Weekly  (owned  by  Xerox),  The 
Village  Voice  (owned  by  Rockefeller 
interests),  and  The  New  York  Times 
know  this;  you  will  not  see  the  wo- 
men's presses  or  journals  praised  or 
analyzed  in  them.  (Although  they 
sometimes  review  a  woman  who  can't 


Feminist  Presses/25 


be  completely  ignored  any  longer, 
perhaps  to  draw  her  into  working  for 
the  finishing  press.  An  occasional  re- 
view of  one  of  us  in  a  finishing  jour- 
nal is  a  tactic  meant  to  confuse  and  di- 
vide us). 

It  is  time  to  stop  giving  any  favor- 
able attention  to  the  books  or  jour- 
nals put  out  by  the  finishing  press.  It 
is  time  to  recycle  our  money  and  re- 
fuse to  let  any  male  corporation  make 
profit— off  of  us.  It  is  time  to  under- 
stand what  male  status  really  means 
and  withdraw  support  from  any 
woman  who  is  still  trying  to  make  her 
name  by  selling  out  our  movement. 

The  first  feminist  movement  was 
briefly  just  as  popular  as  ours,  just  as 
sought  after  by  the  finishing  press 
(who  depend  upon  buying  up  the  en- 
ergy of  genuine  movements  because 
they  have  none  of  their  own). 
When  they  neglected  to  build  their 
own  press,  they  had  access  to  none. 
They  allowed  their  movement  to  be 
controlled  by  the  finishing  press,  who 
showered  them  with  glitter  and  then 
dropped  them,  leaving  the  impression 
that  the  issue  they  had  raised  was 
now  settled.  It  is  vital  that  we  main- 
tain control  over  our  future,  that  we 
spend  the  energy  of  our  imaginations 
and  criticisms  building  feminist  insti- 
tutions that  women  will  gain  from 
both  in  money  and  skills.  As  soon  as 
we  understand  our  own  interests,  the 
women's  independent  communica- 
tions network  can  be  made  strong, 
deep,  and  positively  permanent. 


June  Arnold,  feminist  activist  and 
author  of  several  novels  including  Sis- 
ter Gin,  is  a  co-founder  of  Daughters, 
Inc.  publishing  company. 


^/  Plainfield,  Vermont  0S667 

junc  QiO 


"Arnold  writes  with  great  Insight  and 
understanding  of  women,  lesbians,  meno- 
pause, aging  and  the  aged." 

-Library  journal 

$4.00 

iiHappEtm^iiHG 

!l^  THflUEl.  Dl^  •' 

CdroLe  SpEdHn  Dld^dLiLev 

"This  account  of  seven  women  who  sur- 
vive a  winter  plane  crash  Is  a  suspenseful 
thriller— unique  in  being  an  adventure  story 
without  men."  -Library  Journal 

$4.00 

The  ^PumpklnfEater 

"A  fine  book,  and  one  to  be  greatly  en- 
joyed." -The  New  York  Times 

$4.00 

lonTOsmscLe 


A  London  night  cleaner  tells  the  story  of 
her  life  on  the  streets  and  in  the  pubs. 
"Sharp,  wry,  aggressive." 

-The  Times  Literary  Supplement 

$3.50 


26/Qwcsf 


r^  Critique  &  Commentary 


By  JOAN  BELKNAP 


This  comment  is  a  response  to  Nancy  Hartsock's  article,  "Political 
Change:  Two  Perspectives  on  Power, "  which  appeared  in  Quest,  Volume 
/,  Number  1.  It  was  written  as  an  assignment  in  a  Women's  Studies  Femi- 
nist Theory  Course,  and  addresses  four  specific  questions  asked  by  the 
instructor. 

Quest  is  interested  in  this  form  of  critique  and  commentary,  and  wel- 
comes other  such  material  from  feminist  studies  courses. 


Nancy  Hartsock  is  a  radical  feminist  whose  emphasis  in  this  article  is 
on  political  change.  She  identifies  capitalism,  patriarchy,  and  white  su- 
premacy, as  the  three  inter-related  historical  forces  which  oppressed  wo- 
men, stressing  the  ways  in  which  these  forces  have  fed  each  other,  creat- 
ing larger  webs  of  oppressive  inter-related  structures  and  ideas.  Hartsock 
focuses  on  the  capitalist  idea  of  power,  including  many  of  the  ways  in 
which  it  enslaves  women.  She  uses  the  model  of  money  in  a  capitalistic 
society  to  explain  that  our  society  is  based  on  marketplace  relationships 
of  domination,  with  power  understood  to  be  a  commodity  of  "exchange 
value."  This  concept  of  power  assumes  that  someone  is  being  controlled 
or  dominated.  Hartsock  notes  that  the  domination  concept  of  power  is 
rooted  in  capitalism  and  patriarchy  (virility  =  control),  but  does  not  ex- 
plore the  relationship  between  them.  Is  dominating  masculinity  an  out- 
growth of  capitalist  marketplace  models  of  power  relationships,  or  is  the 
"money"  model  an  outgrowth  of  an  earlier  patriarchal  relationship? 

We  are  oppressed  by  our  own  concept  of  power  (  as  domination)  be- 
cause it  describes  a  commodity  relationship  between  isolated  individuals 
who  seek  their  own  gain  at  the  expense  of  others.  Hartsock  shows  that 
our  own  thinking  is  oppressive  when  it  is  limited  by  concepts  formed  by 
capitalist  (patriarchal)  assumptions.  For  instance,  the  liberal  ideas  of 
equality  and  discrimination  are  tools  of  capitalist  and  patriarchal  struc- 
tures, and  concepts  such  as  "possessive  individualism"  are  as   politically 


Critique  and  Commentary /27 


oppressive  as  the  more  identifiable  social  institutions  of  the  family  or  the 
state.  The  process  of  compartmentalization,  a  function  of  the  common 
needs  of  capitalism,  patriarchy,  and  white  supremacy,  results  in  a  frag- 
mentation that  takes  away  women's  power.  This  fragmentation  cannot 
be  eliminated  by  the  passage  of  a  law,  or  even  many  laws,  but  only  by  a 
direct  challenge  to  the  structures  of  oppression. 

The  major  strengths  and  disappointments  in  this  article  lie  in  Hart- 
sock's  presentation  of  strategies  to  change  the  deeply  rooted  oppression 
of  women.  She  recognizes  a  need  to  destroy  the  many-tiered  structures  of 
capitalism,  patriarchy,  and  white  supremacy,  as  well  as  the  thinking 
which  supports  them.  This  political  change  must  come  on  at  least  three 
levels.  First,  a  redefinition  of  self.  Power  is  presented  as  energy  or  accom- 
plishment, a  non-dominating  definition.  This  positive  definition  of 
power  leads  to  a  sense  of  an  independent  self.  Second,  this  new  concept 
of  power  enables  a  restructuring  of  inter-personal  relationships  within 
the  feminist  movement,  so  that  they  are  no  longer  transactions  of  power. 
Feminist  organizational  structures  can  be  built  to  cultivate  the  power  (en- 
ergy, accomplishment)  of  women,  rather  than  level  it. 

The  disappointment  in  Hartsock's  strategy  comes  in  her  discussion  of 
the  third  level  of  change.  The  ultimate  change  must  come  in  direct  strug- 
gle against  the  oppressive  institutions.  She  reverts  to  the  power  (as  domi- 
nation) model  for  this  struggle.  By  discounting  the  strength  of  power  (as 
accomplishment,  energy)  when  faced  with  power  (as  domination)  Hart- 
sock  leaves  an  impression  that  power  (as  energy)  is  really  a  weak  sister  to 
the  controlling  male  power.  If  it  is  not  enough  for  the  big  struggle,  why  is 
it  good  enough  for  our  internal  relationships? 

Ultimately,  Hartsock  shares  the  basic  radical  feminist  principle  of  the 
political  value  of  personal  experience.  This  is  in  many  ways  the  profound 
principle  of  feminism,  providing  the  main  roots  for  feminist  change,  as 
well  as  the  guide  to  feminist  visions  of  goals  and  possibilities.  As  much  as 
Hartsock  claims  that  we  must  make  no  assumption  about  the  process  of 
feminist  change,  her  entire  theory  assumes  the  value  of  personal  power, 
personal  independence,  and  personal  wholeness. 

Beyond  this  principle,  Hartsock  holds  fast  to  the  rule  that  feminist  so- 
cial change  is  open-ended.  Its  task  is  so  huge,  so  complicated,  so  vast, 
that  its  directions  and  structures  cannot  be  predicted.  "Change  is  the  pro- 
cess of  creating  new  problems.  Feminist  political  change  is  so  profound, 
so  basic,  so  unknown,  that  even  "the  meaning  of  power  itself  is  trans- 
formed." Feminist  theory  describes  a  process,  rather  than  a  result.  The 
process  brings  a  whole  new  sense  of  human  possibility.  A  principle  of 
feminist  social  change  is  that  the  strategy  must  contain  "the  seed  of  its 
own  supercession." 

Joan  Belknap  is  presently  unemployed  and  moving  to  California, 
where  she  hopes  to  return  to  school  to  study  women  and  religion. 


28/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  summer,  1976 


How  long  can  she  afford  to  wait  to  have 
her  own  subscription  to  Quest? 

The  bus  stops  and  there  she  is  —  halfway  through  the  article  on  "One 
Hundred  and  One  Steps  Toward  a  Feminist  Revolution"  and  begging  to 
borrow  your  copy.  What  can  you  do?  Invite  her  home  to  dinner?  Tear 
off  the  subscription  flap?  Buy  a  gift  subscription?  We  want  more  Quest 
readers.  We  also  want  more  subscribers  —  subscribers  become  regular 
readers.  We  want  more  feminist  activists.  More  activists  means  greater 
power  for  women.  Renew  your  subscription  and  introduce  others  to 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly. 

Can  any  feminist  afford  not  to  know  what  her  movement  is  thinking? 

—  Renew  or  enter  my  subscription  to  Quest  so  that  I  won't  miss 
"Communication  and  Control."  (Vol.  Ill,  no.  2); 

—  Become  a  sustaining  member  of  Quest  with  a  $25.00  contribution 
(one  free  subscription  included); 

—  Order  gift  subscriptions  beginning  with  the  "Communication  and 
Control"  issue; 

—  Order  copies  of  one  or  more  of  the  following  back  issues:  Vol.  I, 
No.  2,  3,  4;  Vol.  II,  No.  1,  2,  3,  4;  Vol.  Ill,  No.  1. 

Prices  and  address  are  on  the  flap.  Please  tear  that  off  and  mail  with  check  to  Q^iest:  a 
feminist  quarterly.  Thank  you. 


29 


Women,  Power,  and  Labor 
Governments 


By  ROSEMARY  PRINGLE 
and  ANN  GAME 

graphics  by  Scarlett  Cheng 


Editor's  Note: 

In  1972,  a  Labor  Government  head- 
ed by  Gough  Whitlam  came  to  power 
in  Australia,  after  23  years  of  Conser- 
vative rule.  It  initiated  major  changes 
in  Australia's  foreign  policy  and  a  se- 
ries of  social  democratic  reforms  do- 
mestically, including  the  formation 
of  a  women's  National  Advisory 
Committee  and  a  Women's  Affairs 
advisor  to  the  Prime  Minister.  The 
coming  to  power  of  the  Labor  Gov- 
ernment coincided  with  the  growth  of 
feminism  in  Australia  and  provided 
funds  for  various  women's  projects. 
Feminists  were,  therefore,  actively  en- 
gaged in  debate  over  the  relationship 
between  the  development  of  an  inde- 
pendent radical  feminist  movement 
and  a  government  that  was  respon- 


sive to  some  reforms  for  women,  but 
still  operated  within  a  male  suprema- 
cist and  capitalist  context. 

In  November  of  1975,  the  Labor 
Government  fell  from  power  and 
with  it  went  most  of  the  funding  for 
women's  concerns.  This  article  was 
written  out  of  the  struggles  of  Austra- 
lian women  to  analyze  that  experi- 
ence, look  at  their  present  situation, 
and  better  understand  the  effects  of 
different  political  concepts  of  power 
upon  feminism. 

Three  years  of  social  democracy  in 
Australia,  and  particularly  the  re- 
forms implemented  during  Interna- 
tional Women's  Year,  have  highlight- 
ed the  various  conceptions  of  social 
change  and  political  power  which 
characterise  feminism.  In  December 
of  1972,  the  Equal  Pay  case  was  re- 
opened, signaling  the  first  of  many  in- 
itiatives to  end  discrimination  in  em- 
ployment. Through  the  Schools  Com- 
mission, steps  were  taken  to  end  in- 


30/Quesf ,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  summer,  1976 


equalities  in  educational  opportunity 
and  to  accept  responsibility  for  child 
care.  Tentative  steps  were  taken  to- 
wards funding  Family  Planning  clin- 
ics, health  centres,  rape  crisis  centres 
and  women's  refuges.  In  all  these 
ways,  the  traditional  demands  of  the 
women's  movement  appeared  to  be 
being  met.  However,  it  was  not  with- 
out pressure  being  brought  to  bear. 
For  the  most  part,  the  Government 
belatedly  took  the  credit  for  reforms 
initiated  by  the  political  activity  of 
the  women's  movement.  It  even 
rationalised  its  stance  in  terms  of  the 
desirability  of  "grass  roots"  participa- 
tion in  policy  making.  By  1975,  when 
several  million  dollars  were  made 
available  to  women's  groups,  femi- 
nists had  become  increasingly  con- 
cerned about  the  problems  of  "co-op- 
tion." Reform  of  laws  relating  to 
abortion  and  homosexuality,  which 
were  of  central  importance  to  the  wo- 
men's movement,  failed  to  receive  the 
backing  of  the  Labor  Party.  Instead, 
we  were  given  the  farce  of  a  Human 
Relations  Commission.  Time  and 
energy  had  been  put  into  fighting  for 
"Welfare  State"  policies  which  would 
not  in  themselves  bring  about  "libera- 
tion," and  whose  treatment  by  the 
government  seemed  to  range  from  the 
trivial  to  the  token. 

In  the  second  half  of  1974,  recession 
set  in  and  the  Labor  government  was 
unable  to  sustain  its  progressive 
stance:  the  child  care  budget  was  cut 
and  the  N.E.A.T.  (National  Employ- 
ment and  Training)  scheme,  which 
was  originally  designed  "to  aid  in  the 
removal  of  past  inequalities  in  em- 
ployment opportunities,"  was  in- 
creasingly used  to  relieve  (male)  un- 
employment.   The    government    be- 


came more  and  more  sensitive  to  pub- 
lic criticism  of  the  money  it  was 
"wasting"  on  International  Women's 
Year,  and  particularly  on  the  heavily 
subsidised  Women  and  Politics  Con- 
ference m  September,  1975.  Follow- 
ing the  backlash  from  this,  it  hastily 
cancelled  a  U.N.  Conference  on  "Wo- 
men and  the  Media,"  planned  for  No- 
vember, 1975.  The  Prime  Minister's 
adviser  on  Women's  Affairs,  Eliza- 
beth Reid,  was  sacked  under  the  guise 
of  "administrative  re-organisation." 
Funding  of  women's  projects  was 
threatened  by  the  government's  ef- 
forts to  cut  public  spending.  The 
structural  limitations  of  social  democ- 
racy itself,  and  its  dependence  on  the 
economic  climate,  were  becoming 
clear.  The  women's  movement  had 
become  disillusioned  with  the  Whit- 
lam  Government  by  the  time  of  its 
sacking;  at  the  same  time,  it  had  no 
alternative  but  to  support  it,  thus  ex- 
posing the  contradictions  that  had  al- 
ways been  implicit  in  its  political 
practice. 

Concepts  of  Power 

We  wish  to  argue  that  the  limita- 
tions in  the  practice  of  the  women's 
movement  are  a  consequence  of  the 
feminist  conception  of  power,  which 
is  based  upon,  and  consistent  with, 
the  theoretical  trends  of  feminism. 
Here  we  touch  upon  a  question  fre- 
quently posed  in  the  women's  move- 
ment, "what  is  the  relationship  be- 
tween sex  and  class?"  Insofar  as  femi- 
nists assume  that  the  oppression  of 
women  by  men  is  the  fundamental 
form  of  oppression,  we  fail  to  recog- 
nise the  reality  of  power  as  a  function 
of  the  class  relations  on  which  a  social 


Women,  Power  and  Labor  Govemments/31 


formation  is  based.  Our  underlying 
assumption  here  is  that  any  political 
practice  directed  towards  overcoming 
forms  of  domination  and  oppression 
is,  in  essence,  a  question  of  political 
power.  In  class  society,  political  pow- 
er, exercised  through  the  state  appara- 
tus, is  the  means  by  which  one  class 
maintains  its  dominance  over  the 
other  classes.  The  specific  content  of 
forms  of  oppression  other  than  class 
oppression  (e.g.,  black,  women,  ho- 
mosexuals) is  not  to  be  denied.  How- 
ever, the  adequacy  of  the  strategies  of 
the  liberation  movements  is  depen- 
dent upon  an  understanding  of  the  na- 
ture of  oppression  in  terms  of  the  role 
of  the  state  in  maintaining  the  politi- 
cal dominance  of  the  capitalist  class. 
Despite  claims  of  feminist  theorists 
to  be  developing  radical  views  of 
power,  these  are  based  on  precisely 
the  same  assumptions  as  the  pluralist 
conception.  Power  is  understood  to 
be  either  an  attribute  of  individuals  or 
of  "male"  institutions.  Even  when  it  is 
conceded  that  power  is  not  fragment- 
ed, it  is  viewed  from  a  pluralist  stand- 
point akin  to  that  of  C.  Wright  Mills: 
the  orthodox  definition  of  the  power- 
ful as  "those  who  are  able  to  realise 
their  will,  even  if  others  resist  it."^ 
Mills  even  accepted  that  a  "romantic" 
pluralism  was  "a  recognisable,  al- 
though confused,  statement  of  the 
middle  levels  of  power. "^  He  simply 
stressed  that  at  the  top,  the  units  of 
power  (economic,  political,  military) 
that  really  count  are  few  in  number, 
and  in  the  hands  of  those  individuals 
who  have  access  to  the  command  of 
major  institutions  and  come  together 
to  form  a  "power  elite."  The  feminist 
conception  of  a  "male  power  struc- 
ture"  similarly   suggests   that    while 


some  power  is  dispersed  amongst  all    ■ 
men,  the  major  units  of  it  are  in  the 
hands  of  those  who  control  "male"  in-    . 
stitutions.  ^ 

Some  of  the  implications  of  this 
emerge  from  a  comparison  with  Sto- 
kely  Carmichael's  analogous  formula- 
tion of  a  "white  power  structure."  He 
argued  that  the  aim  of  black  power  is 
to  gain  "an  effective  share  in  the  total 
power  of  the  society"  ^  through  "a 
broadened  base  of  political  participa-  ■ 
tion."^  The  feminist  mission  has  simi-  ' 
larly  been  conceived  of  as  a  matter  of 
taking  over  units  of  power  in  order  to 
balance  "male"  power  with  "female" 
power.  In  terms  of  political  strategy, 
this  takes  two  forms:  first,  women 
should  gain  a  share  of  what  is  now 
seen  as  a  male  preserve,  through  lob- 
bying, running  for  office,  and  enter- 
ing the  bureaucracy;  second,  by  set- 
ting up  alternative  power  centres  to 
counter  "male  power."  Both  involve  a 
zero-sum  conception  which  is  based 
on  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  fixed 
amount  of  power  and  the  more  of  it 
that  women  can  gain,  the  less  will  be 
held  by  men. 

Very  few  in  the  Women's  Move- 
ment consciously  turned  to  pluralist 
theory  to  explain  "male  power."  But 
at  the  time  it  emerged,  in  the  late 
1960's,  pluralism  had  been  the  pre- 
vailing orthodoxy  for  years,  and  East- 
on's  view,  that  "neither  the  state  nor 
power  is  a  concept  that  serves  to 
bring  together  political  research,"^ 
was  still  accepted.  Marxist  theory, 
which  might  have  provided  an  alter- 
native, was  only  just  emerging  from 
the  tradition  of  economism  stemming 
from  the  Second  and  Third  Interna- 
tionals. The  Women's  Movement  did 
emerge  out  of  the  humanist  tradition 


32/Quest 


of  the  New  Left,  breaking  away  when 
it  became  clear  that  participatory  de- 
mocracy and  the  creation  of  "whole 
people"  with  the  power  to  make  deci- 
sions affecting  their  lives,  was  not  to 
be  extended  to  women.  But  the  attack 
on  "bourgeois  pluralism,"^  which 
both  shared,  was  made  within  essen- 
tially the  same  framework  as  that  be- 
ing criticised. 

The  most  important  assertion  of 
the  early  Women's  Liberation  move- 
ment was  that  "the  personal  is  politi- 
cal." The  examination  of  personal  ex- 


perience produced  the  recognition 
that  relationships  between  men  and 
women  are  "power"  relations,  based 
on  dominance  and  subordinance,  so 
"power"  did  seem  to  be  spread,  if  not 
evenly,  amongst  all  men.  Orthodox 
theory  therefore  appeared  to  have  im- 
mediate relevance.  This  was  rein- 
forced by  the  emphasis  on  the  tech- 
nique of  consciousness-raising  and 
the  assumption  that  experience  alone, 
properly  understood,  will  generate 
theory.  There  was  a  confusion  be- 
tween theory  and  ideology  which  left 


Women,  Power  and  Labor/33 


women  vulnerable  to  just  re-using  the 
prevailing  ideologies  of  power,  and 
prevented  our  breaking  away  from  an 
empiricist  epistemology. 

It  is  the  analysis  of  patriarchy  that 
distinguishes  the  new  feminism  from 
the  older  women's  rights  movement. 
For  Kate  Millet,  "patriarchy"  is  a  uni- 
versal political  system,  penetrating 
class  divisions,  different  societies  and 
different  historical  epochs/  Shula- 
mith  Firestone  traced  its  origins  to  the 
"biological  family":  she  argued  that 
women,  because  of  our  biology,  and 
children,  because  of  the  length  of  time 
it  takes  us  to  reach  maturity,  have  al- 
ways been  dependent  on  males  for 
our  physical  survival.  This  imbalance 
of  power  within  the  family  leads  to 
the  development  of  a  power  psycho- 
logy, which  has  shaped  the  whole  of 
human  history.^  According  to  this 
view,  male  supremacy  in  the  original 
biological  family  created  a  psycho- 
logy of  domination  which  provides 
the  basic  model  for  the  exercise  of  all 
forms  of  power. 

Sex  oppression  is  thus  seen  as  prior 
to,  and  providing  the  foundation  for, 
all  other  sorts  of  oppression.  Char- 
lotte Bunch,  for  instance,  argues  that 
capitalism  and  white  supremacy  are 
the  "sons  of  patriarchy."  Writing  in 
Quest,  she  says:  "Patriarchy  includes 
not  only  male  rule  but  also  heterosex- 
ual imperialism  and  sexism;  patriar- 
chy led  to  the  development  of  white 
supremacy  and  capitalism.  For  me, 
the  term  patriarchy  refers  to  all  these 
forms  of  oppression  and  domination, 
all  of  which  must  be  ended  befpre  all 
women  are  free."^ 

Capitalism,  patriarchy  and  racism 
are  treated  here  as  equivalent  institu- 
tions and  the  question  of  their  rela- 


tionship is  posed  in  terms  of  "which 
came  first."  This  is  misdirected  be- 
cause it  assumes  that  capitalism  desig- 
nates a  specifically  economic  relation- 
ship from  which  the  rest  of  society  is 
relatively  separate.  Hence  sexism  is 
seen  as  something  outside  "capital- 
ism" and  superimposed  on  it.  But  any 
social  formation  constitutes  a  com- 
plex unit  in  which  a  certain  mode  of 
production  dominates  the  others 
which  compose  it.  The  abstract  con- 
cept, "mode  of  production,"  already 
embraces  not  only  relations  of  pro- 
duction but  political  and  ideological 
relations.  In  a  capitalistic  social  for- 
mation, class  relations  appear  at  all 
levels.  Sexism  thus  cannot  be  seen  as 
standing  outside  of  the  class  struggle. 
It  is  in  this  context  that  the  question 
of  power  is  to  be  posed.  It  is  not  a 
free-floating  commodity,  nor  is  it  an 
atttribute  of  individuals.  There  is  not 
a  fixed  quantity  of  it  that  can  be  taken 
over,  either  lot  by  lot,  or  sphere  by 
sphere .^°  Power  is  a  unity.  This  does 
not  mean  that  political,  cultural  or 
ideological  power  are  identical  with 
economic  power,  or  that  there  is  not  a 
plurality  of  power  centres.  It  relates 
to  the  capacity  of  a  class  to  realise  its 
interests  at  each  relatively  autono- 
mous level.  But  the  relative  autono- 
my of  these  different  levels  does  not 
mean  that  power  has  a  diversity  of 
sources.  It  does  not  require  the  same 
"agents"  in  control  at  all  levels  to  es- 
tablish that  power  is  unified.  Indeed, 
such  a  situation  would  be  absurdly 
crude.  Power  is  not  located  in  the  dif- 
ferent levels  or  structures,  but  in  the 
field  of  class  struggle,  which  is  carried 
on  at  all  levels.  In  terms  of  any  revo- 
lutionary transformation,  it  is  the  po- 
litical level  that  is  the  key,  since  it  is 


M/Q^st 


the  state  apparatus  that  holds  the  so- 
cial formation  together.  This  makes 
clear  why  the  transformation  of  capi- 
talist society  depends  on  the  seizure  of 
state  power  by  the  working  class, 
rather  than  a  piece-by-piece  eating  in- 
to, or  sharing,  of  "male  power." 

Sexism  is  a  form  of  oppression  re- 
lated to  the  reproduction  of  the  domi- 
nance of  the  capitalist  class.  Its  exist- 


feminists  would  have  it,  and  it  is  idea- 
list to  believe  that  consciousness-rais- 
ing can  remove  them.  This  idea  is 
expressed  explicitly  by  Nancy  Hart- 
sock  when  she  asks: 
Can  our  organisations  serve  as  tools 
for  taking  power  for  women  and  still 
lay  the  groundwork  for  new  non-sex- 
ist, non-racist,  non-classist  societal  in- 
stitutions?'^^ 


ence  at  all  levels  as  an  expression  of 
class  power  highlights  the  importance 
of  the  women's  struggle.  But  women 
are  not  a  unified  group  in  terms  of  our 
relations  to  the  means  of  production. 
The  crude  suggestion  that  sisterhood 
can  unite  all  women  across  class  bar- 
riers fails  to  come  to  grips  with  the 
complexity  of  the  overdetermined 
form  of  the  oppression  of  women  in 
capitalist  society.  Class  differences 
are  not  a  matter  of  ideology,  as  some 


Its  objective  relation  of  exploitation 
makes  the  working  class  the  revolu- 
tionary class.  The  significant  question 
for  the  women's  movement  then,  is 
how,  organisationally,  it  relates  to 
the  struggle  of  this  class  for  political 
power. 

American  feminists  have  called  for 
a  "recognition  of  the  two  faces  of 
power,  and  of  the  necessity  for  work- 
ing on  both  levels."^  By  this  they 
mean   "power   as   domination"    and 


Women,  Power  and  Labor /35 


"power  as  energy  and  strength."  Male 
power  is  to  be  fought  both  on  its  own 
terms  and  by  setting  up  alternative  fe- 
male power  centres.  In  Australia,  the 
first  of  these  was  taken  up  by  the  Wo- 
men's Electoral  Lobby  (WEL),  which 
believed  it  could  take  advantage  of 
the  opportunities  offered  by  "pluralist 
politics"  to  make  the  system  relevant 
for  women  .^  Women's  Liberation  has 
placed  its  emphasis  on  changing  the 
face  of  power.  Thus  it  was  concerned 
with  the  possibility  of  co-option  into 
the  "white,  male,  capitalist,  power 
structure, "^4  and  its  political  practice 
largely  revolved  around  conscious- 
ness-raising and  issues  of  leadership 
and  domination  within  its  own  organ- 
isational structure.  With  the  advent 
of  the  Labor  Government  it  became 
clear  that  these  practices  were  based 
on  similar  assumptions.  The  domi- 
nant activity  of  the  women's  move- 
ment was  beginning  to  revolve  a- 
round  self-help  groups  which  in- 
cluded health  collectives,  shelters, 
rape  crisis  groups  and  child  care 
centres.  These  started  as  an  attempt 
by  radical  feminists  to  produce  a  so- 
cial strategy,  rather  than  remaining 
simply  at  the  level  of  personal  solu- 
tions. They  were  soon  in  a  position  of 
having  to  decide  their  attitude  to- 
wards government  funding.  While  ac- 
cepting that  it  would  provide  an  op- 
portunity to  expand  the  activities  of 
the  movement,  and  force  the  govern- 
ment to  fulfill  its  stated  social  welfare 
responsibilities  in  relation  to  women, 
it  seemed  to  have  numerous  built-in 
problems:  would  it  be  possible  to 
threaten  relations  of  power  and  con- 
trol while  financed  by  the  system?  Or 
would  it  be  a  way  of  dismissing  the 
movement,    through   assistance   and 


approval?  Would  it  be  possible  to  re- 
sist the  re-imposition  of  hierarchial 
structures?  15 

These  questions  were  answered  in 
terms  of  an  analysis  of  "bureaucracy" 
which  led  only  to  a  partial  recogni- 
tion of  the  role  of  the  state.  The  state 
apparatus  was  reduced  to  a  bureau- 
cracy made  up  of  men.  This  could  be 
dealt  with  in  several  ways;  first,  for 
example,  by  the  development  of  a  net- 
work of  "feminist  bureaucrats"  and 
their  appointment  to  influential  deci- 
sion-making positions,  and  second, 
by  the  extension  of  pressure  groups 
and  lobbies,  "in  order  to  effect 
changes  and  the  whole  structure  of 
government  and  force  it  to  give  us 
what  we  want."^^  Both  of  these  strate- 
gies assume  that  it  is  possible  to 
change  power  structures  by  "balanc- 
ing and  equalising  the  power  relation- 
ship between  bureaucracies  and  wo- 
men, "^^  taking  power  lot  by  lot.  The 
inadequacy  of  the  former  was  shown 
when  the  first  round  of  IWY  grants 
went  to  areas  other  than  those  set  up 
by  the  women's  movement.  The  im- 
potence of  the  latter  is  clearly  illus- 
trated by  the  long  history  of  the  fail- 
ure of  women's  lobbies  in  Austraha. 
While  WEL  may  achieve  limited  ob- 
jectives, it  will  remain  a  traditional 
lobby  group  dominated  by  "the  belief 
that  no  matter  what  partisan  quarrels 
may  arise,  women  have  more  to  gain 
by  working  together. "^^ 

The  response  of  women's  liberation 
is  more  complex,  although  it  is  still 
put  in  terms  of  relating  to  the  bureau- 
cracy. Self-help  groups  were  original- 
ly seen  as  autonomous  female  power 
centres.  However,  they  were  always 
open  to  the  criticisms  made  of  chari- 
ties, and  they  fitted  in  with  the  estab- 


36/Quest 


lished  female  role  of  applying  band- 
aids.  Insofar  as  funding  seemed  to  put 
them  at  the  mercy  of  government 
grants,  the  problem  was  exacerbated. 
Consequently,  some  would  argue  that 
setting  up  self-help  groups  is  a  useless 
strategy,  wasteful  of  time  and  energy, 
and  that  the  main  responsibility  of  the 
women's  liberation  movement  to 
women  is  not  to  provide  services  for 
us,  but  to  build  a  mass  political  move- 
ment based  on  working  women. ^^ 
This  at  least  addresses  itself  to  the 
right  questions,  but  much  too  simply: 
the  problem  of  the  relationship  of  sex 


and  class  is  not  solved  by  focussing 
on  working  class  women. 

We  agree  that  the  main  impact  of 
women's  liberation  has  been  neither 
on  the  provision  of  services  for  wo- 
men nor  in  the  recruitment  of  individ- 
uals. It  has  been  through  political  agi- 
tation that  consciousness  has  been 
changed  and  reforms  effected.  Self- 
help  groups  are  nonetheless  impor- 
tant. Insofar  as  their  involvement 
with  the  "bureaucracy"  forces  them  to 
confront  organisational  forms  and  the 
role  of  state  intervention,  this  has  po- 
tential for  politicising  the  leadership 


Women,  Power  and  Labor/37 


of  the  women's  movement.  In  this 
context,  it  is  not  irrelevant  which  par- 
ty governs.  Not  only  is  social  democ- 
racy progressive,  but  it  also  provides 
the  political  environment  in  which  the 
contradictions  of  capitalism  become 
most  apparent.  While  the  self-help 
groups  have  had  to  confront  these 
contradictions,  they  should  not  be 
conceived  of  in  terms  of  alternative 
power  centres  that  can  effect  social 


change  by  taking  over  political  power 
in  this  way.  Once  government  fund- 
ing has  dried  up  under  the  new  Prime 
Minister,  there  is  a  danger  that 
cultural  separatism  will  gain  hege- 
mony throughout  the  movement. 
Since  we  believe  that  this  can  never 
pose  the  question  of  political  power, 
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  women's 
movement  will  not  retreat  into  reac- 
tionary, counter-cultural  politics. 


Footnotes 


1 C.  Wright  Mills,  The  Power  Bite  (Oxford 
University  Press,  1956),  p.  9. 

^Ibid.,  p.  244. 

^  Stokely  Carmichael  and  Qiarles  V.  Hamil- 
ton, Black  Power  (Pelican,  1969),  p.  61. 

^Ibid.,  p.  57. 

5  As  quoted  in  Ralph  Miliband,  The  State  in 
Capitalistic  Society  (Weidenfeld  and  Nichol- 
son, 1969),  p.  2. 

^  Robin  Blackburn,  "A  Brief  Guide  to  Bour- 
geois Ideology,"  Student  Power,  eds.  Alexan- 
der Cockbum  and  Robin  Blackburn  (Penguin, 
1969).  a..  Editorial,  Mfl^je/,  NV:1  (December, 
1975):  "Feminists  want  power  back  in  the 
hands  of  people,  not  concentrated  in  the  hands 
of  a  few  men  at  the  head  of  political  parties  and 
economic  monopolies." 

7  Kate  Millet,  Sexual  Politics  (Rupert  Hart- 
Davis,  1970). 

^Shulamith  Firestone,  The  Dialetic  of  Sex 
Qohnathon  Cape,  1971). 

9  Charlotte  Bunch,  'The  Reform  Tool  Kit," 
Quest,  1:1  (Summer,  1974),  p.  43. 
^^Mabel,  NV:1  (December,  1975),  p.  7:  "We 
can  observe  that  a  male  power  is  divided  into 
hundreds  of  competing  yet  interlocking  blocs 
and  structures.  Power  is  unequally  divided  (hi- 


erarchical), and  there  is  constant  tension  as 
those  with  less  access  to  power  push  against 
those  who  have  more.  ..." 

Qaude  Steiner,  "Power,"  Radical  Therapy, 
111:3  (Summer,  1975):  "Power  and  its  effects 
like  the  air  we  breathe,  are  all  around  us.  .  . 
And  just  like  the  air  we  breathe  power  is  subtly 
or  grossly  contaminated.  .  .  ." 

^^  Nancy  Hartsock,  "Political  Change:  Two 
Perspectives  on  Power,"  Quest,  1:1  (Summer, 
1974),  p.  17. 

12/Hrf.,  p.  16. 

^^  Julie  Richter,  "Women  in  Politics,"  Refac- 
torv  Girl,  NV:9  (Winter,  1975),  p.  36. 

^^For  an  expression  of  this  idea,  see  Anne 
Summers,  Damned  Whores  and  God's  Police 
(Penguin,  1975),  p.  23.  See  also  the  discussion 
of  "capitalist  patriarchy,"  Mabel,  NV:1  (De- 
cember, 1975),  p.  7. 

^5  For  a  discussion  of  these  problems,  see 
Scarlet  Woman,  NV:2  (September,  1975). 

l^Iiz  QKeefe  and  Margaret  Roberts,  "Bur- 
eaucracy," a  summary  of  discussions  held  at 
the  Women  and  Politics  Conference,  Canberra, 
Australia  (September,  1975). 

'^'^Loc.  cit. 

18  Julie  Richter,  op.  cit.,  p.  37. 

Rosemary  Pringle  and  Ann  Game 
are  lesbians  active  in  the  women's 
movement  in  Australia;  Rosemary  is 
Women's  Studies  Tutor  in  the  Politics 
Department  of  Adelaide  University  in 
Adelaide;  Ann  is  a  research  assistant 
in  the  Sociology  School  of  Macquarie 
University  in  Sydney. 


38/Q^st 


The  gay  magazine 
for  the  whole  family 

15 


Christopher  Street 

60  West  13th  Street.  New  York,  New  York  10011 

Please  enter  my  subscription  to  Christopher  Street 
Enclosed  is  my  check  ior  $12  50  (12  issues) 


Name 


Address 


City  State/Zip 


Christopher  Street 

60  West  13th  Street,  New  York,  New  York  1001 1 

Please  enter  my  subscription  to  Christopher  Street 
Enclosed  is  my  check  for  $12  50  (12  issues) 


Name 


Address 


City/State/Zip 


39 


'''''fr&i:^^ 


The 
Club 


By  HOPE  LANDRINE     ©  Copyright  Hope  Landrine,  1976 
graphics  by  Constance  Samaras 


40/Quesf,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  summer,  1976 


Alice  dressed  slowly  and  methodic- 
ally in  her  tent,  giving  herself  the  time 
she  needed  to  review  all  she  had  learn- 
ed. It  had  been  a  fascinating  six 
months  at  Basic  Training  Camp;  she 
had  read  more,  perceived  more  and 
understood  more  than  she  ever  had  in 
the  past.  And  most  of  all,  she  had 
come  to  understand  that  the  battles 
she  had  fought  daily  were  battles 
others  fought  also,  that  she  was  not  a- 
lone  in  this  struggle  and  that  The 
Club  was  not  simply  winning,  but 
that  The  Club  would  win. 

That  morning  she  had  one  thing  left 
to  accomplish  in  order  to  be  a  real 
member  of  The  Club.  That  morning 
she  was  to  take  a  test  that  she  had 
been  told  would  require  all  she  had 
learned  and  now  understood,  all  of 
her  strength  and  all  that  she  was,  a 
test  that  would  be  the  final  measure  of 
her  commitment  to  The  Club.  Alice 
put  on  her  hat,  paused  to  look  in  the 
mirror  at  her  so  changed,  so  suddenly 
aged  face,  and  left  her  tent. 

Outside  the  sun  was  blaring  and 
beating  down  on  the  charred  earth. 
Alice  walked  slowly,  listening  to  the 
scratching  of  her  boots  in  the  desert 
sand,  swallowing  hard  and  wonder- 
ing what  it  was  she  would  be  asked  to 
do.  She  arrived  at  the  Basic  Training 
Camp  at  11  a.m.  She  paused,  took  a 
deep  breath  and  went  in.  Behind  a 
metal  desk  placed  squarely  in  the  cen- 
ter of  the  tent  a  C  sat,  waiting. 

"Alice  Norton?"  the  C  asked. 

"Yes,"  Alice  replied. 

"Goodl"  the  C  exclaimed,  "Are  you 
ready?" 

Alice  swallowed  again  and  then 
said  loudly,  'Tes.  I'm  ready." 

The  two  women  left  the  tent  fol- 
lowed by  a  third  woman  and  started 


across  the  desert.  They  walked  slowly 
and  in  silence,  Alice  and  the  C  togeth- 
er, and  the  third  woman,  who  had  an 
X  on  her  cap,  followed  behind  them. 
After  a  half-hour  of  trudging  they  ar- 
rived at  the  Test  Tent  site. 

"This  is  it,  Ms.  Norton,"  the  C  said. 
"Let  me  give  you  a  brief  explanation 
and  then  you  can  ask  any  questions 
you'd  like,  though  I  won't  promise  to 
answer  them  all.  Okay.  All  members 
of  The  Club  should  pass  this  test. 
Those  who  do  are  dressed  in  blue 
jeans  and  then  sent  to  the  cities  to 
work  for  the  The  Club.  Those  who  do 
not  pass  this  test  are  given  various 
statuses  within  The  Club  and  some 
choose  to  go  back  to  Basic  Training 
until  they  are  ready  to  try  the  test 
again.  I  took  this  test  a  month  ago 
and  couldn't  make  it.  So  I've  chosen 
to  go  to  a  special  ovular  with  those 
who  failed  for  the  same  reasons  I  did 
— collaboration.  That's  what  the  C  on 
my  cap  stands  for.  I  am  a  collaborat- 
or and,  in  my  opinion,  not  really  suit- 
ed to  represent  The  Club,  though  I  do 
work  for  it.  Ms.  Clairton  here  is  an  X. 
That  means  she  failed  all  of  her  Basic 
Training  classes  and  she's  chosen  to 
take  Basic  Training  again  from  the  be- 
ginning, and  then  she  wants  to  try  the 
test  again.  In  the  meantime,  Ms. 
Clairton  assists  in  giving  the  test  and 
so  she  also  works  for  The  Club,  al- 
though she  is  in  no  way  qualified  to 
represent  it.  Now.  The  test  is  fairly 
simple  in  design.  See  that  hill  over 
there  ?" 

Alice  Norton  looked  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  C's  pointed  arm.  There,  a 
few  hundred  yards  in  the  distance, 
was  a  steep  hill  with  a  tent  at  the  top. 
"Yes,  I  see  it,"  Alice  responded. 

"Well,"  the  C  continued,  "that's  it. 


The  aub/41 


You  are  asked  to  climb  that  hill.  If 
and  when  you  arrive  at  the  top, 
depending  upon  your  decisions  along 
the  way,  you  will  become  a  real  mem- 
ber of  The  Club,  qualified  to  repre- 
sent it  and  to  work  at  undercover  po- 
sitions for  it.  So  Ms.  Norton,  this  is 
the  task.  You  will  climb  that  hill,  if 
you  choose.  And  it's  not  easy.  The 
hill  is  covered  with  dummies,  stuffed 
dummies  of  various  sizes,  dummy 
men  and  a  few  dummy  women — all 
dummies.  In  order  to  climb  the  hill 
then,  you'll  have  to  step  on  the  dum- 
mies with  your  heels,  smash  in  their 
faces  with  your  feet,  crush  their  ply- 
wood skulls  to  get  to  the  top.  But  this 
is  only  the  beginning,  Ms.  Norton. 
Each  dummy  has  a  tape-recorder  in  it. 
When  you  approach  a  dummy  its 
tape-recorder  begins.  The  dummy 
will  cry,  beg,  scream,  kick,  fight  and 
plead.  The  dummy  will  recite  con- 
vincing propaganda  of  various  types. 
Everything  it  says  will  make  you 
want  to  stop.  And  what  you  must  do 
is  step  on  the  dummy.  Such  action  will 
turn  off  the  recorder  and  you  can  then 
continue  the  climb.  I  warn  you,  Ms. 
Norton,  it's  not  easy.  When  you  start 
up  that  hill  all  the  dummies  in  that 
area  will  go  off  at  once,  each  pleading 
and  screaming,  begging  and  crying, 
shouting,  lying  and  condemning  you. 
It's  so  loud  and  it's  coming  from  every 
direction  so  you'll  want  to  run  back 
down  the  hill,  and  that  choice  is 
yours.  One  more  thing  Ms.  Norton. 
You  will  not  climb  alone.  No.  You 
will  take  Ms.  X  here  with  you.  She 
will  climb  on  your  back,  wrap  her 
legs  around  your  belly  and  push  in 
with  her  feet,  wrap  her  arms  around 
your  neck,  choke  you  and  try  to  pull 
you  down.  Oh  yes,  Ms.  X  weighs  145 


pounds.  So.  That's  the  test,  Ms.  Nor- 
ton. Climb  that  hill  of  dummies  with 
Ms.  X  on  your  back.  You  can  drop 
her,  or  drag  her  with  you  to  the  top; 
that  choice  is  yours.  Your  sisters  will 
be  waiting  at  the  tent  up  there.  Ques- 
tions? 

Alice  stood  still,  looking  at  the  hill 
in  the  distance.  It  was  almost  noon 
and  the  sun  was  overhead.  It  was  hot 
and  the  air  was  dry  and  tasted  of 
sand.  Alice  looked  at  the  C.  "Yes," 
Alice  said.  'Tirst,  do  all  Club  mem- 
bers pass  this  test?" 

The  C  smiled  and  said,  "All  real 
members  have  passed.  You  see,  most 
women  known  as  members  of  The 
Club  and  who  actually  represent  The 
Club  haven't  really  passed.  Most  who 
are  well-known  throughout  the  world 
are  collaborators,  which  is  pretty 
close  to  being  a  real  member,  but  not 
the  same.  And,  yes,  that  causes 
problems  for  the  struggle,  since  the 
real  members  and  the  well-known  col- 
laborators don't  agree  on  military 
tactics.  And  the  real  members  are  pro- 
testing loudly  that  they  are  the  only 
real  Club  members  and  deserve  much 
more  recognition.  So,  the  situation 
today  is  that  the  Cs  work  for  The 
Club  and  the  Cs  are  even  running  The 
Club,  and  the  real  members  are  get- 
ting angry  and  slowly  seizing  power. 
Anyway,  it's  only  the  real  members 
who  have  made  it  to  the  top.  Is  this 
confusing?  You  wonder  why  The 
Club  condones  a  test  that  the  majority 
of  its  members  can't  pass?  Well,  as 
briefly  as  possible,  it's  this:  all  of  the 
members  of  The  Club,  the  X's,  the 
Cs,  and  the  real  members,  under- 
stand that  real  and  total  commitment 
to  the  philosophy  and  the  politics  of 
The  Club  necessitates  passing  the  test. 


42/Quest 


We  all  know  that.  But  we're  not  all 
ready  to  pass  yet.  So,  we  still  give  this 
test  and  we  respect  this  test  as  the  fi- 
nal measure  of  commitment.  And 
though  many  of  us  fight  and  scream 
and  protest  out  of  fear  of  the  real 
members,  we  know,  deep  inside,  that 
the  real  members  are  the  only  true 
Club  members,  that  the  real  members 
have  passed  and  they've  got  it,  and 
we  know  that  any  Club  member  can 
be  a  real  member.  Any  more  ques- 
tions?" 

Alice  shook  her  head  'yes,'  saying, 
"Okay.  So  most  of  The  Club  mem- 
bers and  even  its  leaders  haven't 
passed  the  test.  Why  and  how  did 
they  fail?" 

The  C  smiled  again.  "I  can't  tell  you 
that  really.  That's  something  you 
must  figure  out  for  yourself.  I  will 
tell  you  that  it  has  a  lot  to  do  with 


how  you  answer  one  of  the  questions 
the  dummies  will  ask  you — if  you  an- 
swer 'yes,'  you,ve  made  it;  if  you  an- 
swer 'no,'  you  haven't,  and  no,  I'm 
not  going  to  tell  you  which  question  it 
is.  Also,  making  it  to  the  top  has  a  lot 
to  do  with  whether  you  drop  Ms.  X 
here  when  she  gets  too  heavy,  or 
when  she  wraps  her  arms  around 
your  head  so  you  can't  see  where 
you're  going,  or  whether  you  carry 
Ms.  X  with  you  to  the  top.  No.  I'm 
not  going  to  tell  you  what  you  should 
do.  Anything  else?" 

Alice  looked  at  the  C  and  then  into 
Ms.  X's  tiny  eyes.  Then  she  turned 
and  looked  at  the  hill.  The  noon  sun 
was  glaring  over  the  top  of  the  hill 
and  Alice  shielded  her  eyes  with  her 
hand.  There  in  the  distance  she  could 
see  the  women  at  the  top  of  the  hill. 
They  were  outside  the  tent  in  the  sun 


Theaub/43 


— some  walking  arm  in  arm,  some 
playing  and  kissing,  others  working 
together. 

"Well?"  the  C  asked,  "Are  you  go- 
ing to  try?" 

Alice  turned  to  her  and  looked  into 
her  eyes.  The  C  looked  away.  'Tes," 
she  answered,  still  looking  at  the  hill, 
"yes." 

Ms.  X  climbed  on  Alice's  back  and 
held  on  tightly.  Alice  stuck  one  hand 
into  her  Club  pants  pocket,  pushed 
back  her  hat  with  the  other,  glanced 
once  more  at  the  tent  on  the  hill,  swal- 
lowed, and  started  walking. 

Hope  Landrine,  a  black  lesbian- 
feminist  living  in  Cambridge,  MA.,  is 
working  on  a  novel  about  a  black  les- 
bian/feminist's conflicts  and  experi- 
ence with  psychosis.  She  is  also  pre- 
paring a  collection  of  feminist  short 
stories,  from  which  "The  Club"  is  ex- 
cerpted. 


Errata: 

Due  to  typesetting  and  proofreading  difficul- 
ties, the  following  inexcusable  errors  were 
made  in  the  article  by  Bertha  Harris,  "The  Les- 
bian: The  Worhnaker,  The  Leader"  in  Vol.  Ill, 
No.  4  (Leadership}  p.  16,  col.  2,  final  para- 
graph, first  sentence  should  read:  Patriarchy's 
most  dynamic  instance  of  ta  legomena  epi  tois 
dromenois^  (fhe  thing  said  about  the  thing 
done )  is  the  celebrated  drama  of  Fifth  century 
B.C.  Athens.  P.  21,  col  2,  line  4  should  read 
"(penis  as  womb)"  instead  of  "(penis  and 
womb)."  P.  22,  col.  1,  first  paragraph,  first  sen- 
tence should  read:  The  human  model  for  work- 
making,  therefore,  should  be  neither  the  uncon- 
sciousness of  the  mother  nor  the  consciousness 
of  the  father,  but  the  use  of  both  by  the  child  to 
make  first  herself,  then  the  work.  P.  24,  col.  2, 
final  paragraph,  line  5  should  read  "from  gen- 
der to  gender"  instead  of  only  "from  gender. " 
P.  25,  col.  1,  line  3  should  read:  "group-  and 
self-propelled  power. "  The  article  should  abo 
be  marked  ©  Copyright  Bertha  Harris,  1976. 


read 

off  our  backs      )* 

the  feminist  newscoumal 
ipuhlished  monthly 

Get  the  stories  that  most 
papers  wont  print--news  and 
analysis  from  a  feminist 
point  of  view. 

12  issues-$6  Canada-$7 

Institutions-$15     sample  copy-45(t 

off  our  backs,  1724  20th  St.  N.W. 
Washington,  D.C.  20009 


DUB-L-TAPE,  LTD.  presents  33-sixty  min- 
ute or  longer-unedited  cassettes  of 
workshops  from  this  year's  conference, 
March,  1976,  on  such  topics  as: 

•  The  Rights  of  Elderly 
Women 

•  Women  With  Power,  Their 
Problems  &  Perspectives 

•  The  Use  of  Social  Science 
Data,  Statistics  &  Experts 

•  What  Happens  When 
Women  Fight  Back 

•  The  Legal  &  Economic 
Problems  of  Unrecognized 
Families 

•  Plus  28  More  .  .  . 

Write  For  Free  Brochure  to: 

DUB-L-TAPE,  LTD. 

2000  P  Street,  N.W. 

Suite  310A 

Washington,  D.C.  20036 


44/Quest 


Bth  MQDN 

A  LITERARY  MAGAZINE  PUBLISHING  WOMEN  WHOEVER 
WE  CHOOSE  TUBE 

Poetry  •  Fiction  •  Reviews  •  Graphics 

13th  Moon  is  a 
literary  magazine  pub- 
1 ishing  qua! ity  work 
by  women.  Its  name  is 
derived  from  the  lunar 
calendar,  which  has 
thirteen  months.  It 
commemorates  the  time 
when  the  moon,  as  me- 
diator of  our  bodies ' 
rhythms,  was  the  sym- 
bol of  spiritual  transformation.  It  cele- 
brates the  opening  of  an  age  where  women 
have  all  their  energies  at  their  command. 

Our  current  double  issue  is  our  most 
ambitious  yet.  It  contains  short  stories 
(one  by  Alix  Kates  Shulman),  an  outspoken 
interview  with  concrete-conceptual  poet 
Amelia  Etlinger,  a  generous  selection  of 
photos  and  graphics,  an  extensive  books- 
received  section  of  small  press  books  by 
women,  and  poetry  by  Eve  Merriam,  Rochelle 
Owens,  Colette  Inez,  Karen  Swenson,  and 
others.  13th  Moon  is  128pp, squarebound. 

(  )  subscription  $4. 50/ individuals 
(  )  subscription  $9.00/institutions 
Name 


Address. 


Zip. 


13th  Moon  is  a  not- for-profit ,    tax-exempt 
organization, 

FO.BoxS  m  Inwood  Station  •  New  York,  N.Y  10034 


45 


DO  FEMINISTS 
NEED 

Marxism  ? 


By  JANE  FLAX 

graphics  by  Sylvia  Wallace 


In  the  past  three  years,  a  tendency 
has  emerged  called  socialist  feminism. 
Many  feminists  have  argued  that  it  is 
the  most  progressive  position  in  femi- 
nism today.* 

Socialist  feminism  is  not  a  precise 
term.  Those  who  consider  themselves 
socialist  feminists  include  female  so- 
cialists, women  who  consider  imperi- 
alism to  be  the  primary  contradiction, 
socialists  who  see  feminism  as  a  way 
of  organizing  women  into  the  class 
struggle,  and  women  who  see  patriar- 
chy** and  class  as  equal  and  (to  vary- 


*The  most  visible  organizational  manifesta- 
tion of  this  tendency  was  the  Socialist  Feminist 
Conference  held  at  Antioch  College  in  July, 
1975,  and  attended  by  1600  women.  See  Social- 
ist Revolution,  V:4  (X975),  and  Quest,  11:2 
(^975)  for  reports  and  criticisms  of  the  confer- 
ence as  well  as  position  papers  on  socialist  femi- 
nism. See  also  Socialist  Revolution,  IV:  1 
(Ji974)for  additional  articles  on  socialist  femi- 


** Patriarchy  means  here  a  system  of  power 
relations  whereby  men  dominate  women. 


ing  degrees)  independent  sources  of 
women's  oppression.  The  minimum 
area  of  agreement  seems  to  be  that 
Marxism  has  something  to  teach  us 
about  the  sources  and  maintenance  of 
women's  oppression  and  about  ways 
to  overcome  it.  On  a  theoretical  level, 
this  assumption  has  led  to  attempts  to 
integrate  feminism  into  Marxism  or  to 
reconceptualize  one  in  terms  of  the 
other.  1 

Feminists  have  received  strong  criti- 
cism from  both  male  and  female  Left- 
ists for  "dividing  the  working  class," 
making  bourgeois  "personal"  issues 
central  to  political  struggle,  and  so 
on. 

Perhaps  the  turn  to  Marxism  is  to 
some  extent  an  attempt  on  the  part  of 
feminists  to  show  that  they  too  can  do 
"real"  political  work  and  "real"  the- 
ory. It  may  be  a  way  of  showing  that 
it  is  "correct"  to  organize  women  be- 
cause they  do  produce  surplus  value 
(through  housework),  or  at  least  re- 
produce labor-power  which  is  the  pre- 
condition for  extracting  surplus  val- 
ue. Alternatively,  since  women  con- 
stitute an  expanding  segment  of  the 
working  class,  they  can  now  be  seen 
as  significant  in  the  organization  of  a 


^ /Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  sununer,  1976 


socialist  movement  (as  workers).  Or, 
socialist-feminism  allows  women  to 
argue  that  feminism,  because  it  focus- 
es on  process,  is  a  valuable  tool  for 
building  revolutionary  organizations 
or  revolutionizing  the  working  class. 

All  these  positions  implicitly  as- 
sume that  women's  lives  in  and  of 
themselves  have  little  or  no  revolu- 
tionary potential,  that  women's  ex- 
perience only  becomes  meaningful 
when  it  is  related  to  the  class  struggle, 
and  that  patriarchy  is  not  a  relatively 
autonomous  historical  force  which  al- 
so determines  the  character  of  social 
relations  and  human  history.  In  short, 
socialist  feminism  suggests  that  femi- 
nists have  raised  interesting  questions 
and  developed  forms  of  organization 
which  must  now  be  integrated  into 
ongoing  class  struggle. 

These  issues  are  considered  subor- 
dinate to  class  struggle  and  have  not 
been  taken  seriously  as  a  fundamental 
challenge  to  the  way  Marxists  under- 
stand politics  and  political  change. 
The  real  question  is  whether  we  ac- 
cept Marxism  as  the  correct  (if  flaw- 
ed) paradigm  for  comprehending  wo- 
men's oppression  or  instead  call  for 
the  development  of  a  new  mode  of 
analysis.  What,  if  anything,  can 
Marxism  as  it  stands  now  teach  us 
about  women's  oppression,  and  what 
is  the  utility  of  the  Marxist  method 
for  feminist  analysis? 

Problems  of  Orthodox  Marxism 

A  careful  examination  of  Engels' 
writing  can  point  up  the  weaknesses 
of  orthodox  Marxist  theory*** in  re- 

***The  term  "orthodox,"  here  means  a  sim- 
plistic, or  mechanistic  use  of  Marx. 


gard  to  the  analysis  of  women's  op- 
pression. I  will  not  restate  Engels'  ar- 
gument in  The  Origins  of  the  Family, 
Private  Property  and  the  State,^  but 
rather  I  will  list  seven  basic  problems 
with  his  argument  and  discuss  how 
these  problems  are  related  to  the  gen- 
eral nature  of  a  Marxist  approach. 
Furthermore,  I  will  show  that  Engels' 
own  theory  can  be  fully  comprehend- 
ed only  by  integrating  an  analysis  of 
patriarchy  with  his  work.  By  relying 
solely  on  a  history  of  changes  in  the 
mode  of  production,  Engels  ignores 
the  specific  history  of  women. 

First,  Engels  takes  a  sexual  division 
of  labor  for  granted.^  He  assumes  that 
labor  has  always  been  divided  on  the 
basis  of  sex  and  that  women  have  al- 
ways done  household  labor.  He  pro- 
vides no  explanation  for  why  this  is 
the  case,  and  moreover,  does  not  do 
justice  to  the  fantastic  variety  of  the 
content  of  work  done  by  women  and 
men;  as  recent  anthropological  work 
shows,  childcare  seems  to  be  the  only 
type  of  work  women  do  almost  uni- 
versally .^  A  more  concrete  analysis  of 
the  sexual  division  of  labor  in  differ- 
ent societies  would  have  highlighted 
one  crucial  fact:  whatever  women  do 
is  considered  less  valuable  than  what- 
ever men  do.^  The  orthodox  Marxist 
approach  has  not  explained  this  fact. 
Nor  does  Engels  explore  the  conse- 
quences for  men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren of  the  primary  responsibility  for 
childcare  falling  on  women. 

Second,  Engels  argues  that  wealth 
was  owned  by  the  gens'\  and  that  the 
gens  was  matriarchal  But  then,  how 
can  he  argue  that  cattle  became  pri- 

^As  used  by  Engeb,  "gens"  refers  to  a  circle 
of  blood  relations  in  the  female  line. 


Do  Feminists  Need  Marxism?  /47 


vate  property  of  men  because  they 
were  "heads"  of  these  families?^  Ac- 
cording to  more  recent  anthropologi- 
cal work,  agriculture  and  herding  de- 
veloped about  the  same  time,  so  that 
the  development  of  private  property 
in  cattle  could  not  in  itself  be  such  a 
radical  transformation  that  it  would 
lead  to  the  overthrow  of  mother-right 
(if  it  ever  existed). 

This  is  merely  one  concrete  instance 
of  the  larger  difficulty  of  assuming  the 
existence  of  a  matriarchal  society  and 
the  primacy  of  changes  in  property  re- 
lations. Engels  needs  a  matriarchy  so 
it  can  be  overthrown  by  men — not  as 
men  but  rather  as  owners  of  private 
property,  or  the  instruments  of  labor^ 
That  is,  the  course  of  history  depends 
on  changes  in  the  mode  of  production 
and  the  consequent  property  rela- 
tions, not  on  (or  as  well  on)  sexual- 
power  relations  or  the  mode  of  repro- 
duction. For  Engels,  the  family  be- 
comes part  of  the  superstructure  rath- 


er than  a  part  of  the  base.  He  recog- 
nizes the  centrality  of  the  "mode  of  re- 
production," but  fails  to  carry  out  the 
exploration  of  sexual  politics  required 
to  understand  it. 

Third,  also  along  these  lines,  if  cat- 
tle and  slaves  were  such  clear  signs  of 
wealth,  how  did  the  presumably  male 
heads  of  households  claim  them? 
Why  did  they  not  belong  to  women? 
"Custom"*  cannot  explain  why  these 
sources  of  power  could  so  easily  be 
appropriated  by  men. 

I  am  led  to  two  possible  conclu- 
sions: either  there  never  was  a  matri- 
archy (in  which  case  one  cannot  ex- 
plain the  oppression  of  women  solely 
on  the  basis  of  changes  in  production- 
property  relations),  or  the  overthrow 
of  matriarchy  was  a  political  as  well 
as  economic  revolution  in  which  men 
as  men  subdued  or  destroyed  the  pri- 
vileged (or  perhaps  equal)  position  of 
women  for  a  number  of  historically 
possible  reasons  (such  as  men  discov- 


48/Quest 


ering  their  role  in  reproduction  and/ 
or  asserting  control  over  reproduc- 
tion). 

Fourth,  why  should  inheritance  be 
such  a  crucial  issue  7*^  Engels  is  reading 
the  present  into  the  past.  In  gens  soci- 
ety, is  there  any  danger  to  children 
themselves  (would  they  be  outcast,  or 
not  be  taken  care  of),  or  is  illegiti- 
macy and /or  individual  inheritance 
even  a  meaningful  concept  in  a  matri- 
archal society?  Men  must  already 
have  been  feeling  excluded  from  the 
gens  and/or  from  reproduction,  since, 
as  Engels  states,  in  pre-monogamous 
marriage  systems,  only  the  mother  of 
the  child  could  be  known  with  cer- 
tainty.io 

Thus,  men  might  attempt  to  use 
children  as  a  means  of  claiming  power 
and  overcoming  exclusion,  promis- 
ing protection  in  return.  (As  feminists 
have  pointed  out,  this  is  one  of  the 
oldest  protection  rackets  around — 
women  and  children  are  guaranteed 
protection  by  the  aggressors — men.) 
Furthermore,  in  most  cultures,  only 
sons  can  inherit  property,  not  daugh- 
ters; thus  inheritance  can  be  seen  as 
another  way  of  keeping  power  and 
property  within  male  control  .^^  Alter- 
natively, inheritance  could  point  to 
the  possibility  that  women  and  their 
products  (children)  were  already  re- 
garded as  property.  Indeed,  Levi- 
Strauss  suggests  that  women  were  the 
first  form  of  property  and  were  traded 
out  of  their  clan  to  cement  relation- 
ships between  men  in  differing  clans. 
At  least  initially,  such  a  system  must 
have  been  instituted  and  maintained 
by  force. 

Fifth,  Engels  suggests  that  men 
wanted  their  own  children  to  inherit 
and  that  this  was  a  reason  for  over- 


throwing the  then  traditional  matri- 
lineal  order  of  inheritance.  But  what 
is  wrong  with  a  sister's  children  (or 
anyone  else)  as  inheritors?  There 
must  already  have  been  a  property/ 
patriarchal  system  in  which  children 
and  women  were  seen  as  a  special  sort 
of  property. 

This  is  where  the  concept  and  reali- 
ty of  patriarchal  privilege  become  im- 
portant. Men,  according  to  Engels, 
would  want  to  retain  the  power  and 
privilege  they  held  as  a  result  of  the 
original  division  of  labor.  Women's 
natural  interest  in  a  restricted  birth- 
rate (because  childbearing  is  danger- 
ous and  tiring)  would  oppose  men's 
interest  in  increasing  their  power  by 
increasing  the  amount  of  property  for 
trade  or  labor  available  to  them.  Re- 
stricting births  would  also  reduce 
men's  control  over  women  since  wo- 
men would  have  more  energy  for  ac- 
tivities other  than  child-birth  and 
child  rearing.  In  addition,  as  long  as 
women  have  children  at  home,  ser- 
vice to  children  spills  over  into  service 
to  the  man  (why  cook,  sew,  clean,  for 
example,  only  for  children).  Why 
would  anyone  want  to  give  up  these 
personal  services?  So  men  have  an  in- 
terest in  controlling  reproduction.  At 
this  point,  the  sexual  division  of  labor 
becomes  an  instrument  of  oppression. 

Sixth,  Engels  argues  that  the  over- 
throw of  mother  right  could  take 
place  through  a  simple  decree.  ^ 
Wouldn't  women  be  disturbed  by  be- 
ing transferred  out  of  their  gens  upon 
marriage,  thus  losing  a  crucial  source 
of  their  power?  How  and  by  whom 
could  a  "simple  decree"  be  issued  that 
descent  would  in  the  future  be  patri- 
lineal? Why  would  women  obey  it? 
Certainly   legal   doctrines   had   little 


Do  Feminists  Need  Marxism? /49 


meaning  in  this  era  and  would  have 
had  to  be  backed  by  other  forms  of 
power.  Again,  the  very  structure  of 
early  social  systems  seems  to  point  to 
force  being  used  by  men  against  wo- 
men, originally  for  control  over 
scarce  resources  (children)  and  later 
to  maintain  the  privileges  the  initial 
system  created. 

Finally,  why  did  shifts  in  inheri- 
tance of  property  bring  total  suprem- 
acy to  the  male?  Doesn't  this  view 
transfer  the  present  centrality  of  pri- 
vate property  back  to  "primitive" 
times?  Moreover,  there  is  no  reason 
to  think  that  property  owned  by  fam- 
ilies would  necessitate  or  lead  to  male- 
dominated  families.  The  existence  of 
male  domination  and  private  proper- 
ty cannot  be  explained  unless  we  pos- 
tulate a  whole  structure  of  society  in 
which  power  derives  from  and  is  ex- 
ercised by  males  as  well  as  by  a  prop- 
erty-based ruling  class.  All  men  are 
kings  in  their  castles,  no  matter  what 
or  who  they  are  in  the  King's  castle. 

In  short,  the  dynamic  which  Engels 
sees  centered  in  property  and  inheri- 
tance must  also  be  grounded  in  a 
struggle  for  power,  in  the  dialectic  of 
sex.  Changes  in  the  mode  of  produc- 
tion are  not  a  sufficient  explanation 
for  the  overthrow  of  mother-right. 
On  another  level,  even  though  it  is 
doubtful  that  a  matriarchy  ever  exist- 
ed, Engels  nonetheless  needed  to  pos- 
tulate one  so  that  he  could  paradoxi- 
cally avoid  following  out  the  implica- 
tions of  his  statement  about  the 
modes  of  production  and  reproduc- 
tion. Women  (communal  property) 
are  overthrown  by  men  (private  prop- 
erty): Engels  only  examines  property 
relations,  not  relations  between  men 
and  women,  and  hence  does  not  carry 


out  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  mode 
of  reproduction.  In  fact,  the  mode  of 
production  and  the  mode  of  repro- 
duction are  not  necessarily  in  har- 
mony, and  contradictions  can  be 
overcome  by  force,  by  the  mainte- 
nance of  patriarchy,  and  by  realign- 
ments of  the  family,  and  realignments 
within  the  family. 

Marx  acknowledges  this  when  he 
discusses  "the  natural  division  of  la- 
bor in  the  family. "^^  Marx  means 
"natural"  in  a  very  specific  sense,  i.e., 
"uncivilized."  "Natural"  is  the  oppo- 
site of  "social."  So  the  "natural"  divi- 
sion of  labor  in  the  family  must  be 
based  on  the  capacity  of  women  to 
bear  children,  and  since  they  bear 
them,  it  is  "convenient"  (Engels)  for 
them  to  also  raise  children.  Marx  ex- 
plicitly acknowledges  that  the  distri- 
bution of  labor  and  its  products  is  un- 
equal within  the  family  and  that  it  is 
unequal  because  the  man  has  control 
over  the  woman  and  children  and  can 
do  with  their  labor  and  reproductive 
power  what  he  wills. 

Property  is  the  power  of  control- 
ling others'  labor.^^  Marx  does  not  ex- 
plain how/why  men  got  this  power. 
Furthermore,  he  says  that  the  slavery 
latent  in  the  family  is  the  "nucleus"  of 
later  forms  of  property,  which  are 
just  higher  forms  of  essentially  the 
same  relation.  Although  the  question 
of  how  men  got  this  initial  power  is   ] 
still  unresolved,  its  existence  permits   ; 
men  to  gain  other,   more  extensive  i 
and  elaborate  forms  of  property  and  ( 
power.  Thus  we  can  argue  that  "patri-  , 
archal  privilege"  is  both  a  foundation 
for  ("primitive  accumulation"?)  and  . 
basis  of  men's  economic  power.  Once 
the  initial  act  of  expropriation  (wo-  < 
men  and  children  as  property)  is  car-  ; 


50/Quest 


ried  out,  men  can  use  their  differential 
power  bases  to  subordinate  other  men 
through  gift-giving,  wife-trading,  etc. 
To  destroy  men's  privileged  position 
in  the  family  means  to  take  control 
over  our  own  labor  power  and  thus  it 
is  analogous  to  removing  the  privilege 
of  appropriation  of  surplus  value 
from  the  capitalist. 

In  fact,  Marx  himself  seems  to  be 
making  a  similar  analogy  in  his  next 
paragraph  when  he  says: 
the  division  of  labor  offers  us  the  first 
example  for  the  fact  that  man's  [wo- 
man's] own  act  [childh earing,  labor 
for  the  man]  becomes  an  alien  power 
opposed  to  him  [her] — as  long  as  man 
[woman]  remains  in  natural  society, 
that  is,  as  long  as  a  split  exists  be- 
tween the  particular  and  the  common 
interest,  and  as  long  as  the  activity  is 
not  voluntarily ,  but  naturally  divi- 
ded. For  as  soon  as  labor  is  distribu- 
ted, each  person  has  a  particular,  ex- 
clusive area  of  activity  which  is  im- 
posed on  him  [her]  and  from  which  he 
[she]  cannot  escape}^ 

Translated  into  feminist  terms, 
Marx's  argument  means  that  patriar- 
chy is  a  form  of  individual  expropria- 
tion which  constricts  the  possibility  of 
developing  a  communal  form  of  soci- 
ety. The  man's  private  possession  of 
women  and  children  leads  to  the  anti- 
social form  of  private  and  privatistic 
families.  Nonetheless,  the  man  has  an 
interest  in  maintaining  this  form  of 
property;  he  benefits  directly  from 
this  inequality.  Furthermore,  women 
will  remain  enslaved  as  long  as  they 
are  subject  to  a  "natural"  as  opposed 
to  "social"  division  of  labor. 

Marx  does  not  point  out,  however, 
that  the  division  of  labor  has  different 
consequences  for  men  and  women. 


Men  go  outside  the  home;  the  family 
is  the  base  from  which  they  can  move 
out.  Women  remain  embedded  in  the 
family,  and  the  split  which  results 
from  the  sexual  division  of  labor  (par- 
ticular/common, private/public),  re- 
inforces the  powerlessness  and  exploi- 
tation of  the  woman  .^^  While  histori- 
cally neither  men  nor  women  can  es- 
cape their  exclusive  areas  of  activity, 
men's  sphere  has  expanded  and  in- 
creased in  importance  while  women's 
area  of  activity  (the  family)  has  de- 
creased in  importance.  Men,  having 
committed  the  first  act  of  expropria- 
tion and  having  accumulated  their 
first  property,  are  free  to  expand  their 
holdings  and  power.  Women  remain 
slaves. 

In  addition,  Marx  has  an  ambigu- 
ous view  of  the  family.  He  states  that 
"the  third  circumstance  entering  into 
historical  development  from  the  very 
beginning  is  the  fact  that  men  who 
daily  remake  their  own  lives  begin  to 
make  other  men,  begin  to  propogate: 
[they  create]  the  relation  between  hus- 
band and  wife,  parents  and  children, 
the  family.  "^^  Since  the  two  forms  of 
activity  to  which  Marx  refers — the 
production  of  material  life  (food,  clo- 
thing, shelter),  and  the  creation  of 
new  needs  which  arise  once  the  old 
ones  are  satisfied — are  constitutive  of 
human  history,  we  might  assume  that 
the  mode  of  reproduction  is  just  as 
important  as  the  mode  of  production 
itself.  Indeed,  in  the  paragraph  fol- 
lowing, Marx  calls  the  production  of 
persons  and  the  mode  of  cooperation 
which  accompanies  it  a  "productive 
force. "^^  Marx  implies  that  the  family 
could  be  treated  as  the  "mode  of  co- 
operation" with  which  the  production 
of  persons  is  allied.  At  the  same  time. 


Do  Feminists  Need  Marxism?  /51 


however,  Marx  says  that  the  family 
becomes  a  "subordinate"  relationship 
as  society  becomes  more  complex. 
This  would  imply  that  although  his- 
torically the  family  was  one  of  three 
aspects  of  historical  development,  it 
no  longer  retains  any  independence 
and  can  only  be  understood  as  a  sub- 
set of  some  more  central,  autono- 
mous aspect.  However,   Marx  does 


not  tell  us  here  what  the  family  be- 
comes subordinate  to  or  how  this  oc- 
curs—a typical  failing  of  Marxist  dis- 
cussions of  the  family. 

Finally,  any  mention  of  women  as 
women,  or  of  how  their  historical  de- 
velopment might  have  proceeded  dif- 
ferently from  men's  is  glaringly  ab- 
sent from  Marx's  discussion.  Indeed, 
this  absence  points  to  the  dangers  in- 


52/Qugsr 


herent  in  any  analysis  of  women's  op- 
pression which  relies  solely  on  a  his- 
tory of  the  changes  in  the  mode  of 
production.  Without  an  analysis  of 
patriarchy,  women  as  historically 
specific  beings  disappear. 

This  is  where  socialist  feminist  the- 
ory must  begin.  We  must  trace  the 
history  of  the  mode  of  reproduction 
and  its  changing  forms  of  social  coop- 
eration. We  must  work  out  the  rela- 
tion between  the  mode  of  reproduc- 
tion and  the  mode  of  production, 
with  special  attention  to  the  different 
experiences  of  women  and  men  with- 
in this  history  (the  dialectics  of  sex  as 
well  as  thedialectics  of  class). 

In  order  to  carry  out  such  an 
analysis,  we  must  overcome  the  sim- 
plistic determinism  we  have  inherited. 
(Marxists  have  their  equivalent  of  the 
Holy  Grail— the  search  for  the  contra- 
diction from  which  everything  else 
follows.)  An  analysis  of  the  mode  of 
reproduction  requires  considering 
psychological  and  sexual-political  di- 
mensions which  remain  almost  un- 
touched in  Marxist  literature. 

Patriarchal  Ideology  and 
Feminist  Theory 

Georg  Lukacs  shows  us  the  interac- 
tion between  self-interest  and  theoret- 
ical unclarity: 

The  hegemony  of  the  bourgeoisie 
really  does  embrace  the  whole  of  soci- 
ety in  its  own  interests  (and  in  this  it 
has  had  some  success).  To  achieve 
this  it  was  forced  both  to  develop  a 
coherent  theory  of  economics,  poli- 
tics, and  society  (which  in  itself  pre- 
supposes and  amounts  to  a  'Weltan- 
schauung) ,'t\  and  also  to  make  cons- 
cious and  sustain  its  faith  in  its  own 


mission  to  control  and  organize  soci- 
ety.-^^ 

His  words  apply  to  men's  protec- 
tion of  their  interests  as  well  as  to  the 
bourgeoisie.  Any  ruling  group  pro- 
tects its  hegemony  by  making  univer- 
sally valid  rules  out  of  currently  exist- 
ing relationships.  In  addition,  how- 
ever, the  ruling  group  must  develop  a 
clear  enough  grasp  of  reality  to  be 
able  to  control  and  manipulate  it.  A 
ruling  group  thus  claims  objectivity, 
but  only  elucidates  those  aspects  of 
relations  which  are  in  its  interest  to 
know.  For  example,  bourgeois  econo- 
mists could  develop  laws  of  the  mar- 
ket but  could  not  develop  the  Marxist 
labor  theory  of  value  or  the  concept 
of  surplus  value.  The  self-interest  of 
any  ruling  group  must  necessarily 
lead  it  to  ignore  the  deeper  contradic- 
tory aspects  of  reality  which  underlie 
the  immediately  given,  and  which 
provide  possibilities  for  revolt  and 
liberation. 

Lukacs  contrasts  the  bourgeoisie's 
need  for  mystification  to  the  proletar- 
iat's need  for  an  analysis  of  the  real 
social  relations  underlying  the  pro- 
duction and  exchange  of  things. 20  He 
adds  a  warning  that  is  as  relevant  to 
feminists  as  it  is  to  socialists: 
When  the  vulgar  Marxists  detach 
themselves  from  this  central  point  of 
view,  i.e.,  from  the  point  where  a 
proletarian  class  consciousness  arises, 
they  thereby  place  themselves  on  the 
level  of  consciousness  of  the  bour- 
geoisie. And  that  the  bourgeoisie 
fighting  on  its  own  ground  will  prove 
superior  to  the  proletariat  both  eco- 
nomically and  ideologically  can  come 
as  a  surprise  only  to  a  vulgar  Marx- 

^X'Weltcmschauung"  refers  to  a  world  view. 


Eto  Feminists  Need  Marxism? /53 


Feminists  must  understand  that  in 
order  to  maintain  their  hegemony, 
men  will  attempt  to  deny  or  obscure 
the  experiences  and  insights  of  wo- 
men who  challenge  their  privilege  and 
power.  Men  will  deny  that  they  have 
any  special  self-interest  because  in  or- 
der to  maintain  hegemony,  they  must 
insist  that  they  are  speaking  for  and 
acting  in  the  interest  of  society  as  a 
whole.  If  we  deny  the  lessons  of  our 
own  experience  and/ or  try  to  fit  that 
experience  into  categories  established 
by  men,  we  will  lose  both  the  mean- 
ing of  that  experience  and  our  strug- 
gle for  liberation  (men  cannot  be  beat- 
en on  their  own  ground). 

This  means  we  have  to  stop  "acting 
like  women,"  by  justifying  our  theory 
and  practice  to  men.  We  must  stop 
seeking  their  approval  of  what  we  do. 
In  particular,  we  must  stop  proving 
we  are  more  socialist  than  they. 

Men  do  not  have  a  monopoly  on 
truth.  Indeed,  their  self-interest  keeps 
them  from  seeing  the  totality.  The 
"personal  is  political"  because  our  ex- 
perience drives  us  both  to  understand 
and  to  transform  the  present  (indeed 
the  two  activities  must  be  aspects  of 
each  other,  integrally  connected).  If 
we  deny  our  own  experience,  if  we 
decide  a  priori  to  fit  those  experiences 
into  categories  which  others  have  de- 
cided are  politically  correct,  we  lose 
the  very  possibility  for  comprehend- 
ing and  overcoming  our  oppression. 

In  summary,  it  is  the  orthodox 
Marxists  who  have  been  insufficiently 
dialectical,  and  who  have  never 
adopted  the  standpoint  of  women. 
They  did  not  adequately  deal  with  the 
"woman  question,"  in  part  because 
they  never  really  explored  reproduc- 


tion as  a  crucial  moment  of  history — 
both  in  its  internal  relations  and  in  its 
relation  to  the  other  moments  of  his- 
tory. An  overly  deterministic  meth- 
odology which  focuses  exclusively  on 
production  in  the  narrowest  sense, 
will,  of  necessity,  ignore  women  and 
the  dialectic  of  sex  because  women's 
labor  often  takes  place  "outside"  the 
market.  Moreover,  determinism  leads 
one  to  focus  on  things  rather  than  on 
relations,  and  patriarchy  is  above  all 
a  social  relation. 

One  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that 
most  socialist  theorists  are  men.  It  is 
not  in  their  interest  to  acknowledge 
the  existence  of  patriarchy.  Engels' 
work  is  a  clear  example  of  the  distor- 
tions and  omissions  typical  of  ortho- 
dox Marxists.  After  the  opening  chap- 
ter of  the  Origins,  the  book  becomes 
an  analysis  of  the  changing  nature  of 
production.  Reproduction  and  the 
family  disappear,  "hidden  from  his- 
tory" indeed. 

Historically,  socialists  have  put  off 
women's  demands  until  "after  the  rev- 
olution," or  have  defined  women's  de- 
mands as  particularistic,  divisive  of 
the  working  class,  not  central  to  so- 
cialist revolution  or  society.  Again, 
we  must  ask:  who  defines  what  is  cen- 
tral and  what  is  not?  On  what 
grounds?  Working  class  demands  are 
defined  by  Marx  as  both  particular 
and  universal:  this  is  precisely  what 
defines  it  as  the  revolutionary  class. 
Working  class  demands  as  tradition- 
ally defined  by  Marxists  speak  to 
transforming  the  social  relations  of 
production.  We  women  must  speak 
to  the  question  of  reproduction,  be- 
cause in  that  realm,  as  well  as  in  pro- 
duction, our  labor  is  being  expropri- 
ated. 


5A/Quest 


Marxism  can  only  help  us  under- 
stand women's  oppression  if  it  is  radi- 
cally reconceptualized.  Specifically, 
we  must  develop  a  theory  of  social  re- 
lations, and  analyze  history  as  the  de- 
velopment of  social  relations. 

Marxism  can  help  us  understand 
one  aspect  of  social  relations:  that  be- 
tween the  exploiters  and  the  exploited 
in  the  realm  of  production.  (It  was  to 
understand  these  relations  that  Marx 
developed  categories  such  as  surplus 
value,  commodity  fetishism,  and 
class.)  Furthermore,  Marx  (and  He- 
gel) developed  a  method— dialectics 
—one  of  the  most  flexible  and  richest 
modes  of  social  analysis.  But  there  are 
other,  equally  important  aspects  of 
social  relations,  among  them,  rela- 
tions centering  around  reproduction. 
Despite  his  insistence  that  all  history 
is  rooted  in  concrete  human  beings, 
Marx  had  little  to  say  about  these 
other  relations.  The  categories  ade- 
quate for  comprehending  the  realm  of 
reproduction  have  yet  to  be  develop- 
ed; though  reproduction  and  produc- 
tion are  separate  but  inter-related 
spheres,  it  is  a  mistake  to  impose  cate- 
gories developed  for  the  comprehen- 
sion of  one  directly  onto  the  other. 

In  developing  these  new  categories, 
we  need  to  look  beyond  Marxist  the- 
ory. Psychoanalysis,  structuralism, 
and  phenomenology  have  provided 
many  valuable  possibilities  for  com- 
prehending the  reproduction  of  social 
persons,  but  they  often  lack  a  histori- 
cal dimension.  Freud  enables  us  to  be- 
gin to  understand  how  sex /gender 
comes  to  constitute  a  central  element 
of  our  very  being  as  persons.  Under 
patriarchy  we  do  not  become  a  per- 
son but  a  male  or  female  person.  In 
many  ways  our  gender  is  who  we  are 


and  this  identification  goes  far  deeper 
than  sex  roles  understood  in  the  sense 
of  socialization  or  intentional  (and 
easily  changed)  choices  of  roles  and 
behavior.  The  theory  of  the  uncons- 
cious, the  role  of  sexuality,  and  the 
Oedipus  complex  which  traces  out  on 
an  unconscious  level  the  conse- 
quences of  the  domination  of  the  fath- 
er— all  provide  a  starting  point  for  the 
analysis  of  the  social  relations  of  re- 
production. Structuralism  and  pheno- 
menology are  excellent  tools  for  ex- 
amining ongoing  social  relations 
without  falling  into  the  simple  deter- 
minism characteristic  of  orthodox 
Marxism. 

We  can  conceptualize  production 
and  reproduction  as  two  spheres  of 
human  life  and  history,  constituted 
by  the  social  relations  within  them 
and  by  the  relations  of  persons  to 
their  own  biology  and  to  the  natural 
world.  These  two  spheres  have  histor- 
ically been  related  to  each  other 
through  the  family.  For  this  reason, 
the  organization  of  the  family  reveals 
information  about  both  spheres,  and 
shows  us  the  attempts  people  are 
making  to  bring  these  spheres  into 
some  sort  of  harmony.  The  study  of 
the  family  can  also  reveal  the  contra- 
dictions between  the  demands  of  pro- 
duction and  reproduction.  The  more 
disjunctive  the  nature  of  production 
and  reproduction  become  (conceptu- 
alized by  Marx  as  the  difference  be- 
tween use  and  exchange  value,  and  by 
Freud  as  the  conflict  between  the  plea- 
sure and  reality  principles),  the  more 
possible  it  is  for  the  family  to  retain 
an  aspect  of  autonomy  and  unique- 
ness. The  categories  we  employ  must 
do  justice  to  these  disjunctions,  not 
submerge  them. 


Do  Feminists  Need  Marxism? /55 


sS 


I 


i^ 


56/Quest 


Conclusion 

As  feminists,  we  must  not  assume 
that  there  are  Marxist  answers  to 
feminist  questions.  Our  history  is  not 
the  same  as  men's — neither  on  an  in- 
dividual nor  on  a  collective  level.  Un- 
til we  understand  the  mode  of  repro- 
duction more  thoroughly,  we  cannot 
begin  to  bridge  the  often  dicussed  gap 
between  Marx  and  Freud.  To  compre- 
hend reproduction,  we  must  continue 
to  explicate  our  experience  with  the 
help  of  psychoanalysis,  structuralism, 
and  phenomenology.  This  is  not  to 
deny  the  interrelation  of  the  world  of 
production  and  reproduction,  or  to 
ignore  the  fact  that  we  are  shaped  by 
both— indeed  we  need  to  retain  con- 
sciousness of  this  inter-relatedness 
while  carrying  on  our  explorations. 
We  must  come  to  understand  how 
and  why  men  obtained  and  kept  pow- 
er over  women  and  how  this  power 
relation  varied  historically.  We  must 
explore  the  consequences  this  relation 
has  for  the  ways  we  are  constituted  as 
persons.  We  must  learn  how  power 
relations  interact  with  and  affect  rela- 
tions of  production.  Finally,  we  must 
discover  the  most  effective  sources  for 
change. 

Marxism  alone  cannot  answer  our 
questions.  But  if  we  retain  and  expand 
our  original  insights  into  our  experi- 
ence as  women,  we  will  be  operating 
within  the  spirit  which  originally  mo- 
tivated Marx— that  history  is  rooted 
in  human  needs  and  social  relations. 
By  confronting  Marxism  with  femi- 
nism we  require  an  overcoming,  a  re- 
taining of  the  old  within  the  new. 
What  we  will  create  will  be  neither 
Marxism  nor  psychoanalysis,  but  a 
much  more  adequate  form  of  social 


theory.  The  concepts  used  by  Marx, 
Freud,  and  others  are  only  guidelines 
along  the  way,  to  be  retained  in  a  new 
form  within  a  more  integrated  and  in- 
clusive theory.  For  now,  we  have 
only  glimpses  of  the  necessity  and 
possibility  of  such  a  theory,  through 
the  frustration  we  encounter  in  trying 
to  answer  feminist  questions. 

Footnotes 

This  paper  could  not  have  been 
written  without  the  ideas  and  discus- 
sion provided  by  Jessica  Benjamin, 
Jean  Elshtain,  Anne  Ferguson,  and 
Heidi  Hartmann.  However,  they  are 
not  responsible  for  the  final  result. 

1  Juliet  Mitchell,  Woman's  Estate  (New 
York:  Random  House,  1971),  Maragaret  Bens- 
ton,  'The  Political  Economy  of  Women's  Uher- 
ation/' Monthly  Review,  XXI:  4  (1969),  OiZar- 
etsky,  "Capitalism,  the  Family  and  Personal 
Uie,"  Socialist  Revolution,  III:  1-3  (1973),  and 
the  articles  on  women's  labor  inRadical  Ameri- 
ca, VII:  4-5  (1973)  all  insist  that  in  the  last  in- 
stance contradictions  luif/im  the  sphere  of  pro- 
duction are  the  crucial  determinant  of  women's 
status.  The  radical  feminists  emphasize  patriar- 
chy as  either  equal  to  class  or  as  the  first  form 
of  class  oppression  which  still  underlies  all 
forms  of  oppression.  See  Shulamith  Firestone, 
The  Dialectic  of  Sex  (New  York:  Bantam, 
1971),  and  Kate  Millett,  Sexual  Politics  (Gar- 
den City:  Doubleday,  1970),  as  well  as  Barbara 
Burris,  'The  Fourth  World  Manifesto,"  Notes 
From  the  Third  Year. 

2  Frederick  Engels,  The  Origins  of  the 
Family,  Private  Property,  and  the  State,  ed.  El- 
eanor Burke  Leacock  (New  York  International 
Publishers,  1972).  All  citations  from  Engels 
refer  to  this  edition. 

^Ibid.,  p.  119. 

4  See,  for  example,  Claude  Levi-Strauss, 
"The  Family,"  MflM,  Culture,  and  Society,  ed. 
Harry  Shapiro  (London:  Oxford  University 
Press,  nd)  for  the  varieties  of  work  done  by  wo- 
men in  primitive  cultures. 

5  See  Sherry  B.  Ortner,  "Is  Female  to  Male  as 
Nature  is  to  Culture?"  Women,  Culture,  and 


Do  Feminists  Need  Marxism? /57 


Society,  eds.  Michelle  Rosaldo  and  Louise  Lam- 
phere  (Stanford:  Stanford  University  Press, 
1974),  pp.  67-73. 

^  Karen  Sachs,  Women,  Culture,  and  Soci- 
efiA  eds.  Rosaldo  and  Lamphere,  pp.  211-212. 

^Engels,  op.  cit.,  pp.  119-120. 

^Ibid.,  p.  119. 

"^  Ibid.,  pp.  119-120. 

"^Olbid.,  p.  106. 

^1  Suzie  Olah,  "Impolite  Questions  about 
Frederick  Engels,"  A  Feminist  Journal  1:1 
(March,  1970),  p.  4. 

12  Engels,  op.  cit.,  p.  120. 

^^  Karl  Marx  and  Frederick  Engels,  'The  Ger- 
man Ideology,"  in  Lloyd  D.  Easton  and  Kurt  H. 
Guddat  (eds.)  Writings  of  the  Young  Marx  on 
Philosophy  and  Society  (Garden  Qty:  Double- 
day,  1967),  p.  424. 

^^Ibid. 

^^Ibid.,  (My  comments  in  brackets.) 


1^  For  an  elaboration  of  this  point  see  Rosal- 
do, "Theoretical  Overview,"  Women,  Culture, 
and  Society,  eds.  Rosaldo  and  Lamphere,  pp. 
23-42. 

l^Marx  and  Engels,  op.  cit.,  p.  424. 

^^Ibid.,  p.  421. 

l^Georg  Lukacs,  History  and  Class  Con- 
sciousness (Boston:  MIT  Press,  1971),  pp. 
65-66. 

2^ Ibid.,  p.  68. 

21  Ibid. 


Jane  Flax  teaches  political  science  at 
the  University  of  Massachusetts,  Am- 
herst, and  works  in  an  experimental 
living/ learning  community  there.  She 
has  been  an  active  feminist  for  many 
years. 


MAKARA 


PUBLISHED  BY  WOMEN.  FOR  PEOPLE. 
A  NEW  WEST  COAST  BI-MONTHLY 
MAGAZINE  PRESENTING  FEMINIST 
ALTERNATIVES,  IN  AN  EXCITING 
GRAPHIC  FORMAT. 


FICTION,   POLITICS,  INTERVIEWS,  CHILDREN,  HISTORY. 
ART,  ETC. 

SUBSCRIPTION:  CANADA  $6.00  ELSEWHERE  $7.50. 
MAKARA.      1011       COMMERCIAL      DRIVE,     VANCOUVER. 
B.C.  CANADA. 


5&/Quest 


▲ni^SIGNS 

m  Journal  of  Women  in  Culture  and  Society 

SIGNS:  JOURNAL  OF  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  AND  SOCIETY,  a  new 

quarterly  from  The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  is  an  international  voice 
for  scholarship  about  women. 

A  sampling  of  articles  from  the  first  volume: 

Carroll  Smith-Rosenberg,  The  Female  World  of  Love  and  Ritual:  Relations 

between  Women  in  Nineteenth-Century  America 

H^l^ne  Cixous,  The  Laughter  of  the  Medusa 

Marnie  Mueller,  The  Economic  Determinants  of  Volunteer  Work  by  Women 

Janet  M.  Todd,  Images  of  a  Feminist:  The  Biographies  of  Mary  Wollstonecraft 

Nancy  Tanner  and  Adrienne  Zihlman,  Women  in  Evolution:  Subsistence  and 

Social  Organization  in  Early  Hominids. 

James  A.  Brundage,  Prostitution  in  Medieval  Canon  Law 

In  every  issue: 

REVIEW  ESSAYS.  Regular  assessments  of  research  and  publications  on 
women  in  the  various  disciplines  and  professions.  A  different  group  of  related 
disciplines  is  covered  in  each  issue;  each  group  is  treated  once  annually. 
ARCHIVES.  Important  documents,  essays,  and  fiction  retrieved  from  the 
past,  accompanied  by  historical  notes  and  commentary. 
REPORTS/REVISIONS.  Notes  on  research-in-progress,  meetings,  new 
periodicals,  programs,  etc. 
BOOK  REVIEWS.  Concise  reviews  of  current  titles. 

A  SUPPLEMENTARY  ISSUE  in  Spring  1976:  Proceedings  of  the  Conference 
on  Occupational  Segregation  held  at  Wellesley  College  in  May  1975. 

Editor,  Catharine  R.  Stimpson,  Barnard  College 

Associate  Editors,  Joan  N.  Burstyn,  Douglass  College,  Rutgers  University; 

Domna  C.  Stanton, Barnard  College     Managing  Editor,  Sandra  M.  Whisler 


ORDER  FORM    ASi:«SIGNS 


Please  enter  my  subscription  for  one  year,  beginning  with  the  inaugural  issue. 
Autumn  1975. 

Institutions,  $16.00     Individuals,  $12.00     Students  (with  professor's 
signature),  $9.60      Outside  the  United  States,  add  $1 .00  to  cover  postage. 

Name  

Address  

City    State   Zip   

Mail  with  your  check  or  purchase  order  to: 

SIGNS:  JOURNAL  OF  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  AND  SOCIETY 

The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  11030  Langley  Avenue, 
Chicago,  Illinois  60628 


Do  Feminists  Need  Marxism?  /59 


Critique  &  Commentary  ^i 


By  JEANNE  HORBACH  HSU 


Gracia  Clark  in  "The  Beguines:  Medieval  Women's  Communities" 
(Vol.  I,  No.  4  Quest)  brings  out  much  fascinating  information  on  this  lit- 
tle known  organization  of  pious  women  living  a  communal  life  according 
to  their  own  rules.  She  traces  their  history,  their  struggles  for  indepen- 
dence and  identity,  and  she  gives  a  good  description  of  life  in  the  medie- 
val beguinages  and  the  beguines'  role  in  the  community.  She  leaves  them 
at  the  end  of  the  14th  century,  when  the  Church  is  finally  successful  in  en- 
forcing the  beguines'  obedience  to  a  supervising  friar.  From  that  point, 
the  once  independent  communities  "declined  sharply  into  charity  homes 
and  sheltered  workshops." 

This  last  remark  could  not  be  more  to  the  point.  The  beguines  did  sur- 
vive until  the  present  times,  but  they  offer  a  different  picture  from  what 
was  true  in  the  Middle  Ages.  I  was  very  surprised  to  read  of  their  inde- 
pendent spirit  because,  in  the  popular  mind,  their  image  has  become, 
with  some  justification,  that  of  fairly  cloistered  women,  active  in  taking 
care  of  the  poor,  the  sick  and  the  elderly,  and  addicted  to  time-consum- 
ing ancient  crafts  such  as  lacemaking,  where  the  pay  is  not,  and  cannot 
be,  commensurate  with  the  time  and  skill  required.  As  has  happened  so 
many  times,  the  established  powers  managed  to  bring  a  self-sufficient 
group  back  into  line  by  reducing  its  members  to  their  "proper"  roles  (as 
women)  of  auxiliaries,  caretakers  of  the  poor,  the  sick  and  the  elderly. 

Most  historians  agree  that  the  Beguines'  movement  was  the  strongest 
in  what  is  now  Belgium.  It  probably  started  in  the  southern  French-speak- 
ing part  of  the  country  in  the  12th  century.  Curiously  enough,  the  begui- 
nages remaining  now,  and  which  can  still  be  visited,  are  all  located  in  the 
northern  Flemish-speaking  part  of  the  country.  At  one  time  there  were  as 
many  as  ninety-four  beguinages  dotting  the  country.  Twenty  of  them 
still  remain. 

The  beguinages'  history  after  the  middle  ages  has  not  always  been  a 
peaceful  one.  During  the  devastating  wars  of  the  16th  C,  the  beguines 
often  had  to  disperse  and  go  back  to  a  lay  life.  In  the  17th  C,  during  a 
peaceful  period,  many  of  the  beguinages  were  rebuilt  (most  of  the  extant 
buildings  are  of  that  period)  and  beguines  gathered  once  again.  At  the 


60/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  summer,  1976 


time  the  French  Revolutionary  armies  swept  over  Europe,  their  proper- 
ties, assimilated  to  Church  property,  were  confiscated,  and  their  houses 
used  as  shelters  for  destitute  families.  Later,  some  of  them  were  returned 
to  their  previous  owners,  and  Napoleon,  recognizing  the  usefulness  of 
the  beguinages,  gave  permission  for  them  to  reorganize  and  to  keep  a 
wall  around  their  compounds.  During  the  1815  campaign,  ending  with 
Napoleon's  defeat  at  Waterloo,  near  Brussels,  the  beguines  took  care  of 
the  wounded  and  the  sick  with  great  devotion.  They  were  also  cited  for 
their  exemplary  behavior  during  a  cholera  epidemic  in  1832.  During  the 
19th  C,  several  attempts  to  instill  a  new  life  into  the  beguines  movement 
were  made,  but  without  much  success.  Now,  in  the  late  20th  C,  beguin- 
age  as  a  movement  has  almost  disappeared.  Only  in  Ghent  (the  Small 
Beguinage  or  Klein  Begijnhof  of  Our  Lady  of  Ter  Hoy)  is  communal  life 
still  practiced  by  approximately  sixty  women.  In  Bruges,  since  1934,  Ben- 
edictine nuns  have  been  occupying  the  beautiful  grounds.  They  have 
somewaht  modified  their  habits  to  resemble  the  old  dress  of  the  ancient 
beguines  and  the  tourist  can  get  the  feeling  of  old,  walking  around  the 
square  and  the  narrow  cobbled  streets.  One  can  even  visit  a  typical  be- 
guine's  room  or  apartment. 

Other  beguinages  are  used  differently,  as  cultural  centers  in  Diest  or  in 
Hasselt;  low  cost  housing,  as  in  Tongeren;  or  old  people's  homes  in  many 
others,  even  student  housing  in  Lou  vain.  Most  contain  at  least  a  small 
museum;  the  site  and  the  buildings  are  protected  as  historical  and  artistic 
monuments  and  efforts  are  made  to  preserve  their  character.  Two  years 
ago,  the  Belgian  government  called  for  a  commemoration  of  beguinages 
and  abbeys;  a  new  guide  was  published,  where  I  found  much  of  the  infor- 
mation cited  here. 

To  the  visitor,  a  beguinage  offers  the  aspect  of  a  small  town,  surround- 
ed by  a  wall,  with  the  gates  closing  at  night.  Small  houses,  sometimes 
with  a  garden  in  front,  line  the  immaculate  cobblestone  streets.  A  church 
occupies  the  center.  The  individual  houses  used  to  belong  to  the  wealthier 
beguines  who  kept  control  of  their  property,  while  the  poorer  women 
had  a  room  in  the  convent  or  collective  house.  "La  Grande  Dame,"  who 
managed  the  community,  lived  in  the  "Grande  Maison." 

Gracia  Clark  has  touched  upon  their  role  in  the  community  as  teachers 
and  examples,  and  has  described  their  organization,  each  house  having 
its  own  rules  and  its  own  emphasis.  The  beguinages  were,  in  troubled 
times,  a  haven  where  spiritual  and  intellectual  pursuits  were  still  possible. 
They  are  still  inspiring  places  to  visit,  filled  with  a  strong  sense  of  self-suf- 
ficiency and  community.  The  art  treasures  they  have  preserved  leave  no 
doubt  as  to  the  quality  of  life  within  those  walls. 

Jeanne  Horback  Hsu,  bom  and  educated  in  Belgium,  has  taught  high 
school  French  and  just  received  a  Master  in  Library  Sciences  from  the  U. 
of  Ca.,  Berkeley. 


Critique  and  Commentary /61 


Alphabet  Soup 

Wbmen  and  Mixed  Movements 


^"p 

\ 

c^u^^ 

Ntf 

h^ 

,   V 

h'' 

F 

S*^^ 

fl* 

4t          ^^ 

'h 

€Q                C 

o.<? 

# 

J 

iv  e 

%^ 

0 

>  ''' 

^\    ^ 

/• 
^ 

''is            cf 

4> 

ft 

c 

t  .. 

^4 

* 

*^  C 

\> 

62/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  s 

iummer,  1976 

By  PEG  AVERILL 

graphics  by  Jacky  English 

I  Peg  Averill  serves  on  the  Political 
'  Council  of  the  Mass  Party  Organizing 
{  Committee,  and  is  acting  editor  of  its 
1  NIC  women  newsletter.  She  helped 
\  found  Art  for  People  in  Washington, 
I  D.C.  and  is  a  contributing  artist  for 
Liberation  News  Service.  She  argues 
that  Left  political  organizations  are 
being  affected,  both  directly  and  indi- 
rectly, by  feminist  developments.  She 
also  notices  a  cross-fertilization  be- 
tween feminists  new  to  political  work 
as  such  and  women  new  to  feminist 
politics.  This  process  is  encouraging 
more  and  more  women  to  struggle 
with  the  questions  which  go  to  the 
heart  of  the  rationale  for  mixed  Left 
politics — questions  of  class,  race,  sex, 
constituencies  and  survival  organi- 
zing for  new  power  bases.  Averill 
views  the  mixed  Left  as  neither  pre- 
dominantly white  nor  predominantly 
male.  It  is  made  up  of  people — partic- 
ularly poor  and  minority  people — 
who  for  a  long  time  have  been  active 
in  their  own  communities  on  a  variety 
of  levels.  She  includes  in  the  Left  all 
progressive  forces,  that  is,  any  strug- 
gle which  looks  beyond  liberalism. 

Q.  Recognizing  that  more  and 
more  women  are  participating  in  po- 
litical organizations  which  include 
both  men  and  women,  can  you  dis- 
cuss what  there  is  available  for  wo- 
men? 

A.  There  are  two  ways  to  look  at 
what's  available  for  women  in  mixed 


Left  organizations.  First,  there's  survi- 
val—together we  all  have  a  better 
chance  to  save  our  skins.  Secondly, 
we  can  increase  the  probability  for 
change.  The  only  real  chance  for 
change,  it  seems  to  me,  lies  in  more 
principled  unity  among  a  variety  of 
groups. 

Q.     What  about  acquiring  skills? 

A.  One  important  skill  is  recog- 
nizing, assessing,  and  developing  our 
own  leadership  potential— which  is 
essential  for  any  organization.  In  par- 
ticular, in  the  Mass  Party  Organizing 
Committee,  we  have  made  it  a  priori- 
ty to  get  women  to  play  a  larger  role 
in  leadership,  in  active  participation 
in  mixed  work,  while  trying  to  put  to- 
gether today's  survival  skills  and 
struggles  with  a  socialist  vision  of 
where  we  are  trying  to  go... some- 
thing that  can  provide  a  functioning, 
working  vehicle  for  oppressed  people 
in  this  country.  This  is  not  paternalis- 
tic, but  is  an  effort  to  make  sure  wo- 
men share  in  what's  going  to  happen. 

Q.  That's  interesting,  especially 
since  developing  leadership  is  also  a 
priority  to  many  sections  of  the  femi- 
nist movement.  How  does  this  occur 
in  mixed  organizations? 

A.  Women  need  to  recognize 
where  their  leadership  potential 
comes  from — whether  it's  from  politi- 
cal participation,  their  experience  of 
the  women's  movement,  or  their  per- 
sonal backgrounds.  For  example,  I  be- 
lieve that  class  and  race  exert  a  unique 
kind  of  influence  on  leadership  devel- 
opment. A  lot  of  dirt-poor  and  work- 
ing-class women  who  became  active 


Alphabet  Soup:  Women  and  Mixed  Movements/63 


in  civil  rights  and  other  community 
struggles  did  so  only  as  a  last  form  of 
resistance  and  survival.  The  courage 
of  these  women  could  fill  volumes 
and  has  hardly  made  the  history 
books.  Leadership  for  them  is  simul- 
taneously survival  and  resistance.  It's 
the  healthy  and  necessary  response  of 
people  who  find  their  options  limited 
or  even  non-existent.  For  better-edu- 
cated and  more  economically  secure 
women,  leadership  is  more  a  matter 
of  personal  preference,  moral  princi- 
ple, and  ego. 

I'm  not  saying  this  to  cut  down 
other  women,  but  it  seems  to  me  we 
must  be  really  clear  about  the  differ- 


ing widths  of  survival  margins  of  dif- 
ferent women,  and  the  immense  influ- 
ence this  has  on  our  ways  of  living 
and  working.  It  seems  quite  logical 
that  where  there  isn't  a  real  personal 
urgency,  the  reasons  for  moving,  for 
trying  to  find  a  solution  or  even  just 
some  temporary  relief,  tend  to  be 
more  introspective  and,  well,  intellec- 
tual. The  less  the  need  for  an  analysis 
or  action  of  some  kind,  the  more  in- 
tellectual and  leisurely  leadership 
tends  to  be.  A  middle  class  or  better- 
off  woman  of  good  intentions  can  rec- 
ognize the  seriousness  of  a  given  prob- 
lem but,  particularly  in  mixed  organi- 
zations, she  may  still  hold  back  her 


(A/Quest 


ideas  out  of  fear  of  being  wrong,  or 
sounding  bossy,  or  being  misinterpre- 
ted as  egotistic  or  unnecessarily  ag- 
gressive. Women  facing  grave  situa- 
tions tend  not  to  care,  or  not  to  be 
able  to  afford  to  care  so  much  about 
image  and  timing.  So,  a  woman's  past 
history  and  needs  will  determine 
whether  and  how  she  exercises  leader- 
ship. Certainly  there  is  the  likelihood 
that  some  poor  women  will  not  exer- 
cise leadership — initiate  action — be- 
cause they  don't  feel  as  well  educated 
or  as  verbally  effective  in  presenting 
their  ideas.  But,  at  the  point  a  woman 
looks  at  the  problems  and  determines 
to  risk  herself  by  offering  leadership 
in  initiating  or  accelerating  struggle,  I 
would  say  it  comes  from  a  real  gut 
commitment — a  survival  understand- 
ing and  a  refusal  to  lie  down  and  die, 
a  decision  to  resist  psychologically 
and  politically.  Class  and  race  are  ter- 
rible, powerful,  effective  weapons 
which  keep  people  divided.  These  are 
weapons  which  keep  real  struggle — 
which  means  active  leadership  from 
the  oppressed— at  a  low  level.  And 
they're  weapons  which  have  worked 
effectively  for  a  long  time. 

Q.  How  about  an  example  of  wo- 
men's political  participation?  Where 
have  you  seen  that  develop  into  wo- 
men's leadership? 

A.  Well,  I'd  use  China  as  an  ex- 
ample because  it  allows  for  a  more  ex- 
panded vision  of  the  possibilities.  .  . 
free  of  capitalism.  .  .as  a  frame  of  ref- 
erence. The  women  there  believe  that 
the  Party,  the  revolution,  and  the 
country  are  theirs,  and  always  refer 
to  "our  party,  our  country,"  etc.  It 
must  be  great  to  feel  that  way  I  They 


know  that  it  was  their  blood  spilled  to 
build  it.  They  went  to  prison,  they  or- 
ganized, they  did  whatever  it  took  to 
pull  it  off.  There's  no  sense  of  intimi- 
dation or  disassociation  or  disowning 
the  crucial  role  they  played,  whether 
it  was  under  male  leadership  or  not. 
The  Chinese  women  we  talked  with  in 
Shanghai  pointed  out  that  when  they 
became  involved  in  revolutionary  ac- 
tivities, there  was  no  precedent  what- 
soever for  women  being  leaders.  So, 
of  course,  they  had  male  leadership, 
but  the  male  leadership  encouraged 
women  to  develop  their  own  skills,  to 
take  initiative — both  because  it  was 
their  right  and  because  the  revolution 
could  not  be  won  without  them.  Uni- 
versally, it  seems,  poor  women  are 
born  with  a  sixth  sense  for  surviving 
and  finding  ways  of  making  it.  In 
many,  many  instances  it  was  women 
who  organized  women  to  participate 
and  fight  at  every  level,  whether  it 
was  foraging  for  food  or  throwing 
grenades  or  carrying  the  wounded. 
They  clearly  connect  their  struggles  as 
women  and  as  revolutionaries.  Ap- 
plying that  experience  to  the  United 
States,  I  felt  upon  returning  here  that 
so  many  women  in  the  Left  who  join- 
ed the  women's  movement  had  dis- 
owned the  fantastic  contributions 
they  made  in  the  anti-war  and  other 
movements.  We  did  accomplish  some- 
thing of  worth  in  this  country  during 
those  years.  If  nothing  else,  there  was 
a  lot  of  consciousness  raised  on  all 
fronts  and  we  should  be  proud  of 
what  we  did  to  build  that.  Those  acti- 
vities, too,  are  part  of  the  history  and 
development  of  activist  women. 

Q.     What  about  the  influences  of 
the  women's  movement?  You  men- 


Alphabet  Soup/65 


tioned  that  feminism  also  was  impor- 
tant in  influencing  women's  leader- 
ship potential  in  mixed  organizations. 

A.  The  women's  movement  is 
having  a  cumulative  effect  on  mixed 
organizations  in  promising  ways. 
Some  of  the  women  who  courageous- 
ly initiated  (or  attempted  to)  feminist 
perspectives  early  on,  helped  to  alter 
the  entire  political  environment,   to 


make  possible  more  input  and  leader- 
ship— and  not  only  on  the  Left.  Even 
women  in  the  liberal  parties  have  be- 
gun to  flex  their  political  muscle,  and 
to  make  waves.  Who  could  have  pre- 
dicted the  "Women  make  policy,  not 
coffee!"  buttons  worn  by  well-dressed 
women  inside  the  1972  Democratic 
Convention  while  others  wore  sister- 
hood buttons  in  the  streets  outside? 
And  some  of  those  women,  once 
started,  are  going  to  refuse  to  stop 
growing  politically. 

This  is  also  affecting  many  men 
who  have  decided  to  stop  and  take 
stock  of  what's  going  on.  All  this  ob- 
viously affects  process,  openness  to 
new  approaches,  and  the  ability  to  re- 
spect and  really  hear  the  input  of  wo- 
men. It  puts  an  emphasis  on  educating 
oneself  on  the  so-called  women's  is- 
sues— like  sterilization — so  these  is- 
sues become  part  of  all  demands.  This 
makes  it  easier,  more  supportive,  to 
work  with  women's  groups  within 
mixed  organizations.  In  the  MPOC, 
we  have  a  name  for  it — dualism — 
which  means  that  party  building  and 
other  organizational  affiliation  a- 
round  women's  issues,  or  racial  or 
ethnic  concerns,  can  be  worked  on  si- 
multaneously. It  can  mean  either  par- 
allel, organizational  and/ or  personal 
commitments.  Clearly,  this  opens  up 
a  lot  of  possibilities  for  coalitions. 

Q.  What  kinds  of  coalitions  do 
you  think  can  work? 

A.  There  are  two  kinds  of  coali- 
tions which  can  be  very  important 
right  now.  First,  there  are  local  survi- 
val coalitions  that  can  be  made  up  of 
radicals  and  reformers  (and  some- 
times non-reformers)  at  least  in  the 


66/Quest 


beginning.  These  can  be  coalitions 
formed  around  specific  issues— food 
stamp  cutbacks,  for  instance.  Such  lo- 
cal survival  coalitions  can  build  into  a 
second  kind  of  coalition— a  network. 
There  are  a  number  of  these  around, 
which  focus  on  survival,  party  build- 
ing, or  anti-imperialist  issues. 

Unified  action  is  becoming  increas- 
ingly important.  That's  why  a  party, 
to  unify  all  these  struggles,  is  so  im- 
portant on  the  Left.  Although  the  wo- 
men's movement  has  begun  selective 
organizing  around  some  key  issues 
and  developed  some  good  local  mo- 
dels for  work,  the  problem  remains 
that  given  the  complex  and  interre- 
lated issues,  we  aren't  strong  enough 
— divided — to  deal  with  them  ade- 
quately. There  is  also  a  growing 
awareness  in  the  women's  movement 
that  capitalism  creates  conditions 
which  keep  feminist  solutions  from 
being  developed.  The  awareness  of 
the  accelerating  decline  of  capitalism, 
and  the  subsequent  increase  in  econo- 
mic and  political  repression,  bring 
feminists  ever  closer  to  the  position 
that  while  socialism  may  not  be  total- 
ly synonymous  with  women's  libera- 
tion, capitalism  makes  it  impossible. 
I'm  willing  to  bet  that  fact  will  contin- 
ue to  influence  the  relationship  be- 
tween the  women's  movement  and 
the  mixed  Left. 

Q.  What  are  the  reasons  women 
are  coming  into  mixed  political  orga- 
nizations, especially  women  who 
have  been  working  in  women's 
groups? 

A.  Women  who  are  entering,  or 
re-entering  the  mixed  Left  from  wo- 
men's unions  or  other  kinds  of  femi- 


nist groups,  seem  to  want  to  broaden 
the  nature  of  the  struggles  they  are  in- 
volved in,  particularly  in  terms  of 
class  and  race.  They  want  to  do  this 
while  keeping  a  primary  focus  on  wo- 
men and  women's  issues.  In  that 
sense,  I'd  say  the  women's  movement 
is  very  important — providing  a  new 
consciousness,  a  new  sense  of  rooted- 
ness,  but  also  creating  a  need  to  un- 
derstand more  fully  the  class  and  race 
bias  which  underpins  this  country.  I 
feel  really  good  about  the  leadership 
and  direction  I've  seen  these  women 
exercise,  and  I've  learned  a  lot  watch- 
ing them  do  it.  I've  been  impressed  by 


Alphabet  Soup/67 


their  honesty  and  candidness  in  ad- 
mitting to  race  and  class  ignorance 
and  a  commitment  to  work  at  it. 
These  women  have  a  clear  confidence 
in  their  leadership  abilities;  they  have 
an  awareness  of  the  limitations  of  the 
women's  movement,  but  in  no  sense 
do  they  think  the  women's  movement 
has  failed  them.  And  most  do  not  see 
themselves  as  having  left  the  women's 
movement. 

Generally,  I  see  a  tendency  toward 
unity  that  is  characteristic  of  this  peri- 
od of  the  U.S.  Left.  People  seem  to  be 
making  greater  efforts  to  pull  together 
and  to  begin  principled  compromise 
to  achieve  more  cohesion  and  do 
more  effective  work.  I'm  not  implying 
that  the  demands  of  women  fall  into 
the  category  of  those  to  be  shelved 
until  after  the  revolution,  but  clearly 
there  are  aspects  that  need  to  be  de- 
veloped and  worked  out  in  the  con- 
text of  a  more  diverse  struggle. 

Q.  What  are  the  problems  wo- 
men face  working  in  mixed  organiza- 
tions? 

A.  There  are  a  lot  of  frustrations 
right  now.  There  is  a  lot  of  divisive- 
ness,  and  there  is  a  tendency  to  relate 
primarily  to  male  political  figures.  In 
addition,  for  women  who've  worked 
only  with  women  from  similar  race 
and  class  backgrounds,  dealing  with 
women  (as  well  as  men)  from  differ- 
ent races  and  classes  can  be  threaten- 
ing. While  certainly  some  women's 
organizations  include  people  from  dif- 
ferent race  and  class  backgrounds  and 
not  all  mixed  organizations  do,  it  can 
be  a  problem.  For  example,  when 
MPOC  began  to  work  with  Black 
construction  workers  in  New  York,  it 


took  time  to  understand  and  relate  to 
what  they  were  saying.  There  were 
class /race /sex  and  experiential  differ- 
ences. But  we  have  found  ways  of 
working  together.  Racism  is  some- 
thing everyone  is  trying  to  deal  with 
in  that  setting.  Sexism  is  certainly 
there,  but  the  women's  movement  has 
had  an  impact.  For  example,  one  of 
the  black  construction  workers  was 
trying  to  find  ways  for  men's  and  wo- 
men's caucuses  to  communicate,  in 
part  because  he  thought  that  the  wo- 
men's caucus  was  doing  important 
things,  and  he  wanted  to  learn  from 
them.  This  is  not  to  say  that  sexism  is 
being  adequately  dealt  with,  but  once 
people  are  committed  to  doing  some- 
thing, they  can  begin  to  move  beyond 
the  problem. 

Q.  Can  we  talk  about  women's  is- 
sues? There  are  disagreements  among 
feminist  groups  on  what  makes  an  is- 
sue feminist.  In  your  opinion,  what 
are  the  issues  that  directly  affect  wo- 
men? And  how  are  these  issues  han- 
dled by  mixed  Left  organizations? 

A.     Personally,  I  see  women's  is- 
sues first  as  questions  of  survival,  and 
second,  as  questions  of  power.  I'm  de- 
fining power  as  people's  energy  in  a       j 
formal  and  informal  sense.  Survival 
comes  first,  because  I  don't  think  you 
can  get  to  power  without  survival. 
Part  of  survival,  aside  from  having  a       \ 
place  to  live,  something  to  eat,  some-      \ 
thing  to  feed  your  kids,  to  get  clothes      : 
on  them — is  getting  basic  information      | 
on  things  like  nutrition.  Another  part      I 
of  that  survival  has  got  to  be  building      l 
knowledge  and  tools  for  change.  Ty-      j 
ing  the  concept  of  survival  skills  with      I 
women's  issues  in  mixed   organiza-      i 


68/Quest 


tions  brings  several  examples  to  mind. 
Work  around  unemployment  and 
strike  support,  compensation  delays 
and  cutbacks,  and  new  restrictions  on 
government  programs,  all  of  which 
affect  the  lives  of  poor  and  working- 
class  women.  This  is  especially  impor- 
tant since  many  women  are,  for  a  var- 
iety of  reasons,  the  economic  heads  of 
families.  Generally,  I  would  say  these 
survival  areas  are  the  main  organizing 
thrust  of  the  mixed  Left  at  present, 
with  unity  building  efforts  a  close  sec- 
ond. 

In  both  these  areas,  feminist  organ- 
izations and  activities  have  shown 
mixed  groups  which  issues  are  the 
most  viable  areas  in  which  to  begin 
work,  and  have  helped  to  develop 
and  publicize  tools  people  need  to 
fight  their  own  battles.  And,  of 
course,  whenever  you  have  a  tool 
that  is  a  badly-needed  tool  for  wo- 
men, it  is  a  badly-needed  tool  for  al- 
most any  poor  or  oppressed  people. 

Q.  What  do  you  see  as  immediate 
future  tasks  for  the  Left  generally— 
both  women's  organizations  and  mix- 
ed groups? 

A.  Basic  education  is  going  to  de- 
termine the  success  of  our  organizing. 
During  the  Vietnam  war,  we  talked 
about  educating  people,  and  then  it 
was  seen  as  a  liberal  way  of  not  doing 
anything.  But  really  it  was  fundamen- 
tal to  moving  forward.  People  saw 
education  as  less  important  than  or- 
ganizing, but  you  really  do  build  on 
analysis.  People  can't  be  organized 
unless  they  already  have  a  basic  anal- 
ysis of  what  the  problems  are.  Where 
community  organizing  or  wider  or- 
ganizations are  being  built,  they  rest 


on  what  was  done  in  the  past  to  edu- 
cate people.  There's  an  old  saying 
that  children  are  raised  by  the  values 
of  their  grandparents.  I  think  this  is 
true  politically  as  well.  We  are  just  be- 
ginning to  know  enough  radical  his- 
tory to  make  a  difference.  It  is  only 
now  being  recorded  and  presented  on 
a  wide  scale.  That's  why  the  20's  and 
30's  are  so  important.  It  isn't  that  no- 
thing went  on  before,  but  that  those 
years  are  a  really  important  time  for 
us  to  build  on. 

Left  organizations — whether  all 
women  or  women  and  men — need  to 
accept  and  build  on  small  gains,  need 
to  not  be  discouraged,  and  need  to 
gear  for  the  long  haul.  The  whole 
thing  really  has  to  be  understood  in 
terms  of  increasing  the  probability  of 
change.  Our  success  will  depend  on 
people  making  a  long-term  commit- 
ment and  working  to  develop  higher 
levels  of  struggle.  We  have  to  keep 
fighting,  to  develop  women's  cau- 
cuses which  will  pressure  mixed  or- 
ganizations to  get  political  results  for 
women,  and  which  will  encourage 
broader  participation  from  more 
women.  If  women  have  to  leave  mix- 
ed organizations  again,  then  everyone 
is  lost.  Part  of  this  turns  on  how  men 
respond,  but  women  have  a  larger 
role  to  play  than  men,  just  as  Black 
and  other  Third  World  people  have  a 
larger  role  in  making  progress  on  im- 
portant issues.  We  all  have  been  un- 
der-represented, and  each  group  has 
unique  contributions  to  make — con- 
tributions which  have  gone  unrecog- 
nized and  unrecorded — and  it  is  these 
unique  contributions  that  will  make 
the  difference  in  building  mass  organ- 
izations and  instilling  the  belief  that 
revolution  is  possible. 


Alphabet  Soup/69 


^  d^Ae^fwle^ 


By  CAROL  ADAMS 

graphics  by  Claudia  Vess 


"Remember,  I  pray  you,  the  famous 
women  of  former  ages. " 

Mary  Astell,  1694. 

"What  the  woman  thought  is  not  re- 
corded, any  more  than  the  lion  has 
erected  a  statue  to  the  victim  in  the 
hunt. " 

Charlotte  Perkins  Gilman,  1914. 

"Documents  originate  among  the 
powerful  ones,  the  conquerors.  His- 
tory therefore  is  nothing  but  a  compi- 
lation of  the  depositions  made  by  as- 
sassins with  respect  to  their  victims 
and  themselves. " 

Simone  Weil,  1943. 

"Justice  and  Injustice  are  administered 
by  their  Hands:  Courts  and  Schools 
are  filled  with  Sages;  'tis  Men  who 
dispute  for  Truth,  as  well  as  Men  who 
argue  against  it:  Histories  are  writ  by 
them,  they  recount  each  others  great 
exploits,  and  have  always  done  so. " 
Mary  Astell,  1706. 

Winners  have  always  told  their 
stories;  those  who  were  defeated  lost 
not  only  the  battle,  but  their  voices, 
denied  even  the  ability  to  articulate 
their  pain  and  suffering.  Throughout 
recorded  history,  women  have  voiced 
their  experiences,  sometimes  pointing 
to  women's  oppression  and  labelling 


70/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  1,  summer,  1976 


©Copyright  Carol  Adams,  1975. 


te 


o 


"^ex 


male  hegemony  as  "patriarchy." Their 
perceptions  have  been  lost  to  us;  his- 
torians have  failed  to  see  these  analy- 
ses, or  worse  yet,  have  perverted,  dis- 
torted, mistranslated,  obscured  or  de- 
stroyed the  words  of  their  victims.  At 
the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and 
again  today,  a  strong  interest  in  our 
history  has  catapulted  us  into  seeking 
through  musty  old  libraries,  searching 
through  attics  and  basements,  and 
talking  to  our  mothers  and  grand- 
mothers in  hopes  of  reconstructing 
our  hidden,  denied  experiences. 

One  of  the  frustrations  which  be- 
sets an  enterprising  feminist  scholar  is 
that  women  often  had  only  an  oral 
tradition,  talking  while  quilting  or 
watching  the  children.  Writing  was  a 
hazardous  occupation;  when  women 
pursued  it  they  often  spent  their  ener- 
gy hiding  their  work.  Our  history  is 
most  likely  found  by  reading  recipe 
cards,  gravestones,  diaries,  old  wives 
tales,  and  dedications  to  men's  books. 

This  paper  will  probe  the  historical 
exclusion  of  women  by  examining  the 
history  of  one  woman,  Mary  Astell. 
For  us  to  insure  a  future  where  women 
are  taken  seriously,  we  must  begin  to 
take  ourselves  and  our  foremothers 
seriously.  By  examining  what  hap- 
pened to  Mary  Astell,  perhaps  we  can 
learn  of  the  pitfalls  we  must  avoid. 

Mary  Astell's  Writings 

Mary  Astell  wrote  at  the  end  of  the 
seventeenth  and  the  beginning  of  the 
eighteenth  centuries.  While  most  of 


her  books  and  essays  are  addressed  to 
fiery  controversies  of  her  time  which 
have  since  lost  their  vitality,  two  of 
her  books  are  early  feminist  treatises 
which  could  have  importance  today, 
if  they  were  available. 

Mary  was  a  well-educated,  unmar- 
ried woman,  who  held  a  salon  that  at- 
tracted many  educated,  progressive- 
thinking  women  of  the  upper  class. 
Her  contact  with  these  women  pushed 
her  to  examine  the  problems  of  wo- 
men, concentrating  on  the  need  for 
education  and  economic  indepen- 
dence. Her  first  work,  A  Serious  Pro- 
posal to  the  Ladies,  appeared  in 
1694  and  concerns  itself  with  ques- 
tions of  marriage,  education  and  inde- 
pendence. Women's  ignorance  was 
acquired,  she  claimed,  not  natural. 
"The  cause  therefore  of  the  defects  we 
labour  under  is,  if  not  wholly,  yet  at 
least  in  the  first  place  to  be  ascribed  to 
the  mistakes  of  our  education,  which 
like  an  Error  in  the  first  Concoction 
spreads  its  ill  influence  thro'  all  our 
Lives. "^  She  argued  fervently  and  pas- 
sionately that  women  have  better 
things  to  do  with  their  time  than  con- 
cern themselves  with  fashions  or  men. 
"We  value  them  (men)  too  much,  and 
ourselves  too  little  if  we  place  any 
part  of  our  worth  in  their  opinion, 
and  do  not  think  ourselves  capable  of 
Nobler  things  than  the  pitiful  con- 
quest of  some  worthless  heart. "^  To 
remedy  this  she  proposed  the  estab- 
lishment of  an  academic  institution 
for  women. 

Some  Reflections  Upon  Marriage 


She  Wrote  as  One  Who  Loved  Her  Sex/71 


published  in  1700,  continued  to  ex- 
plore these  ideas.  After  outlining  the 
duplicity  and  selfishness  which  influ- 
ence men's  choice  in  marriage,  she 
stated,  "a  woman,  indeed  can't  prop- 
erly be  said  to  choose,  all  that  is  al- 
low'd  her,  is  to  refuse  or  accept  what 
is  offer'd."^  In  describing  the  marriage 
relationship  Mary  continually  used 
slave  imagery,  referring  to  man's  do- 
minion and  tyranny,  women's  sub- 
mission and  martyrdom. 

Hinting  that  marriage  was  a  curse 
for  women  and  that  women  needed 
economic  independence,  proved  too 
controversial.  She  was  attacked  from 
all  sides.  The  divine  ordination  of  wo- 
men's subjugation  was  one  of  the 
most  frequently  invoked  arguments 
to  refute  her  statements.  This  particu- 
larly enraged  Mary,  a  very  religious 
woman,  and  in  her  preface  to  the 
third  edition  of  her  book  she  made 
her  strongest  feminist  statements.  She 
queried,  "If  'all  men  are  born  free', 
how  is  it  that  all  women  are  born 
slaves?"^  She  bemoaned  that  "women 
are  not  so  well  united  as  to  form  an 
Insurrection.  They  are  for  the  most 
part  Wise  enough  to  love  their  chains, 
and  to  discern  how  very  becomingly 
they  set. "5 

In  a  later  book,  Mary  Astell  sum- 
marized her  position: 
"Most  of,  if  not  all  the  Follies  and 
Vices  that  women  are  subject  to  [for  I 
meddle  not  with  the  Men]  are  owing 
to  our  paying  too  great  a  deference  to 
other  People's  judgements,  and  too 
little  to  our  ok;m.  "^ Women  deciding 
for  themselves,  taking  their  lives  into 
their  own  hands,  becoming  indepen- 
dent— these  were  Mary  Astell's  vi- 
sions. In  her  own  life  she  influenced 
many  women  of  her  time  to  follow 


step.  In  the  late  1720's  she  convinced 
her  friends  to  begin  a  charity  school 
for  poor  girls  in  Chelsea;  it  opened  be- 
fore she  died.  Some  girls  today  are  re- 
cipients of  scholarships  from  the 
money  bequeathed  by  Mary's  friends 
to  the  school.  Her  actions,  like  her 
thoughts,  live  on  for  us  today. 

Surprised  by  her  insights,  haunted 
by  her  visionary  statements,  startled 
by  her  harsh,  militant  language,  frus- 
trated and  enraged  by  the  great  si- 
lence around  her,  I  wanted  to  know 
why  I  had  never  learned  about  her 
writings.  I  was  astonished  by  the 
number  of  books  which  do  mention 
her,  disappointed  by  the  lack  of  un- 
derstanding these  writings  display  of 
her,  and  provoked  by  the  insensitive 
way  in  which  we  as  feminists  have  re- 
searched history. 

Historical  View  of  Mary  Astell 

The  first  contemporary  recognition 
of  Mary  is  found  in  John  Evelyn's 
Numismata,  published  in  1697  and 
before  she  produced  most  of  her  writ- 
ings. George  Ballard  wrote  the  first 
biography  of  her  and  included  it  in  his 
Memoirs  of  Several  Ladies  of  Great 
Britain.  He  hoped  to  bring  public 
awareness  of  women  who  "have  been 
passed  by  in  silence  by  our  greatest  bi- 
ographers." ^  Ballard,  writing  just 
twenty  years  after  her  death,  relied  on 
a  friend  of  hers,  the  great  Anglo-Sax- 
on scholar  Elizabeth  Elstob,  for  most 
of  his  information;  he  could  find  few 
written  sources.  Much  of  the  informa- 
tion he  gathered  about  her  is  mythical 
in  content  but  was,  as  the  years  pass- 
ed, taken  as  fact.  After  describing  the 
birth-place  and  "genteel"  education  of 
"this  great  ornament  of  her  sex  and 


72/Quest 


country",  his  language  flowers  in  ef- 
fusive declarations  of  her  concern  for 
her  sex.  He  accurately  describes  A 
Serious  Proposal  to  the  Ladies,  but 
then  the  myths  begin.  Basing  his  in- 
formation on  a  supposed  relative  of 
hers,  he  claimed: 

"When  she  has  accidentally  seen  need- 
less visitors  coming,  whom  she  knew 
to  be  incapable  of  discorsing  upon  any 
useful  subject,  she  would  look  out  of 
her  window,  and  jestingly  tell  them 
(as  Cato  did  Nasica)  "Mrs.  Antell  is 
not  at  home,  '  "  and  in  good  earnest 
keep  them  out,  not  suffering  such  trif- 
lers  to  make  inroads  upon  her  more 
serious  hours. "^  As  this  story  became 
perverted  through  the  years,  one  his- 
torian writing  in  1974  claims  that 
Mary  Astell  was  a  "man-hating  re- 
cluse."^ 

Another  myth  which  begins  with 
Ballard  is  that  her  motive  in  publish- 
ing Reflections  Upon  Marriage  "was 
her  disappointment  in  a  marriage  con- 
tract with  an  eminent  clergyman. "i° 
He  used  this  explanation  to  dismiss 
her  "warmth  of  temper"  in  her  discus- 
sion of  marriage  for  she  "carried  her 
arguments  with  regard  to  the  birth- 
rights and  privileges  of  her  sex  a  little 
too  far."i^  However,  he  acknowl- 
edged that  Reflections  Upon  Mar- 
riage, as  well  as  the  Preface  to  the 
third  edition,  "make  perhaps  the 
strongest  defence  that  ever  yet  ap- 
peared in  print,  of  the  rights  and  abili- 
ties of  the  fair  sex."^  Considering  his 
expertise  on  women's  writings,  this  is 
a  statement  not  to  be  taken  lightly. 

Mary  is  complimented  by  Ballard 
for  her  "piety,  charity,  humility, 
friendship,  and  all  the  other  graces 
which  adorn  the  good  Christian."  The 
result  of  this  extolling  of  her  Christian 


virtues  is  that  her  piety  and  self-sacri- 
fice, feminine  characteristics  par  ex- 
cellence, displace  her  feminist 
thoughts,  and  leave  one  with  an 
image  of  a  severe,  devout,  straight- 
laced  woman,  rather  than  an  angry, 
articulate  feminist. 

Imitations  and  outright  plagiarisms 
of  Ballard's  work  appear  for  the  rest 
of  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  cen- 
turies, and  slowly  Mary's  eccentrici- 
ties start  to  outnumber  her  thoughts 
on  women's  positions. 

In  1803,  Eccentric  Biography:  or 
Memoirs  of  Remarkable  Female  Char- 
acters, appeared.  While  Ballard  at- 
tempted to  make  known  the  "very 
many  ingenious  women  of  this  na- 
tion, who  were  really  possess'd  of  a 
great  share  of  learning,  "^^  the  author 
of  Eccentric  Biography  hoped  to  in- 
struct the  female  mind  by  pointing 
out  the  contrast  of  virtuous  women 
with  evil  ones.  Once  again  "the  emi- 
nent clergyman"  conveniently  disap- 
points Mary,  and  so  we  need  not  put 
too  much  stock  in  her  demands.^^  Bal- 
lard has  seen  her  as  an  "eminent  wo- 
man," whereas  later  writers  consider- 
ed her  increasingly  freakish,  her 
greatest  eccentricity  being  her  defense 
of  the  female  sex. 

A  Critical  Dictionary  of  English  Lit- 
erature and  British  and  American 
Authors,  published  in  1859,  reached 
the  height  of  condescension  about 
Mary  and  her  clergyman.  The  author, 
S.  Austin  Allibone,  stated  once  again, 
that  Reflections  Upon  Marriage  re- 
sulted from  Mary's  disappointment  in 
a  marriage  contract.  Allibone  then  in- 
correctly attributes  Six  Familiar  Es- 
says Upon  Marriage,  Crosses  in  Life, 
Love  and  Friendship  to  her,  and  adds 
his  condolences:    "Poor  Maryl   Still 


One  Who  Loved  Her  Sex/73 


harping  upon  that  gay  deceiver!" ^^ 
This  trivialization  of  her  works  af- 
firms Sheila  Rowbotham's  assertion 
that  an  individual  woman  who  is  a 
spokeswoman  for  the  freedom  of  all 
women  "is  an  amusing  incongruity,  a 
titillating  commodity,  easily  con- 
sumed."^^  In  just  one  hundred  years 
from  the  time  of  George  Ballard, 
Mary  Astell's  concerns  about  women 
had  been  diminished,  distorted,  con- 
sumed, and  spewed  forth  in  perverted 
interpretations  by  the  English  chroni- 


ed  directly  from  a  book  on  women 
throughout  the  ages,  frequently  with- 
out close  attention  being  paid  to  the 
contents.  It  was  disappointing  that 
when  Mary  Astell  was  mentioned, 
her  proposal  for  a  school  and  her  fem- 
inist statements  were  not  mentioned. 
Her  writings  were  discussed  as  relat- 
ing chiefly  to  "religious  controver- 
sy."^^ This  lack  of  historical  knowl- 
edge is  all  the  more  frustrating  since 
both  Anthony  and  Stanton  had  a 
strong  sense  of  history.  They  reprint- 


clers  (all  male):  her  piety  glorified, 
her  dissatisfactions  dismissed. 

The  first  reference  to  Astell  by  a 
woman  that  I  could  find  is  in  Sarah 
Hale's  Women's  Record,  or,  Sketches 
of  Distinguished  Women,  from  the 
'Beginning'  till  A.D.  1850.  Much  of 
what  is  said  about  Mary  is  taken  from 
Ballard.  However,  no  discussion  is 
made  of  her  feminist  thoughts.  All 
give  way  to  a  description  of  her  piety, 
chastity,  humility,  friendship,  and  ab- 
stemious nature. 

The  Revolution,  Susan  B.  Antho- 
ny's and  Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton's 
short-lived  publication,  often  used 
short  descriptions  of  worthy  women 
for  filler.  It  is  obvious  that  the  des- 
criptions of  these  women  are  excerpt- 


ed Mary  Wollstonecraft's  Vindication 
of  the  Rights  of  Women  because  it 
was  out  of  print,  collected  and  pub- 
lished their  monumental  History  of 
Women's  Suffrage  to  insure  that 
when  they  died  the  story  of  that  strug- 
gle would  not;  and  each  worked  on 
her  own  memoirs.  They  recognized 
that  if  they  did  not  record  their  his- 
tory, no  one  else  would.  Although 
Astell's  works  were  widely  available 
in  England,  I  can  find  only  one  men- 
tion of  her  in  the  nineteenth  century 
English  feminist  movement,  an  article 
in  the  Westminster  Review  in  1898. 

I  had  hoped  that  one  of  the  militant 
suffragettes  would  cry  out  "remember 
Mary  Astell".  Mrs.  Mcllquhan  in 
Westminster  Review  did,  in  the  most 


7^/Quest 


striking,  sympathetic,  and  under- 
standing of  all  the  essays  I  have  read. 
While  there  are  a  few  inaccuracies, 
she  grasped  the  spirit  of  Mary  Astell's 
writings,  and  tried  to  share  them  with 
her  readers.  She  argued  that  Mary  As- 
tell  should  be  considered  as  important 
as  Mary  Wollstonecraft  in  the  devel- 
opment of  feminist  thought.  After 
pointing  out  Mary's  use  of  sarcasm 
and  cynicism,  Mrs.  Mcllquhan  sum- 
med up  what  was  most  important 
about  Mary  Astell  in  a  moving  eulo- 
gy: 

"But  less  by  her  'piercing  wit  than  by 
her  warmth  of  heart  will  Mary  Astell 
be  tenderly  remembered.  Her  own 
words  were  'She  wrote  as  one  who 
loved  her  sex. '  She  led  the  way  for  the 
ever-increasing  procession  of  women 
who  walk  through  life  having  their 
chief  desire  to  work  as  women  who 
love  women,  and  to  give  services  to 
ennoble  womanhood,  though  in  their 
lives  they  may  be  very  much  misun- 
derstood, and  their  services  ignored 
and  almost  forgotten,  like  those  of 
Mary  Astell.  "^^ 

Except  for  Ballard  and  Mrs.  Mcll- 
quhan, the  authors  of  books  on  wo- 
men worthies  are  transparently  pa- 
tronizing. It  is  insulting  that  over  and 
over  again,  the  arrogant  presumption 
is  that  one  book  can  contain  all  of  the 
important  facts  about  women  in  his- 
tory. But  perhaps  the  more  damaging 
assumption  was  that  the  authors 
could  decide  who  were  "worthy  wo- 
men". Of  course,  the  women  who 
were  chosen  fit  the  authors'  concepts 
of  what  a  woman  should  be,  and  they 
often  were  women  who  Mary  Astell 
would  say  were  "wise  enough  to  love 
their  chains."  It  is  a  truism  that  we 
find  in  history  what  we  want  to  find. 


In  the  past,  women  who  fulfilled  so- 
ciety's strictures  on  women  were  ex- 
tolled. So,  Mary's  life  was  adapted  to 
fit  these  restraints.  As  we  seek  to  free 
women  from  these  restricting  labels, 
we  must  be  careful  not  to  fall  into  the 
same  pitfalls  by  simply  substituting 
our  own  designations.  The  task  of  the 
feminist  historian  should  be  one  of  ex- 
ploding images,  roles,  concepts,  so 
that  we  neither  have  to  label  Mary  a 
conservative,  an  educator,  or  a  femi- 
nist, but  instead  allow  her  words  and 
thoughts  to  speak  for  themselves. 
Once  historians  label  her,  box  her 
into  a  specific  role,  then  they  need  not 
explore  her  life  further.  This  is  the 
most  damaging  result,  which,  in  turn, 
breeds  neglect  and  misunderstanding. 

When  feminists  probe  no  further 
than  secondary  sources,  we  get  an  in- 
complete picture  of  Mary.  One  solu- 
tion to  the  problem  of  misinterpreta- 
tion, misunderstanding,  and  misin- 
formation about  Mary  Astell  would 
be  to  reprint  her  works  in  order  to 
make  them  more  widely  available. ^^ 
Then  more  complete  studies  of  her 
writing  could  appear.  Current  schol- 
arship might  clear  up  disagreements 
and  varying  interpretations.  Research 
on  her  could  also  correct  the  sloppy 
work  that  has  gone  previously  un- 
challenged for  lack  of  primary 
sources. 

What  we  must  do  is  closely  exam- 
ine the  time  before  Mary  Wollstone- 
craft and  explode  the  myth  that 
"Mary  Wollstonecraft  started  the  mo- 
dern feminist  movement."  Eleanor 
Flexner  in  her  biography  of  Mary 
Wollstonecraft  recognizes  Mary  As- 
tell as  a  forerunner,  but  believes  that 
Wollstonecraft  had  no  knowledge  of 
Mary  Astell,  because  Wollstonecraf  t's 


One  Who  Loved  Her  Sex/75 


writings  were  experiential  in  nature.^ 
Yet,  it  is  impressive  that  many  of 
Mary  Wollstonecraft's  thoughts  are 
anticipated  by  Mary  Astell.  Like  As- 
tell,  she  saw  education  as  the  means 
to  achieving  personal  freedom  and 
self-respect.  The  concept  of  founding, 
initiating,  and  starting,  is  a  male  con- 
cept. Why  do  we  think  that  modem 
begins  with  the  French  Revolution? 
Has  women's  history  and  experience 
ever  paralleled  men's?  The  very  peri- 
odization  of  history  is  based  on  men's 
experience,  not  women's.  And  when 
we  are  informed  that  things  are  im- 
proving, isn't  the  concept  of  evolution 
as  linearly  progressive  a  male  fabrica- 
tion? Do  women  think  naturally  in 
cycles?  We  delude  ourselves  in  think- 
ing that  we  are  a  recent  movement, 
especially  as  more  and  more  facts 
about  protests  prior  to  1792  are 
uncovered.  How  much  is  still  hidden, 
or  worse  yet  destroyed,  to  keep  us 
from  knowing  how  rebellious  our  sis- 
ters in  the  past  were?  We  find  it  hard 
to  believe  that  anyone  wrote  such 
radical  statements  as  Mary  Woll- 
stonecraft's as  long  ago  as  the  1790's; 
what  then  are  the  implications  of  pro- 
tests in  the  1690's?  And  earlier  still? 
Slowly  the  boundary  is  being  pushed 
further  and  further  back. 

There  is  a  strain  of  feminist  theory 
that  believes  that  women  have  steadi- 
ly been  losing  ground  as  the  years 
progress.  In  the  nineteenth  century 
Matilda  Joslyn  Gage  marshalled  facts 
to  prove  her  thesis  that  Christianity 
brought  about  women's  subjugation. 
Gage,  and  Elizabeth  Gould  Davis,  al- 
most one  hundred  years  later,  point 
to  facts  showing  that  before  patriar- 
chy gained  control  there  was  a  matri- 
archy in  which  women  ruled.  Davis 


argues  that  when  patriarchy  became 
the  norm,  women  slowly  lost  their  in- 
fluence and  power  and  that  Christian- 
ity dealt  the  death-blow.  Joan  Morris 
has  criss-crossed  Europe  summoning 
facts  from  woodworks  and  grave- 
stones to  prove  that  women  held  pow- 
erful positions  in  the  church  in  the 
early  medieval  period,  and  that  there 
has  been  a  steady  decline  since  that 
time.  These  analyses  place  the  fact 
that  Mary  Astell  wrote  one  hundred 
years  before  Mary  Wollstonecraft  in 
another  light.  History  can  serve  as  a 
reminder  that  what  we  have  gained 
was  won  after  a  long  hard  fight,  and 
that  it  isn't  solidly  guaranteed  to  us. 
Just  as  we  fight  over  and  over  again 
for  the  same  things,  repeating  the 
same  claims,  so  we  write  the  same 
things  over  and  over  again.  We  have 
not  yet  sufficiently  begun  to  build  on 
our  tradition.  If  other  books  had  re- 
tained currency,  I  would  not  have  to 
duplicate  their  efforts  to  claim  for 
Mary  Astell  a  place  in  herstory.  So 
much  of  our  efforts  are  duplicating 
studies  already  done.  Mary  Astell 
sinks  back  into  oblivion,  as  do 
women's  histories,  as  do  women  in 
real  life —  erasure  is  their  common 
lot.  Mary  Astell's  history  and  reputa- 
tion are  the  reification  of  women's 
lives.  How  many  times  will  we  invent 
the  wheel  before  it  starts  rolling?  How 
do  we  insure  that  it  doesn't  stop? 

Susan  B.  Anthony  and  Elizabeth 
Cady  Stanton  understood  that  it  was 
only  with  a  strong  feminist  movement 
that  women  have  a  history.  Florence 
Smith  also  recognizes  this  connection, 
remarking  in  1916  that  only  as  a 
result  of  women's  activism  had  stu- 
dents turned  "back  to  the  pioneers. "^^ 
Activism  and  scholarship  go  hand  in 


76/Quest 


hand— feeding  and  supporting  each 
other.  Both  concern  themselves  with 
rescuing  women  from  the  status  of 
"non-data".  As  we  struggle  to  be  free 
we  are  strengthened  and  energized  in 
our  knowledge  of  women  from  our 
past.  For  they  dreamt  our  dreams  for 
us  and  we  are  their  spiritual  daught- 
ters. 

Afterward 

"If  truth  is  not  to  be  found  on  the 
shelves  of  the  British  Museum,  where 
I  asked  myself,  picking  up  a  notebook 
and  a  pencil  is  truth?"22  Hera-worship 
drives  one  to  strange  desires.  Bertha 
Harris  describes  how  she  followed 
Djuna  Barnes  down  the  streets  of 
New  York  so  as  to  experience  what  it 
was  like  to  be  a  Lesbian  in  the  twen- 
ties in  Paris .24  And  I,  I  wanted  to  go 
to  the  British  Museum,  like  Virginia 


Woolf,  to  stand  under  "the  vast 
dome",  and  find  books  about  women, 
by  women.  Away  with  male  scholars 
doing  our  history — I  would  pick  up 
where  Virginia  Woolf  had  left  off, 
and  find  more  women  in  our  past 
who  wrote  about  their  experiences. 
Women  who  lived  at  any  time  before 
Mary  Wollstonecraft  would  do;  I 
wanted  to  explode  forever  the  con- 
cept that  with  Mary  Wollstonecraft 
the  feminist  movement  began.  So,  I 
walked  through  Bloomsbury,  aware 
of  Virginia  Woolf  striding  behind  me, 
encouraging  me  to  go  faster  through 
the  streets  which  were  dirtier  and 
more  crowded  than  when  she  had 
lived  there.  I  entered  through  the 
swing  doors  of  the  British  Museum 
Reading  Room  and  "went  to  the  coun- 
ter. .  .took  a  slip  of  paper.  .  .opened  a 
volume  of  the  catalogue,  and.  .  .^, 
looked  up  "biography."  Hadn't  Vir- 


Qne  Who  Loved  Her  Sex/77 


ginia  Woolf  always  referred  to  "bio- 
graphy" for  data,  for  information  to 
learn  women's  thoughts?  Yes,  it 
would  be  biography  for  me. 

There  wasn't  much  that  was  prom- 
ising, mainly  biographical  collections 
of  famous  men.  Turning  page  after 
page,  carefully  reading  each  listing,  I 
spotted  Eccentric  Biography:  or  Mem- 
oirs of  Remarkable  Female  Charac- 
ters. I  wrote  the  name  down,  handed 
it  in,  and  went  to  a  desk  to  await  the 
appearance  of  this  enticingly-entitled 
book.  My  thoughts  wandered  to  Vir- 
ginia Woolf;  maybe  she  had  sat  at  this 
very  desk  and  requested  the  same 
book.  I  daydreamed  about  her  day- 
dreams and  saw  women  circling 
around,  joining  arms,  transcending 
the  different  ages... the  book  arrived. 
I  slowly  perused  the  book,  reading 
about  the  different  women.  I  stopped 
when  I  read  about  the  life  of  Mary  As- 
tell.  Here  she  was  I  The  woman  I  had 
waited  to  find!  She  had  feminist  de- 
sires, shared  her  learning  with  other 
women,  freeing  them  from  their  fol- 
lies, and  her  writings  went  so  far  as  to 
be  threatening  in  their  militancy  to 
whomever  had  compiled  this  volume 
of  eccentrics.  Her  anger,  her 
'warmth',  had  to  be  explained  away 
as  a  result  of  disillusionment  with, 
and  disappointment  by,  a  man.  Oh, 
she  sounded  wonderful — strong  and 
dedicated,  unmarried,  visionary,  as- 
sertive of  her  rights... a  hundred  years 
before  Mary  WoUstonecraft! 

I  ran  to  my  friend,  seated  M3,  no 
longer  thinking  about  what  Virginia 
Woolf  would  have  done.  I  gesticula- 
ted and  jumped  around  in  my  enthu- 
siasm, the  recipient  of  indignant 
stares  from  male  scholars,  who  were 
being  disturbed  by  this  excitement. 


the  evidence  of  life  in  this  stodgy, 
stuffy  repository  of  male  thought.  My 
friend  nodded  in  agreement  to  my  ra- 
pidly-fired questions.  'Tes",  she  said, 
"this  woman  should  be  recovered 
from  oblivion."  This  paper  is  that  res- 
cue expedition. 


HnoKs  OK  nsr  feminist  and  lesbian  films  and  slide 

Sl\(  h  m-|  IHf  HOME,\  S  FILM  COOP  PART  OF  WOMEN  S 
IAI,ll>\tH  l\C  IS  A  NONPROFIT.  EDUCATIONAL  DISTRIB 
)M\tll  IH)  lOPLTTINGTHE  IMAGE  MAKING  PROCESS  INTO 
S  HWDS  WRITE  FOR  FILM  LIST.  OR  SEND  Jl  SO  FOR  CAT 
T    WOMEN  S   FILM    REVIEWS     DISTRIBUTORS.    ARTICLES   ON 


Dl-O 


I  \ND  PROCESS 


72>/Quest 


Footnotes 


1  Mary  Astell,  A  Serious  Proposal  to  the  La- 
dies for  the  Advancement  of  Their  True  and 
Greatest  Interest,  (London:  1694).  p.  25. 
2 Ibid.,  p.  15. 

•^Mary  Astell,  Reflections  Upon  Marriage, 
(London,  1700).  p.  22. 

^Reflections    Upon    Marriage,     the    third 
edition,  1706,  p.  22. 
5 Ibid.,  p.  23. 

^  Mary  Astell,  The  Christian  Religion  as  Pro- 
fessed by  a  Daughter  of  the  Church  of  England, 
(London:  R.  Wilkin  1705),  p.  36. 

^  George  Ballard,  Memoirs  of  Several  Ladies 
of  Great  Britian,  (Oxford,  1752),  p.  vi. 
^Ibid.,  p.  447. 

9  Roger  Thompson,  Women  in  Stuart  Eng- 
land and  America,  (London:  Routledge  and  Ke- 
gan  Paul,  1974),  p.  31. 
lOBallard,  p.  450. 
11/fcfrf.,  p.  449. 
12/infi.,  p.  450. 
13  Ballard,  p.  vi. 

^^ Eccentric  Biography,  (London:  1804),  pp. 
8-9. 

15  S.  Austin  Allibone,  A  Critical  Dictionary, 
P.76. 

1^  Sheila  Rowbotham,  Women,  Resistance 
and  Revolution,  (New  York:  Pantheon  Books, 
1972),  p.  12. 

^'^ The  Revolution,  Volume  II,  no.  12,  (Sept. 
24  1868),  p.  183. 
l^Mrs.  Mcllquhan,  "Mary  Astell:  A  Seven- 


teenth Century  Advocate  for  Women,"  West- 
minster Review,  April  1898,  p.  448. 

19  Source  Book  Press  has  reprinted  expensive 
editions  of  Serious  Proposal  to  the  Ladies  and 
Reflections  Upon  Marriage. 

20  Eleanor  Flexner,  conversation,  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  Oct.  1974. 

21  Florence  Smith,  Mary  Astell  (New  York: 
Columbia,  1916). 

22  Virginia  Woolf,  A  Room  of  One's  Own, 
(New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace  and  World,  1929), 
p.25. 

^Rather  than  usmg  a  male-identified  term 
like  "heroine",  my  roommates  and  I  preferred 
the  word  "hera."  We  combined  Elizabeth 
Gould  Davis'  statement  that  "the  word  'hero' 
was  after  all,  originally  feminine,"  ijhe  First 
Sex,  p.  319)  with  the  worship  of  the  Goddess 
Hera. 

24  Bertha  Harris,  "The  more  profound  ration- 
ality of  their  Lesbianism:  Lesbian  Society  in 
Paris  in  the  1920' s,"  Amazon  Expedition,  Phyl- 
lis Birkby  et  al,  eds.,  (Washington,  New  Jersey: 
Times  Ciange  Press,  1973),  pp.  77-78. 

25Woolf,  p.  26. 


Carol  Adams  teaches  a  course  on 
women  and  spirituality  at  Goddard- 
Cambridge  Graduate  program  for  So- 
cial Change,  Her  book  on  feminism 
and  vegetarianism  will  be  published 
this  fall 


BLACK  m  WOMAN 

The  Magazine  of  Women  in  the  Martial  Arts  and  Self  Defense 


30  page  bi-monthly  featuring:  martial  arts  &  self  defense 
philosophy,  training  aids,  calendar  of  events,  etc. 

Charter  Sub:  $7/yr.     Regular  Sub:  $9/yr. 
Institutions:  $l5/yr.     Sample  Back  Copy:  $1.25 

Write:  Box  B.  22  Ashcroft  Rd..  Medford.  MA  02155 


One  Who  Loved  Her  Sex/79 


Join  the  People  of  NGTF 


Photo  John  Gamble 


Betty  J.  Powell 


HOME:  Brooklyn,  New  York 
PROFESSION:  Educator 


informs  the  movements  to  which  she  gives  so  much  of 
her  talent. 

QUOTE:  "Our  civilization  is  a  repressive  one.  Its 
consciousness  must  be  invaded  by  a  morality  that 
would  liberate  us  all  —  Black,  lesbian,  gay  male,  all 
who  suffer  under  its  madness  and  confusion." 


OTHER  INTERESTS:  Black  history.  Lesbian-feminist 
movement,  tennis,  hiking,  pottery. 

MOST  RECENT  ACHIEVEMENT:  Chairwoman,  Gay 
Academic  Union,  Third  Annual  Conference 

PROFILE:  Energy  and  ability  characterize  this  woman 
whose  kind  spirit  hones  students,  inspires  friends,  and 


MEMBER:  The  National  Gay  Task  Force 

REASON:  "Freedom  and  power  to  be  and  become,  to 
invent  and  reinvent  ourselves  in  our  own  and  no  one 
else's  image  will  not  be  given  out  some  Monday 
morning  on  the  way  to  work.  We  must  seize  it  through 
overt  action  on  every  front — political,  legal,  social  and 
personal." 


IWI^*  I  C    National  Gay  Task  Force,  Rm.  506,  80  Fifth  Ave., 
1^1^  1 1        New  York,  N.Y.  10011,    Tel.:  (212)  741-1010 


Yes,  I  would  like  to  join  NGTF  Enclosed  is  my  contribution  for; 


□       $15  Basic  f\/lember 

D       $25  Contributing  Member 

n       $50  Sustaining  Member 


L^     $100  Supporting  Member 
3     $500  Lifetime  Member 
3  $1000  Sponsor 


□  $25  Household  Member 

(for  two) 

□  $5  Limited  Income  Member 


I  understand  that  I  will  receive  the  NGTF  newsletter,  IT'S  TIME,  with  my  membership. 
D  Please  keep  my  name  and  mailing  confidential. 


qst 


City 


State 


Zip 


80/Quesf 


Notes  for  Prospective  Contributors 


We  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling  material  for  each 
issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off  the  presses,  a  small  de- 
velopment committee  prepares  a  list  of  questions  and  ideas  which  we 
hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  This  list  is  available  to  anyone  who 
is  considering  submitting  ideas  for  the  issue,  outlines  for  potential  arti- 
cles, manuscripts,  poetry,  graphics,  etc.  We  accept  unsolicited  material 
and  seek  out  writers  and  artists  known  to  have  definite  political  perspec- 
tives on  issues  related  to  the  theme. 

All  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members.  If  it  is  not  appro- 
priate for  Quest  purposes,  the  manuscript  or  graphic  will  be  returned  to 
the  author  or  artist.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered,  it  is  then  assigned 
to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible  for  working  with  the  auth- 
or through  whatever  processes  of  rewriting  and  editing  are  required.  This 
process  includes  soliciting  comments  and  suggestions  from  various  Quest 
staff  and  Advisory  Committee  members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edit- 
ed manuscripts  for  review  before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  SVi  by  11  paper,  using  black 
black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  [original  plus  one  copy].  Length  of 
submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  [10  typewritten  pages]  for  re- 
views, responses,  and  short  articles,  to,  at  most,  7,500  words  [25  pages] 
for  longer  articles.  Where  appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be 
collected  and  typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manu- 
scripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a  stamped, 
self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished  manuscripts  and 
graphics  are  acceptable. 

Quest  uses  graphics  for  illustrations  of  specific  articles.  For  informa- 
tion concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspondence 
to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


Future  Issues 

COMMUNICATION  &  CONTROL 
Fall,  1976  Vol  III,  No.  2 

The  selection  and  transmission  of  information  is  an  index  to  power  in 
mass  society:  feminists  must  analyze  how  this  power  affects  women  and 
determine  how  we  can  use  it  to  better  political  effect.  Areas  for  articles 
include:  the  role  and  functions  of  the  media  in  our  society;  communica- 
tion and  art;  communication  and  political  organization;  feminist  forms 
of  communication.  Copy  Deadline:  May  15,  1976 


Winter,  1976-77  Vol.  Ill,  No.  3 

Work  is  an  essential  part  of  our  lives:  of  our  survival,  our  self-identity, 
and  our  group  identification.  Crucial  to  feminist  vision  are  new  ways  of 
viewing  and  organizing  work.  Areas  for  articles  include:  What  is  defined 
and  rewarded  as  work — for  men  or  women;  how  does  work  affect  our 
self-concept,  especially  in  regard  to  class,  race,  and  sex;  what  are  feminist 
modes  of  organizing  work.  Copy  Deadline:  August  15,  1976 

RACE ,  CLASS  &  CULTURE 

Spring,  1977  Vol.  Ill,  No.  4 

While  feminists  create  a  "women's  culture,"  we  learn  about  our  differ- 
ences as  women;  we  must  examine  how  race  goes  beyond  the  color  of  our 
skin  and  class  means  more  than  just  the  money  we  make.  We  seek  articles 
for  this  issue  that  discuss  various  aspects  of  the  relationship  between  poli- 
tical development  and  culture,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  issues  of 
class  and  race.  Copy  Deadline:  November  15,  1976 

KALEIDOSCOPE  TWO 

Summer,  1977  Vol.  IV,  No.  1 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  three  years  of  publication  and 
for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics  and 
ideas  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous  articles. 

Copy  Deadline:  February  15, 1977 


