ISSN  0098-955  X 


QUEST 

a  feminist  quarterly 


WOMEN  IN  THEIR 
COMMUNITIES 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua44wash 


/^v  T  T  T7  C  HT     vol.  iv,  No.  4 

\J  |J  JC/O  JL         Fall,  1978 

a  feminist  quarterly 

WOMEN  IN  THEIR 
COMMUNITIES 

Contents 


INTRODUCTION  4 

Quest  Staff 

WOMEN  in  the  LATIN  COMMUNITY  6 

Jo  Delaplaine 

CRITIQUE  &  COMMENTARY  15 

The  Process/Product  Debate 

Ginny  Crow,  Dorothy  Riddle,  Caroline  Sparks 

IF  IVE  UPSET  YOU, 

YOU'VE  GOT  the  MESSAGE  37 

Mary-Therese  Riccio 

IT'S  ALWAYS  the  WOMEN  42 

An  Interview  with  Community  Organizer  Marie  Nahikian 


WOMEN  in  THEIR  COMMUNITIES 

Photograph  Essay  byJEB 

ORGANIZING  RURAL  WOMEN 

Allie  Cor  bin  Hixson 

WEAVING  the  WEB  of  COMMUNITY 

Dorothy  Allison 


58 


75 


©  Copyright  1978  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All 
rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly 
prohibited.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times 
a  year  in  January,  April,  July  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist 
quarterly,  Inc.,  2000  P  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.,  20036, 
U.S.A.  Second  class  postage  paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Quest: 
a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  is  a  tax  exempt,  non-profit  organiza- 
tion. Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarter- 
ly, P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 
$10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  sur- 
face, $14.50/year  overseas  air;  $25.00/year  to  institutions, 
$3.35/all  single  issues.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines 
available  upon  request.  Bookstores  contact  Women  in 
Distribution,  Box  8858,  Washington,  D.C.  20003  for  ordering 
information. 

ISSN  0098-955  X 


■^m 


Si-  *  *^°**%i  ~~~x 


ii 


Staff 

Assistants 

Promotion  Editor 

Lynn  Bergeson* 

Dorothy  Allison* 

Carla  Brewington 

Design  Editor 

Scarlet  Cheng 

Alexa  Freeman 

Jo  Delaplaine* 

Jane  Flax 

Business  Editor 
Arleen  Rogan 

Marjie  Sadin 
Sara  Shepard 

Editors 

Diane  Shisk 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Sandy  Solomon* 

Jackie  MacMillan* 

Karen  Swanson 

Beverly  Manick 

Mary-Helen  Mautner 
Sidney  Oliver 

Interns 

Gerri  Traina 

Colleen  McGahee 

Associates 

Tracey  Wren  Setel 

""Development  Committee 

Denise  Davis 

Jane  Dolkart 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Judith  Jones 

Sue  Kahan 

Cynthia  Washington 

Helen  Young 

Cover  Design  by  Nancy  Myron 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  po- 
litical analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  it- 
self, but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the  women's  move- 
ment, possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as  regional  or  national 
conferences,  a  national  organization,  or  a  political  party.  We,  the  edi- 
tors, are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the  movement  several  years 
and  have  reached  a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  ques- 
tions. We  have  been  through  various  ideological  and  activist  meta- 
morphoses and  end  up  feeling  that  our  overall  perspective  is  still  not 
adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle  brought  us?  Closer  to  real  econom- 
ic, political,  and  social  power  for  women?  Closer  to  the  end  of  the  ex- 
ploitation of  and  violence  against  women?  Closer  to  self-determina- 
tion for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  ex- 
pect that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to 
this  process  of  seeking. 


Photograph  by  Nancy  Shia 


Introduction 


By  the  QUEST  STAFF 

photo  by  Ruth  Mountaingrove 

In  developing  this  issue,  we  ap- 
proached the  topic  of  "community" 
broadly.  We  wanted  to  learn  how 
women  defined   their  communities 


and  on  what  basis.  The  prospectus 
for  "Women  In  Their  Com- 
munities" reads:  ''Quest  wants  to 
explore  how  we  define  our  com- 
munities; how  communities 
develop  and  interact;  how  well  they 
serve  women  working  on  common 
goals;    and    how   we    relate   as   in- 


4/Quest,  vol.  IV.  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


dividual  women  within  them." 

As  we  read  through  th-e 
manuscripts  we  received,  it  became 
clear  that  we  needed  to  examine  the 
concept  of  community  from  a 
broader  perspective,  one  which 
would  allow  us  to  identify  those 
forces  which  shape  both  individual 
needs  and  the  ways  in  which  those 
needs  are  met  and  not  met.  If  we  do 
so,  we  will  perhaps  have  a  better 
chance  of  developing  political 
strategies  which  reflect  our  values 
and  also  which  deal  with  the  reality 
of  where  power  lies  in  our  society 
and  how  it  affects  us. 

The  articles  assembled  for  this 
issue  do  not  cover  all  of  the 
questions  we  had  hoped  to  address 
here.  They  do,  however,  contribute 
a  context  for  analyzing  the  role  of 
communities  in  social  change 
movements.  The  process/product 
debate  contains  three  articles  which 
keep  the  reader  focused  inside  a 
very  particular  community  —  the 
political  arm  of  the  women's  com- 
munity. Riccio's  article  deals  with  a 
problem  which  women  within  the 
feminist  community  face,  but  her 
focus  is  broadened  because  the 
problems  raised  by  class  conflict 
force  us  to  look  outside  the  feminist 
community.  Delaplaine's  article  dis- 
cusses the  interaction  between  two 
communities  and  thus  forces  us 
even  further  out  of  the  isolation  of  a 
one-community  point  of  view.  Allie 
Hixson  looks  at  how  a  woman 
defined  as  an  "outsider"  can  go 
about  making  changes  in  a  small 
southern  community,  while  the  in- 
terview with  Marie  Nahikian 
provides  us  with  an  example  of 
community  used  as  an  avenue  for 
change.    Allison's    article    steps 


beyond  these  and  asks  questions 
about  why  individuals  need  com- 
munity and  in  addition  presents  a 
description  of  an  alternative  which 
works  for  the  individuals  currently 
involved.  All  of  these  articles 
examine  the  concept  of  community 
from  the  individual  up  through  to 
the  group  structure.  None  really 
examines  the  role  or  concept  of 
community  from  the  point  of  view 
of  power. 

In  the  three  issues  following 
"Kaleidescope  Three,"  we  will  be 
dealing  with  "Individual  and 
Revolution",  "Structures  for 
Living,"  and  ''Movement 
Building."  Many  of  the  questions 
rasied  by  this  issue  remain  un- 
answered, hopefully  to  be  tackled 
again.  In  "Individual  and 
Revolution"  we  will  again  have  the 
opportunity  to  examine  institutions 
and  needs  from  the  individual 
perspective  and  we  will  also  attempt 
to  discover  how  individuals  are 
politicized  and  radicalized.  In 
"Structures  for  Living,"  we  will 
examine  the  family  both  from  the 
point  of  view  of  personal  needs 
and  also  from  the  perspective  of 
power  and  where  it  lies  within  the 
power  structure.  When  we  come  to 
"Movement  Building,"  we  will 
perhaps  have  a  better  idea  of  how  to 
approach  power  so  that  we  will  be 
able  to  address  the  question  of  how 
to  go  about  constructing  a  move- 
ment for  social  change.  Once  we 
start,  how  do  we  keep  it  alive?  How 
do  we  go  about  building  strong  nur- 
turing communities  and  at  the  same 
time  construct  a  revolutionary 
movement?  That  is  the  essential 
question  this  issue  of  Quest  leaves 
unresolved. 


Introduction/5 


Mujeres  y  la  Comunidad  Latina 
Wwnen  and  the  Latin  Community 


By  JO  DELAPLAINE 

photographs  by  Nancy  Shia 
Introduction 

I  have  written  this  article  in  two 
parts.  The  first  part  deals  with  my 
experience  living  in  Colombia, 
South  America.  The  second  part  is  a 
result  of  discussions  I've  had  with 
women  in  the  Latin  community  in 
the  District  of  Columbia  while 
working  on  a  community  rape 
prevention  project  for  the  D.C. 
Rape  Crisis  Center.  The  two  parts 
are  intended  to  be  read  as  a  whole, 
as  an  exploration  of  two  com- 
munities, the  Latin  community  and 
the  feminist  community,  with  an 
eye  towards  the  differences,  and 
towards  an  exploration  of  what  the 
two  communities  have  to  offer  each 
other. 

Ideally,  the  article  would  be  in 
Spanish,  with  an  English  transla- 
tion included.  However,  the  realistic 
constraints  of  a  predominantly 
English-speaking  readership  and 
printing  space  in  Quest  prohibit 
such  a  venture.  Hopefully,  more 
translated  articles  and  bilingual 
publications  will  soon  be  possible. 

Part  One 

In  1964,  when  I  was  eleven  years 
old,  my  family  moved  to  Colombia, 
South  America.  My  father  was 
working  as  an  economic  consultant 


to  the  Colombian  government  in  the 
areas  of  housing  and  urban 
development,  and  we  lived  in  the 
capital  city,  Bogota. 

For  a  year  and  a  half,  the  duration 
of  my  stay  in  Colombia,  I 
experienced  life  as  a  foreigner.  My 
attempts  at  speaking  Spanish  were 
awkward,  the  words  came  painfully 
slowly,  and  often,  rather  than 
taking  the  risk  of  appearing  foolish, 
I  would  remain  silent.  I  concen- 
trated on  learning  how  to  listen.  I 
was  awed  by  the  Catholic  Church, 
which  seemed  to  dominate  the  lives 
of  most  Colombians.  The  religious 
rituals  were  somber  and  mysterious, 
and  I  could  not  identify  with  what 
struck  me  as  a  preoccupation  with 
death  and  suffering.  But  the  most 
difficult  condition  that  I  had  to  con- 
front was  the  widespread  poverty 
and  the  rigidity  of  class  distinctions. 
I  was  acutely  aware  of  my 
privileged  status  as  one  who  had 
enough  food,  sturdy  clothes,  good 
health,  and  a  house  to  live  in, 
because  wherever  I  went,  I  met  peo- 
ple who  didn't  have  these  things.  It 
seemed  unfair.  I  thought  that  if 
everyone  shared  there  would  be 
enough  to  go  around.  One  of  the 
questions  I  found  myself  asking 
was  why  I  had  shoes  to  wear  and 
someone  else  did  not  and  did  it  have 
to  be  that  way. 

Mostly,  I  felt  uncomfortable.  I 
was  always  an  outsider.  I  missed  my 
own  culture  and  I  longed  for  home. 

One  day  my  family  was  driving 


b/Quest,  vol  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


to  the  airport  in  our  car  which  had  a 
black  license  plate  identifying  us  as 
being  from  the  United  States.  We 
were  driving  past  the  National 
University  and  were  stopped  by  a 
large  crowd  of  people  who  had 
gathered  to  welcome  the  return  of 
Camilo  Torrez,  a  revolutionary  and 
internationally  recognized  priest 
and  organizer  of  the  Colombian 
people.  Our  car  was  surrounded, 
many  people  picked  up  rocks  and 
were  shouting  at  us.  Someone  lay 
down  under  the  wheels  of  the  car  so 
we  couldn't  move.  People  started  to 
rock  the  car,  and  one  man  told  us  to 
roll  up  our  windows.  My  parents 
seemed  very  calm,  trying  to  explain 
why  we  were  in  Colombia  in  the 
first  place.  I  wanted  my  parents  to 
stop  talking.  I  knew  that  whatever 
they  said  didn't  matter,  that  these 
people  were  angry  and  that  there 
was  probably  a  reason  for  it  which 
words  wouldn't  'take  away.' 

I  was  sure  we  were  going  to  be 
killed.  Tears  were  streaming  down 
my  cheeks,  though  I  didn't  make  a 
sound.  Finally,  a  man  stood  on  top 
of  the  car  and  made  a  speech.  It  was 
hard  for  me  to  hear  and  understand 
everything,  but  I  knew  he  was 
talking  about  Camilo  Torrez  and 
the  principles  for  which  he 
struggled,  and  the  kind  of  move- 
ment he  was  trying  to  build.  He  said 
that  the  purpose  of  the  gathering 
was  to  celebrate,  not  to  destroy,  and 
that  in  the  spirit  of  their  leader,  they 
should  let  us  go  on  our  way.  When 
he  finished,  many  people  clapped 
and  cheered,  the  man  who  had  lain 
under  the  wheels  got  up,  people 
dropped  the  rocks  they  held  and 
someone  leaned  in  the  car  window 
and   said   to   my   parents,   "You're 


lucky  you  had  children  with  you  or 
you  would  be  dead." 

There  is  much  about  that  incident 
I  did  not  understand  but  it  made  me 
ask  a  lot  of  questions  which  I  am 
still,  almost  fifteen  years  later, 
trying  to  answer.  It's  hard  for  me  to 
sort  out  what  I  learned  from  it  then 
and  what  I've  come  to  understand 
after  years  of  reflection  and  political 
development.  But  I  know  that  what 
I  learned  from  that  experience  has 
shaped  my  values  and  choices  over 
the  years. 

The  first  question  that  occurred 
to  me  then  was  why  were  they  at- 
tacking my  family,  what  had  we 
done?  I  understood  that  it  was 
because  we  were  from  the  United 
States,  and  that  people  resented  the 
presence  of  representatives  from  the 
U.S.,  but  it  was  years  before  I  un- 
derstood why.  Eventually  I  came  to 
see  that  experience  as  one  of  being 
perceived  and  treated  not  for  who  I 
was  as  an  individual,  but  for  what  I 
represented.  As  a  white,  affluent 
North  American,  I  represented  the 
oppressor,  the  ruling  class,  the 
colonizer.  This  awareness  forced  me 
to  become  aware  of  how  my  own 
behavior  and  attitudes  could  be  op- 
pressive to  others.  It  forced  me  to 
question  who  I  was  and  what  I 
stood  for,  and  to  take  responsibility 
for  those  answers.  I  also  learned 
that  it's  not  always  what  one  has 
done  that  is  at  issue,  but  also  what 
one  has  not  done. 

From  that  experience  of  being 
judged  as  a  member  of  a  group,  not 
as  an  individual,  and  from 
developing  consciousness  later 
about  my  experience  as  a  female,  I 
realized  that  such  objectification 
always    means    being    stifled    and 


Women  and  the  Latin  Community/7 


living  in  fear  of  other  people's 
stereotypes  and  hostility.  The 
United  States,  as  well  as  most  other 
countries,  is  riddled  with  such 
objectification  —  stereotyping  and 
prejudice  are  entrenched  in  the 
values,  institutions,  language  and 
behavioral  norms  of  the  culture. 
Whether  it's  racism,  sexism, 
classism  or  any  other  form  of  op- 
pression, objectification  helps  to 
maintain  a  system  of  social  and 
economic  power  for  some  people  at 
the  expense  of  others.  One  of  the 
things  that  maintains  that  im- 
balance of  power  is  calling  the 
existing  system  "natural"  and 
anything  outside  that  system  "un- 
natural" (e.g.,  ugly,  inferior, 
perverse,  ill-mannered,  etc.).  As 
long  as  oppressed  groups  try  to 
mirror  the  "natural"  order  as  a  way 
to  get  rewards,  they  will  be  pitted 
against  each  other,  rather  than 
working  together  to  change  the 
nature  of  that  system. 

Another  question  raised  by  the 
incident  was  why  had  my  life  been 
spared?  Beyond  any  individual, 
religious,  or  metaphysical  perspec- 
tives, I  think  the  primary  answer  is 
political.  My  life  was  spared 
because  people  who  had  the  power 
to  decide  my  fate  at  that  moment 
knew  that  they  were  struggling  to 
create  a  world  based  on  principles 
of  self-determination  for  all  people, 
and  respect  for  life,  not  against  it. 
They  understood  the  human 
meaning  and  purpose  of  politics: 
that  the  ends  don't  justify-  the 
means,  that  the  way  you  interact, 
the  way  you  structure  your  in- 
dividual relationships  and  political 
groups,  and  the  values  by  which 
you  live  are  going  to  determine  the 


kind  of  society  you  can  ultimately 
create. 

Part  Two 

My  experiences  in  Colombia 
affected  my  decision  to  do  anti-rape 
organizing  in  the  Latin  community 
for  the  D.C.  Rape  Crisis  Center, 
which  in  turn,  prompted  me  to 
write  this  article.  My  goal  is  to 
describe  the  conditions  and  special 
problems  in  the  Latin  community  in 
D.C,  to  discuss  the  influence  of 
feminism  on  that  community,  and 
to  promote  a  dialogue  between  the 
feminist  and  the  Latin  communities. 

My  co-workers  at  the  Rape  Crisis 
Center  and  women  in  the  Latin 
community  have  contributed  their 
ideas  to  this  section.  I  would  par- 
ticularly like  to  thank  Susanna 
Cepeda-Cidique,  director  of 
Adelante  (which  means 
"Onward"),  Margarita  Suarez,  who 
works  with  the  youth  program  at 
Ser,  and  Magua  Becerril  Straffon 
who  has  worked  with  women's 
groups  in  Cuernavaca,  Mexico  and 
was  visiting  the  United  States  for 
several  months.  These  three  women 
shared  with  me  their  perspectives 
on  many  issues  of  importance  to 
women  in  the  Latin  community.  I 
weave  their  perspectives  together 
with  my  own  (white,  feminist)  out- 
look in  order  to  portray  the 
differences  in  the  two  communities 
as  well  as  the  areas  of  common  con- 
cern. 

Language  and  Identity 

Language  is  your  culture,  it  deter- 
mines your  life.  Latin  people  here 
are    especially    affected    when    we 


S/Quest 


can't  speak  the  official  language.  It 
affects  what  kinds  of  jobs  we  can 
get  which  are  now  mostly  as  maids 
and  dishwashers.  The  kind  of  jobs 
we  can  get  will  determine  where  we 
live.  We're  limited  to  people  who 
can  speak  our  same  language.  It's  a 
very  important  determinant. 
Anyone  feels  stupid  when  they 
can't  speak  the  language  well. 

Susanna  Cepeda-Cidique 

When  Latin  Americans  come  to 
the  United  States,  the  language 
barrier  presents  real  obstacles  to 
their  full  participation  in  society. 
There  are  very  few  bilingual  schools 
in  D.C.  and  the  number  of  them  is 
decreasing.  Official  documents 
such  as  voting  instructions,  leases 
and  tax  forms  are  rarely  translated, 
which  further  promotes  peoples' 
sense  of  powerlessness  over  their 
lives  and  their  community.  Public 
services    such    as    welfare,    food 


stamps,  and  medicaid  are  often  un- 
attainable, not  because  a  Latin  per- 
son doesn't  qualify,  but  because  no 
one  at  these  agencies  can  explain  the 
application  process  in  Spanish. 

Most  native-tongue  English 
speaking  people  in  the  U.S.  are 
chauvinistic  about  their  languge, 
and  feminists  are  no  exception.*  No 
matter  where  I  was  in  South 
America,  people  attempted  to  com- 
municate with  me  in  my  language 
and  were  extremely  patient  with  my 
attempts  to  communicate  in  theirs. 
In  this  country,  that  kind  of 
patience  and  hospitality  is  not 
usually  offered.  We  expect  the  rest 
of  the  world  to  learn  our  language  — 
and  we  make  few  attempts  to  com- 
municate in  any  language  besides 
English.  This  maintains  barriers  to 

*See  Charlotte  Bunch's  introductory  article 
in  the  Quest  issue  on  "International 
Feminism"  (Volume  IV,  number  2,  Winter 
1978). 


Mujeres  y  la  Communidad  Latina/9 


communication,  and  for  feminists, 
crossing  this  barrier  is  vital  to  our 
growth  as  a  movement. 

Problems  of  identity  accompany 
those  of  language.  In  the  United 
States,  if  you  are  not  a  citizen,  you 
are  officially  identified  by  your  visa 
status.  There  is  a  growing  move  to 
check  the  citizenship  papers  of 
Latins  and  to  deport  undocumented 
workers,  who  are  termed  "illegal 
aliens."  This  term  applies  to  any 
non-citizen  who  has  not  been 
granted  a  work  visa  by  the  Depart- 
ment of  Justice,  and  the  justification 


redistribute  profits.  Arbitrary  raids, 
arrests  and  harassment  of  the  Latin 
community  are  becoming  more 
frequent,  and  people  have  been 
arrested  for  not  carrying  their  visa 
papers  with  them. 

Another  problem  with  identity 
comes  from  the  lack  of  statistics 
kept  on  Latin  Americans.  Statistics 
on  who  is  born  and  who  dies  and  on 
who  perpetrates  and  who  is  vic- 
timized by  crime,  often  do  not  in- 
clude information  on  Latin 
Americans.  Latins  are  sometimes  in- 
cluded   under    'white,'    sometimes 


for  deportation  is  that  there  aren't 
enough  jobs  to  go  around.  This  ig- 
nores the  fact  that  people  migrate 
out  of  political  and  economic 
necessity,  and  pits  workers  against 
each  other  by  placing  the  blame  on 
those  looking  for  employment 
rather  than  on  those  who  have  the 
power     to    create    jobs    and 


under  'black'  and  sometimes  under 
'other.'  It  is  often  left  up  to  the  ar- 
bitrary discretion  of  the  interviewer. 
Without  statistics  it  is  difficult  to 
assess  specific  needs  and  trends 
within  the  Latin  community. 
Further,  the  reality  of  not  being 
counted  can  easily  translate  into  the 
feeling  that  one  doesn't  count. 


10/Quest 


An  additional  identity  problem 
Latins  face  when  they  come  to  this 
country  stems  from  the  confusion 
that  North  Americans  have  about 
what  to  call  a  Latin  person.  They 
have  been  called  Hispanics, 
Spanish,  Spanish-speaking  or 
Spanish  surnamed,  all  of  which  im- 
ply identification  with  Spain  and 
deny  the  diversity  of  roots  in  In- 
dian, Mestizo,  African,  Caribbean 
and  other  cultures.  Many  Latins 
associate  the  term  Hispanic  with 
negative  images  of  Spain  and  its 
conquest  and  exploitation  of  Latin 
America,  and  although  many  Latin 
people  speak  Spanish,  the  native 
tongue  of  others  is  Portuguese, 
French,  or  the  diverse  languages 
which  developed  out  of  the  Incan, 
Mayan,  and  Aztec  civilizations.  The 
term  Latin,  or  Latin  American,  is 
not  a  solution  to  the  problem,  for 
although  it  describes  an  encom- 
passing geographical  area,  it,  too, 
has  associations  with  European 
culture,  specifically  Italy.  The  term 
Chicano  is  preferred  by  Mexican- 
Americans,  but  it  applies  only  to 
members  of  that  group.  Latin, 
Latina,  or  Latino  is  the  preferred 
term  of  women  in  the  D.C.  com- 
munity and  I  use  it  in  the  English 
form  'Latin'  to  avoid  the  problem  of 
masculine  or  feminine  gender  en- 
dings. Just  as  feminists  have  learned 
the  sexist  bias  in  the  English 
language,  we  know  that  sensitivity 
to  a  peoples'  self-concept  and  sense 
of  heritage  can  be  encouraged  or 
discouraged  through  the  use  of 
language. 

Another  sensitive  issue  is  the  use 
of  the  term  American.  Many  people 
in  the  United  States  refer  to 
themselves    as    Americans,    as    if 


America  and  the  United  States  were 
synonymous.  We  forget  that  we  are 
one  of  the  North  American  coun- 
tries, and  the  people  from  Central 
and  South  America  are  also 
Americans. 

Family,  Women  and  Leadership 

We  are  not  a  community  that 
educates  our  own  children. 

Margarita  Suarez 

In  the  Latin  culture,  the  family  is 
considered  the  backbone  of  the 
community  with  mothers  as  the 
leaders,  sources  of  strength  and 
sustenance.  Mothers  and  women  in 
general  are  considered  powerful  by 
virtue  of  their  responsibilities  for 
the  family  and  for  the  community 
interests.""*  Families  often  live  in 
close  quarters  and  it  is  not  unusual 
to  find  several  generations  living 
under  the  same  roof.  There  is  not 
the  isolation  between  generations 
that  is  typical  of  middle-class 
families  in  the  U.S.  As  Margarita 
Suarez  pointed  out,  "In  your 
culture,  you  have  this  tremendous 
ambivalence.  You  celebrate 
Mother's  Day  by  sending  a  card, 
but  at  the  same  time,  you  live  as  far 
away  from  your  mother  as  possible. 
In  my  culture  we  stay  close 
together.  We  are  a  mushy  people." 

When  Latins  come  to  the  United 
States,  their  heritage  and  identities 
are  threatened.  This  threat  often  has 
the  effect  of  pulling  families  closer 
together.    The    family    is    a    place 


**For  further  development  of  this  theme  see 
Quest  issue  on  "Race,  Class  and  Culture" 
(Volume  III,  number  4,  Spring  1977). 


Communidad  Latina/ll 


where  one's  identity  as  an  in- 
dividual and  as  a  community  can  be 
protected  and  preserved. 
Institutions  or  ideologies  which 
threaten  or  are  perceived  as 
threatening  to  the  family  are  con- 
sidered divisive  to  a  community 
whose  survival  depends  on  the  uni- 
ty of  its  members,  and  the  continui- 
ty of  the  culture. 

In  the  Latin  community  of  the 
District  of  Columbia,  women  have 
been  organizers  and  community 
leaders  for  many  years.  Often  it  was 
the  women  who  came  to  the  United 
States  first,  because  there  were  more 
job  opportunities  for  women  in  this 
area  —  as  domestic  workers.  They 
would  save  their  earnings  to  send 
back  to  Latin  America  so  other 
family  members  could  come  here, 
with  the  men  sometimes  being  the 
last  to  come.  Latina  women  were 
forced  to  make  important  decisions 
and  choices  about  their  lives.  They 
had  to  support  themselves  and  their 
families.  This  gave  them  strong,  in- 
dependent identities,  and  they  have 
been  vital  forces  in  the  Latin  com- 
munity here.  Margarita  Suarez 
explained  why  there  hasn't  been  the 
same  kind  of  urgency  for  a  separate 
women's  movement  in  the  Latin 
community  as  there  has  been  in  the 
feminist  community: 

In  the  United  States,  especially  in 
middle  class,  white  society,  women 
were  extremely  isolated  and 
everything  centered  around  the 
men.  But  in  the  Latin  culture,  there 
is  still  a  strong  women-centered 
social  organization  based  on  the 
family  unit  with  the  mother  as  the 
leader.  Women  have  always  had 
communal  ties  with  other  women, 
separate  from  men.   Our  women's 


world  was  not  destroyed  and 
devalued,  and  women  were  not 
isolated  to  the  extent  that  they  yoere 
in  the  U.S.  In  your  culture  mothers 
were  seen  as  the  hitches,  in  our 
culture  mothers  are  still  the  biggies. 

Feminism  has  had  an  influence  in 
the  Latin  community,  but  it  is  still 
often  perceived  as  a  movement 
which  is  irrelevant  to  the  needs  of 
Latin  people  and  divisive  to  the 
community.  We  must  ask  ourselves 
why  this  negative  image  exists,  and 
what  are  its  sources? 

Certainly,  a  partial  source  has 
been  the  establishment  media, 
which  has  often  portrayed  our 
movement  as  a  bourgeois,  reform 
movement,  whose  goal  is  integra- 
tion into  mainstream  society.  The 
other  media  stereotype  is  that  of 
feminists  as  cold,  calculating 
women  who  want  to  be  "just  like 
men."  The  media  has  never  treated 
the  feminist  movement  seriously, 
which  makes  it  difficult  for  com- 
munities who  have  little  direct  con- 
tact with  that  movement  to  counter 
such  stereotypes  with  accurate  in- 
formation. 

Another  source  for  the  negative 
image  of  feminism  is  located  within 
the  feminist  community.  We  have 
barely  begun  to  communicate  and 
work  with  Latina  women  so  that 
our  ideas  can  be  shared  and  the 
stereotypes  destroyed.  We  have,  on 
occasion,  dismissed  their  political 
strategies  and  priorities,  assuming 
that  ours  are  "more  advanced."  In 
so  doing,  we  fail  to  understand  that 
different  strategies  are  necessary  for 
combating  different  forms  of  op- 
pression and  that  we  can  learn  from 
a  diversity  of  effective  approaches. 

In  the  District  of  Columbia,  an 


12/Quest 


exchange  between  these  two  com- 
munities is  growing,  particularly 
around  the  issue  of  violence  against 
women.  The  Rape  Crisis  Center 
started  to  do  outreach  in  the  Latin 
community  several  years  ago  with 
a  Spanish  translation  of  a  pamphlet 
on  "Rape  Prevention  Tactics."  The 
Center  now  has  Latina  women  as 
full-time  paid  staff,  and  presen- 
tations on  the  politics  of  rape, 
workshops  in  self-defense,  and  an 
outreach  office  in  the  Latin  com- 
munity have  been  established.  The 
Task  Force  on  Abused  Women  of 
the  Women's  Legal  Defense  Fund 
has  been  translating  some  of  its 
materials.  Women  from  feminist 
and  Latin  community  organizations 
have  formed  a  coalition  to  establish 
support  groups  for  abused  Latin 
women.  When  endorsements  for 
the  demands  and  principles  of  a 
March    to   Stop   Violence   Against 


Women  were  sought  from  Latin 
community  organizations,  they 
grappled  with  and  voted  to  support 
many  feminist  issues  including  the 
four  principles  of  the  March:  (1) 
self-determination  for  women;  (2) 
power  for  women;  (3)  self-defense 
for  women;  and  (4)  community  cen- 
sure of  violence  against  women. 

Feminist  influence  in  the  Latin 
community  can  also  be  seen  in  the 
development  of  a  Latina  women's 
group  and  a  growing  awareness  of 
women's  needs  and  priorities 
throughout  the  community.  The 
Latin  festival,  a  week-long  event 
which  celebrates  the  heritage  and 
culture  of  the  Latin  community,  and 
draws  a  crowd  of  fifty  to  sixty  thou- 
sand people,  has  for  several  years 
held  a  Dia  De  La  Mujer  (Day  of 
Women).  On  this  day  workshops 
and  literature  are  given  on  health 
care,    sexuality,    rape,    wife   abuse, 


Communidad  Latina/13 


and  the  special  contributions  of 
Latina  women  to  the  political  and 
cultural  heritage  of  the  community. 

As  a  feminist  trying  to  com- 
municate a  certain  perspective  to  a 
community  that  is  not  my  own,  I 
must  acknowledge  the  contradic- 
tions and  difficulties  inherent  in 
that  job.  Discussing  women's 
sexuality  is  often  very  difficult. 
Lesbianism,  both  as  a  sexual  activity 
and  as  a  political  perspective,  is  still 
very  hard  for  women  to  address. 
Although  passage  of  the  preference 
platform  at  the  International 
Women's  Year  conference  in 
Houston  helped  bring  discussion  of 
this  issue  out  into  the  open,  it  is 
talked  about  predominantly  as  a 
civil  rights  issue.  Discussions  about 
abortion,  birth  control  and  rape 
must  also  be  approached  with  enor- 
mous tact,  as  Latin  women  confront 
and  sort  out  conflicting  allegiences 
between  the  religious  and  moral 
values  of  the  culture  they  grew  up 
in  and  their  growing  awareness  of 
their  rights  as  women.  Change  in 
the  Latin  community,  as  in  every 
community,  is  painful  and  slow. 

The  question  of  the  need  for  a 
separate  women's  movement  within 
the  Latin  community  has  not  been 
seen  as  relevant.  Most  women  agree 
with  Magua  Becerril  Straffon  who 
stated:  "The  struggle  for  our  libera- 
tion can't  only  involve  women  or 
we're  forgetting  our  context.  We're 
not  women  alone.  Somewhere  there 
is  a  closer  truth  .  .  .  We  must  fight 
together  if  we  want  our  freedom." 

Just  as  we  are  asking  Latina 
women  to  confront,  understand, 
and  respect  a  radical  feminist 
analysis  of  oppression,  so  must  the 
feminist  community  confront,  un- 


derstand and  respect  Latin  women's 
analysis  of  oppression,  and  the 
work  they  are  doing  to  struggle 
against  it.  If  we  support  their  work 
around  issues  such  as  housing, 
employment,  immigration  and 
bilingual  education,  we  will  better 
understand  how  their  life  con- 
ditions relate  to  ours.  For  example, 
in  seeking  control  over  our  own 
bodies  we  must  include  vocal 
denunciation  of  forced  sterilization 
and  bottled  baby  formulas  along 
with  our  challenge  of  the  existing 
health  care  system. 

Breaking  down  stereotypes  that 
exist  between  our  two  communities 
and  sharing  perspectives  are  a  first 
step  in  developing  a  dialogue  that 
would  benefit  both  feminists  and 
Latin  women.  From  this  exchange, 
each  community  stands  to  gain  a 
broader  base  of  support  and  a 
deeper  understanding  of  our  op- 
pression and  how  to  eliminate  it. 


14/Quest 


|3  Critique  &  Commentary 

TVio  Prnrocc/PrnHiirt   FlpK^fp 


The  Process/Product  Debate 

graphics  by  Marilyn  Clarkson 

Editors'  Introduction 

In  order  to  change  our  social  environment  and  work  effectively  for 
the  empowerment  of  women,  feminists  must  he  able  to  set  goals  and 
focus  our  energy  and  attention  on  their  achievement.  At  the  same 
time,  there  is  a  recognition  among  feminists  that  the  processes  we  use 
—  the  ways  in  which  we  approach  problems,  the  ways  we  organize 
work  and  interact  with  others  —  are  important.  Our  processes  have  an 
impact  on  the  products  of  our  work. 

The  following  three  articles  address  the  relationship  between 
"process"  and  "product"  in  feminist  groups.  The  article  by  Ginny 
Crow,  which  was  submitted  to  Quest  for  publication  in  this  issue, 
describes  a  controversy,  or  split  between  "product  people"  and 
"process  people."  Because  the  article  generated  a  heated  discussion 
within  Quest,  we  decided  that  it  might  stimulate  some  interesting 
thought  outside  Quest  as  well.  We  asked  Dorothy  Riddle  and 
Caroline  Sparks  to  respond  to  the  article.  Each  author  provides  a 
different  perspective  on  the  subject. 

The  Process/Product  Split 
By  GINNY  CROW 

Some  say  a  movement's  first  sign  of  success  is  internal  dissension 
and  the  second  is  the  proliferation  of  splinter  groups  growing  out  of 
that  dissension.  If  they're  right,  the  women's  movement  is 
marvelously  successful  —  we  have  socialist-feminists  and  a  host  of 
other  radical  or  liberal  schools  of  feminism.  These  groups  follow 
separate,  although  sometimes  mutually  respected  paths,  and  often 
come  together  for  specific  short-term  actions.  However,  within  many 
organizations  there  is  a  growing  schism  which  threatens  to  be  the 
most  divisive  of  all.  It  is  the  split  between  the  process  and  the  product 
women. 

The  product  is  the  goal  of  an  organization.  It  is  the  purpose  for 
which  the  organization  was  formed;  it  may  be  a  service,  manufac- 
tured item,  or  political  action.  For  instance,  the  purpose  may  be  to 


©  Copyright  Ginny  Crow  1978.  Critique  and  Commentary/15 


pass  the  ERA,  to  raise  awareness  of  oppression,  or  to  advise  and  aid 
as  many  rape  victims  as  possible. 

The  process  is  the  way  the  goal  is  approached.  It  refers  to  the  struc- 
ture of  the  organization,  the  way  money  is  distributed,  members' 
norms  and  standards  about  who  should  be  a  part  of  the  group,  how 
members  develop  trust  for  each  other,  and  the  method  of  conducting 
meetings.  It  also  includes  what  materials  are  used  and  how  they  are 
obtained,  the  way  that  services  are  delivered,  how  the  product  is 
publicized,  where  funding  comes  from,  and  to  which  potential 
customers,  members  or  clients  an  appeal  is  made. 

Nearly  all  of  us  agree  that  both  process  and  product  are  important, 
but  when  we  need  to  meet  a  deadline,  get  through  an  agenda,  or 
resolve  conflict  we  find  ourselves  clearly  on  one  or  the  other  side.  The 
product  people  speak  contemptuously  of  "touchie  feelies,"  and  the 
process  people  rage  at  them  for  behaving  "like  men."  It  is  not  just  an 
ideological  disagreement;  actions  of  each  faction  are  viewed  by  the 
other  as  betrayal.  There  is  a  special  kind  of  outrage  in  this  battle.  One 
expects  destructive  behavior  from  "The  Enemy,"  or  from  non- 
feminists,  but  not  from  sisters  within  the  same  organization. 
Sisterhood  is  supposed  to  be  not  only  powerful,  but  a  kind  of  cement 
that  holds  all  of  us  together  as  we  march  toward  one  goal  —  and  along 
one  road. 

As  conflict  increases,  both  sides  begin  to  lose.  Not  only  does 
production  slow  down,  sometimes  to  a  halt,  but  the  process  becomes 
oppressive  rather  than  supportive.  The  purpose  of  this  article  is  to  in- 
crease understanding  of  each  position,  to  weigh  the  value  of  each  in 
particular  situations,  and  to  present  guidelines  for  incorporating  the 
best  of  each  point  of  view. 

The  Product  Viewpoint 

Efficiency  is  the  name  of  the  game.  It  is  considered  of  utmost  im- 
portance for  an  organization  to  produce  as  much  as  possible,  as 
quickly  as  possible,  and  with  the  least  expenditure  of  money, 
materials  and  energy.  If  some  members  of  the  group  want  to  discuss 
their  feelings  about  the  job,  the  possibility  of  collectivizing,  or  of 
developing  better  cooperation  on  the  job,  the  product  person  will 
view  it  as  an  unnecessary  interruption,  and  an  inexcusable  delay  of 
the  task  performance.  She  admits  that  feelings  are  important,  but 
believes  that  ideas  and  action  take  precedence.  Ideas,  she  insists,  can 
be  acted  upon  whether  one  feels  good  or  not. 

The  Product  people  value  a  rational  orderly  process.  It  may  be 
Roberts'  Rules  for  conducting  a  meeting,  or  the  work  flow  of  a 
hierarchical  organizational  structure.  Whether  or  not  the  system 
works,  it  is,  at  least,  dependably  the  same,  year  after  year.  One  need 
not  constantly  discuss  underlying  values,  nor  debate  the  efficacy  of 


lb/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


total  reorganization  —  both  of  which  frequently  occur  when  the 
process  is  fluid,  or  when  some  degree  of  collectivity  is  the  goal. 

The  process  is  important  to  product  people.  It  is  important  that  it 
work  smoothly,  be  known  to  everyone,  be  followed  conscientiously, 
and  be  modified  infrequently,  so  that  little  attention  need  be  paid  to  it. 
Neither  side  should  equate  attention  to  process  only  with  the  values 
and  goals  advanced  by  the  process  people. 

The  Process  Viewpoint 

Process  people  are  not  only  concerned  about  what  kind  of  process 
is  used,  they  also  value  attention  to  it.  Some  would  go  so  far  as  to  say 
that  no  product  is  more  important  than  the  process  used  to  produce  it. 
There  is  no  "way"  to  feminism.  Feminism  is  the  way.  And  so  the 
question  arises  "What  is  feminism?" 

Process  and  product  people  are  likely  to  define  feminism  as  a 
movement  that  works  toward  a  new  society  in  which  all  people  will 
have  equal  opportunity  to  acquire  goods,  services,  skills  and  achieve- 
ment in  all  areas  regardless  of  race,  age,  sex  or  sexual  orientation. 


copyright  1978  Marilyn  Clarkson 


Critique  and  Commentary/17 


Process  people  add  the  important  provision  that  feminism  strives  for 
a  society  that  promotes  the  values  of  women's  culture. 

No  one,  to  my  knowledge,  has  spelled  out  those  values,  but  I  am 
suggesting  some  feminist  principles  which  are  generally  accepted  by 
the  process  faction  of  the  movement: 

1.  To  promote  equality  of  opportunity 

2.  To  treat  all  people  with  equal  respect 

3.  To  promote  equal  pay  for  work  of  equal  value 

4.  To  fight  sexism,  racism,  ageism,  and  discrimination  on  the 
basis  of  sexual  orientation 

5.  To  be  open  about  goals  and  agendas 

6.  To  be  open  about  feelings 

7.  To  be  cooperative 

8.  To  be  supportive 

9.  To  be  assertive 

10.  To  be  economically  self-sufficient 

11.  To  value  and  promote  sensitivity,  empathy,  intuition,  nur- 
turance,  interdependence  and  trust. 

According  to  process-oriented  women  the  principles  of  openness 
of  feelings,  cooperation,  supportiveness  and  valuing  sensitivity,  em- 
pathy, intuition,  nurturance,  interdependence  and  trust  are  at  the 
heart  of  the  women's  culture  and  the  feminist  movement.  Asser- 
tiveness,  economic  self-sufficiency  and  equal  opportunity,  and  equal 
pay  for  work  of  equal  value,  are  the  central  goals  of  feminism  for  the 
product-oriented  women. 

The  world  of  business,  fact,  science,  profit  and  production  has 
been  constructed  by  men.  It  is  a  milieu  in  which  aggression,  in- 
dependence and  rationality  are  valued  at  the  expense  of  sensitivity, 
supportiveness,  dependence  and  emotional  expressiveness.  To 
succeed  in  that  world,  men  and  boys  have  developed  the  traits  con- 
sidered appropriate,  repressing  the  others,  and  now  that  women  are 
striving  for  power  in  the  world  of  men,  many  think  that  they  too 
must  develop  these  traits.  They  view  the  "soft"  characteristics  as 
valuable  in  their  place,  but  dysfunctional  in  business  or  politics. 

Their  contempt  for  the  "touchie-feelies"  may  result  from  a 
retrospective  view  of  the  frustrating,  humilitating,  unrewarding  years 
of  living  in  the  process-oriented  woman's  world  of  nurturing  mother, 
sensitive  wife/girlfriend,  trusting  child,  dependant  woman  and  sup- 
portive person.  Now  they  are  excited  about  the  opportunity  to  make 
things  happen,  to  produce  social  changes  and  to  take  some  power. 

The  Process  people  look  at  the  male-constructed  world,  see  the  fear 
of  expressing  emotion,  the  heart  attacks  and  ulcers,  the  facade  of  self- 
confidence  and  independence,  the  hypocrisy  of  politics  and  dangers 
of  war  —  they  measure  the  cost  of  power  and  status  as  too  much. 
They  want   to   build   a   better  world   in   which   things   can  be  ac- 


18/Quest 


complished    without    negating    emotions,     mferdependency,    nur- 
turance,  sensitivity,  supportiveness  and  trust. 

Working  with  "The  Other" 

Many  feminists  believe  that  an  androgynous  world  would  be  ideal. 
The  split  comes  over  the  question  of  whether  that  ideal  can  ever  be 
approached,  and  over  what  to  do  in  the  meantime.  The  problem  is 
how  to  agree  on  priorities.  I  believe  we  can  look  at  the  feminist  prin- 
ciples and  either  agree  on  which  are  most  important  or  at  least  know 
why  there  is  disagreement. 

Product  and  process  people  must  accord  each  other  equal  respect, 
an  important  feminist  principle  for  both  camps.  That  means: 

1.  Making  an  effort  to  understand  the  goals  of  the  other. 

2.  Being  patient  with  new  methods  of  reaching  goals. 

3.  Resisting  the  temptation  to  equate  rational  efficiency  with  the 
worst  aspects  of  masculinity. 

4.  Resisting  the  temptation  to  stereotype  the  others  as  contemp- 
table  "touchie-feelies." 

The  task-oriented  woman  should  be  aware  of  exactly  why  the 
process  is  unacceptable  to  her.  Is  it  the  collective  "wasted"  time,  her 
own  "wasted"  time,  or  intrinsic  aspects  of  the  process?  She  should 
realize  that  the  process  may  be  helpful  to  other  women  even  if  it  is 
repugnant,  embarrassing  or  unnecessary  for  her.  It  may  accomplish 
more  than  simply  helping  some  women  feel  better;  the  "feeling 
better"  may  help  them  complete  the  task  in  a  more  efficienct  way 
than  approaching  the  goal  with  little  thought  to  feelings  or  process. 

If  it  is  a  "waste  of  time"  for  the  product  person,  she  should  con- 
sider what  the  effect  will  be  on  the  group  if  she  attempts  to  be  a  non- 
participant.  It  may  cause  the  group  to  spend  even  more  time  on  dis- 
cussion of  process,  the  necessity  of  full  participation,  etc.  If,  however, 
she  finds  the  process  dysfunctional  for  the  group  and/or  ethically  un- 
acceptable, she  should  speak  out  for  her  beliefs.  If  that  results  in  her 
leaving  the  group,  perhaps  followed  by  others,  it  is  important  that  the 
process  people  understand  the  reasons  for  it. 

Process  people  often  feel  oppressed  not  only  by  men  in  positions  of 
power,  but  by  anyone  who  makes  a  high  priority  of  rationalism,  ef- 
ficiency or  task-orientation.  They  say  that  the  dominant  male  culture 
is  defective,  insofar  as  it  denies  the  importance  of  feelings  and 
devalues  their  expression.  They  insist  that  the  women's  culture  must 
encourage  women  to  express  their  feelings.  They  don't  realize  that 
their  attention  to  feelings  and  process  is  often  experienced  by  the 
task-oriented  people  as  oppressive.  Those  who  make  a  high  priority 
of  attention  to  process  and  to  feeling  are  sometimes  confused  about 
the  relationship  of  process  to  feeling  and  of  both  to  "feeling  good" 
and  living  by  feminist  principles. 


Critique  and  Commentary/19 


/ 


\ 


7 


1 


f 


r 


i 


■-.. 


20/Quest 


In  an  effort  not  to  deny  a  woman  the  opportunity  to  express  her 
feelings,  a  whole  group  may  stop  their  business  and  attend  to  her, 
giving  her  attention,  "strokes,"  understanding  and  affection  until  she 
feels  comfortable. 

Many  product-oriented  people  object  to  business  being  interrupted 
for  such  purposes,  but  most  of  them  could  live  with  it  if  it  were  brief. 
The  problem  arises  when  group  members  assume  that  someone's  hurt 
feelings  must  be  attended  to  at  whatever  length  is  necessary  to  dispel 
them.  More  than  one  meeting  has  fallen  into  disarray  because  all 
group  energy  and  time  was  devoted  to  helping  one  or  two  women  feel 
comfortable. 

The  process  "party  line"  goes  something  like  this:  "We  need  to 
show  that  we  care  about  each  other's  feelings  by  stopping  business 
and  doing  whatever  is  necessary  (listening,  hugging,  discussing,  etc.) 
until  the  injured  party  feels  okay  again."  It  is  this  last  phrase  that 
causes  the  trouble.  It  gives  the  injured  party  almost  unlimited  —  and 
arbitrary  —  power.  Unlimited,  because  all  energies  are  focused  on  her. 
Arbitrary,  because  feelings  are  subjective,  and  so  she  alone  has  the 
power  to  decide  what  to  define  as  "feeling  okay." 

The  way  out  of  this  problem  lies  in  recognizing  the  difference 
between  (1)  acceptance  of  the  right  to  emotional  expressiveness  and 
(2)  the  group's  obligation  to  make  everyone  feel  good.  The  first  is  a 
viable  goal.  The  second  is  not,  because  even  though  we  affect  each 
other's  feelings,  ultimately  each  of  us  controls  our  own  feelings. 
Further  the  feelings  of  the  product  people  are  not  taken  into  con- 
sideration if  they  object  to  the  situation.  If  process  people  limit  their 
demands  to  the  creation  of  an  environment  in  which  everyone  feels 
free  to  express  feelings,  and  to  accept  as  valid  that  expression  by  other 
people,  without  each  person  having  to  agree  with  or  dissipate  or  even 
understand  those  feelings,  most  product  people  would  be  willing  to 
cooperate. 

Another  important  distinction  for  process  people  to  make  is  the 
difference  between  being  unable  to  function  efficiently  because  of 
overwhelming  emotional  reactions,  and  choosing  to  overcome 
feelings  before  getting  on  with  the  task. 

It  is  not  only  men  who  have  developed  an  ability  to  overcome  or 
deny  feelings  in  order  to  accomplish  a  task.  Many  women  have 
carried  on  their  work,  in  or  out  of  the  home,  even  when  suffering 
from  physical  pain,  emotional  stress  or  grief.  We  can  do  it.  We  may 
legitimately  choose  not  to  deny  or  ignore  our  feelings,  but  the  cost 
must  be  carefully  weighed.  There  should  not  be  a  presumption  that 
feelings  always  outweigh  task  performance. 

Still  another  important  distinction  must  be  made  between  equality 
of  respect  and  a  feeling  of  emotional  closeness.  A  blurring  of  that  dis- 
tinction may  occur  in  relation  to  minority/majority  or 
lesbian/straight  relations.  Respect  for  people  of  different  lifestyles, 


Critique  and  Commentary/21 


ethnicity  and  values  sometimes  is  confused  with  love  or  a  necessity 
for  complete  understanding  and/or  melding  of  values.  Although  un- 
derstanding does  help  most  of  us  to  respect  other  people's  values,  the 
basic  idea  behind  equality  of  respect  is  not  understanding.  It  is  that  all 
people  are  due  respect  by  virtue  of  being  human  beings.  Feelings  are 
valid,  whatever  they  are;  we  each  deserve  to  have  our  ideas  heard 
even  if  we  are  a  minority  of  one  and  our  ideas  seem  strange. 

One  may  make  special  efforts  to  see  that  ethnic  or  other  minority 
views  are  heard,  that  their  specific  goals  and  needs  are  attended  to  by 
the  group,  and  to  consider  their  values  seriously.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
allow  vocal  minorities  to  dominate  a  meeting  or  a  group,  even  if  their 
voices  have  rarely  been  heard  in  the  past.  Nor  is  it  essential  that  their 
goals  take  precedence  or  their  values  prevail. 

While  it  may  not  be  possible  to  agree  on  values,  it  is  important  to 
recognize  the  point  at  which  further  argument  is  not  fruitful.  Com- 
promises may  be  made,  or  the  group  can  split,  while  maintaining 
respect  for  each  other,  if  not  for  each  others'  values. 

"Minor"  Compromises 

Attention  to  process  can  be  wearing  even  to  those  who  value  it 
most.  Worse,  unremitting  adherence  to  process  may  not  only  stop 
production,  but  cause  mutual  disrespect  and  enlarge  the  oppor- 
tunities for  competition,  secretiveness,  aggression  and  other 
characteristics  such  principles  are  designed  to  inhibit. 

Absolute  commitments  to  production  can  have  similarly 
paradoxical  results.  If  feelings  of  appreciation,  hurt  or  resentment  of 
inequality  in  the  organizational  process  are  left  unexpressed  they  may 
cause  unintentional  slow  downs  of  production,  or  may  erupt  at  the 
most  inconvenient  times.  Product  people  may  then  find  themselves  in 
the  ludicrous  position  of  having  to  stop  all  work  in  order  to  cope  with 
process  questions  that  might  have  been  more  easily  resolved  by  con- 
sistent and  early  attention  to  them.  In  either  of  these  situations  each 
faction  must  look  closely  at  the  principles  that  may  be  violated  by 
compromise  or  failure  to  compromise.  It  is  important  to  recognize 
which  principles  have  highest  priority  for  the  individuals  and  the 
group  as  a  whole. 

The  feminist  principles  listed  above  can  provide  a  basis  for  con- 
sideration in  setting  those  priorities.  The  first  four  (equality  of  oppor- 
tunity, respect  and  pay,  and  resistence  to  sexism,  racism,  agesm  and 
heterosexism)  are  the  least  controversial  among  feminists  and  are  fun- 
damental to  any  conception  of  feminism.  When  they  are  violated 
within  a  feminist  organization,  the  organization  is  in  real  trouble,  and 
action  should  be  taken  to  restore  the  balance. 

It  is  essential  to  know  when  compromises  are  being  made.  Facing 
that  reality  means  we   must  carry   the  consciousness   that  we  are 


22/Quest 


ethically  imperfect.  Feminists  not  only  act  badly,  but  they  sometimes 
make  conscious  decisions  to  do  sq,  simply  because  the  price  of  totally 
ethical  behavior  is  too  high.  Those  of  us  who  believe  it  is  wrong  to 
pollute  the  air,  poison  our  bodies,  contribute  to  war  and  exploitation 
of  the  poor,  would  hardly  be  able  to  make  a  move  beyond  getting  out 
of  bed  if  we  determined  to  be  completely  principled  in  all  our  actions. 
Recognizing  that  doesn't  mean  we  should  view  all  acts  as  equally  un- 
principled. We  need  to  act  as  well  as  each  of  can  and  to  lay  the 
groundwork  for  moving  closer  to  our  ethical  ideal  in  the  future. 

Ginny  Crow  is  a  co-director  of  the  Women's  Institute  of  the 
Northwest,  Seattle,  Washington,  where  she  conducts  workshops  and 
directs  the  Abused  Women's  Support  Network. 


Integrating  Process  and  Product 
By  DOROTHY  RIDDLE 

One  of  the  major  contributions  of  feminism  has  been  the  concept 
that  the  process,  or  HOW  we  do  things,  is  as  important  as  the 
product,  or  WHAT  we  do.  In  fact,  process  and  product  are  in- 
separable because  the  process  is  part  of  the  product  and  shapes  that 
product. 

Focus  on  product  allows  us  to  have  the  experience  of  concep- 
tualizing goals,  of  having  the  power  to  create  and  implement. 
Exclusive  product  focus,  though,  can  allow  us  to  view  persons,  in- 
cluding ourselves,  as  objects  to  be  used.  We  may  push  ourselves 
beyond  the  levels  of  good  health  and  sanity  because  the  product 
deadline  "can't  wait."  We  may  wind  up  ill,  unable  to  talk  or  relate 
meaningfully,  popping  pills,  draining  our  selves  because  we  have 
allowed  the  product/goal  to  become  all-consuming.  Such  single- 
minded  pursuit  of  product  focus  forces  us  to  function  under  a 
regimen  which  is  inhumane,  which  does  violence  to  ourselves.  In 
order  to  function  effectvely,  we  must  nourish  ourselves,  while  still 
pursuing  our  goals. 

Focus  on  process  allows  us  to  take  ourselves  and  our  own 
experiences  seriously,  to  realize  that  our  loving  is  inextricably  in- 
tertwined with  our  working.  Exclusive  focus  on  process,  though,  can 
maintain  focus  so  exclusively  on  the  HOW  that  we  never  get  to  the 
WHAT  and  people  get  burnt  out  from  feeling  like  they  never  get 
anything  done.  Continuous  introspection  is  like  pulling  the  scab  off 
the  wound  to  see  if  it  is  healing.  We  can  get  so  busy  pulling  up  our 
roots  to  see  how  we  are  doing  that  we  never  get  on  with  growing, 


copyright  1978  Dorothy  Riddle  Critique  and  Commentary/23 


pushing  outward,  trying  new  things.  We  all  need  the  sense  of  ac- 
complishment and  closure  that  comes  from  a  job  well  done. 

What  has  happened  to  date  has  been  an  artificial  dichotomy 
between  the  feminists  who  value  product  to  the  virtual  exclusion  of 
product.  I  would  like  to  focus  on  three  aspects  of  this  dichotomy:  the 
power  issues  involved,  the  fears  each  group  has  about  the  other 
extreme,  and  the  integration  of  the  two  approaches. 

A  Look  at  the  Power  Issues 

As  feminists,  we  are  still  having  a  lot  of  trouble  with  the  concept  of 
power.  Power  is  the  ability  to  act,  to  cause  or  prevent  change.  On  a 
basic  level,  power  is  the  capacity  to  control  all  forms  of  energy 
(productive  and  reproductive).  We  all  have  power  since  we  all  have 
the  ability  to  act  and  to  change. 

Power  in  and  of  itself  is  neutral.  It  is  the  intent  with  which  we  use 
our  power  which  makes  the  impact  of  that  power  either  positive  or 
oppressive.  The  three  basic  choices  which  we  have  about  the  use  of 
our  power  are  a)  to  be  centered/balanced  in  our  use  of  power;  b)  to 
abuse  power  by  trying  to  take  responsibility  both  for  ourselves  and 
others;  and  c)  to  abuse  power  by  trying  to  abdicate  responsibility  for 
our  own  lives,  leaving  that  responsibility  to  someone  else. 

Exclusive  product  and  exclusive  process  persons  each  abuse  power, 
but  in  different  ways.  Whenever  we  strive  for  too  rigid  control,  for 
being  able  to  determine  exactly  what  will  happen,  we  are  abusing 
power  in  the  "product  orientation"  way.  We  become  judgmental  of 
any  women  with  different  styles  or  priorities  than  our  own.  We  do 
violence  in  not  allowing  for  nonlinear  experiences,  in  losing  the 
flexibility  to  experiment  with  alternate  approaches,  in  not  being  able 
to  accept  failure  and  try  again.  We  set  up  an  external  standard  rather 
than  evolving  toward  one.  We  come  to  believe  that  the  more  power 
the  better,  that  the  goal  is  to  have  enough  collective  power  to  be  able 
to  "do  to  others  what  has  been  done  to  us."  We  become  involved  in 
creating  reverse  oppression. 

Exclusive  focus  on  process,  however,  also  results  in  power  abuse 
since  we  often  refuse  to  create  our  own  goals  and  to  take  responsibili- 
ty for  ourselves  and  our  actions.  We  tend  to  feel  judged  by  any 
woman  with  a  different  style  or  priorities.  We  act  as  though  it  is  up  to 
others  to  fix  things,  to  make  us  feel  better.  If  that  person  is  feeling 
competent  and  is  doing  well,  then  it  becomes  her  fault  if  we  feel 
powerless  or  less  competent  by  comparison.  Exclusive  process  orien- 
tation is  grounded  in  the  belief  that  all  power  is  evil,  and  that  each 
person  should  divest  herself  of  all  power.  By  never  giving  any  one 
person  the  right  to  make  decisions,  we  hope  that  there  will  be  no 
power,  and  thus  no  abuse  of  power.  What  actually  happens  is  that  by 
abdicating    and    demeaning    our    power,    we    are    really    depriving 


24/Quest 


ourselves  of  our  own  creative  energy,  never  challenging  ourselves  to 
grow  and  risk.  We  become  involved  in  creating  a  power  vacuum. 

Thus,  neither  style  creates  the  possibility  of  being  centered  in  one's 
own  power.  Both  styles  acknowledge  that  power  is  important  —  one 
by  seizing  it,  the  other  by  abdicating  it.  Both  styles  are  critical  of 
strong,  centered  women  trying  to  take  responsibility  for  themselves 
and  the  consequences  of  their  own  actions,  without  taking  control  of 
the  lives  of  others.  And  both  styles  result  in  creating  what  we  criticize 
most  in  the  patriarchy  —  power  abuse. 

The  Fears  of  Each  Style 

In  actuality,  we  each  have  bits  of  both  approaches  in  us.  We  each 
give  others  control  over  us,  whether  it  is  in  allowing  another  to 
"make"  us  feel  vulnerable  or  by  refusing  to  make  necessary 
decisions.  And  we  each  take  power  over  others,  whether  it  is  through 
protecting  someone  "for  their  own  good"  or  in  maximizing  our  own 
esteem  at  the  expense  of  someone  else. 

The  crux  of  the  dilemma  here  is  that  we  see  ourselves  as  having 
only  two  options:  to  either  "get"  or  "be  got,"  to  either  aggressively 
pursue  total  power  or  to  reject  it  altogether.  We  set  up  a  whole  series 
of  dichotomies:  competition  versus  cooperation;  predictability  versus 
flexibility;  linear  versus  non-linear;  limiting  versus  extending; 
patriarchy  versus  matriarchy;  aggression  versus  passivity;  efficiency 
versus  warmth;  exclusion  versus  inclusion;  focused  versus  diffuse. 
Since  we  buy  into  an  either-or,  rather  than  a  both-and  model  we  are 
forced  to  one  extreme  or  the  other.  And  so  we  settle  into  the  mode 
with  which  we  feel  most  comfortable  in  order  to  avoid  the  con- 
sequences of  the  other  extreme. 

Let  me  try  to  diagram  the  two  different  styles  in  their  extremes. 
When  a  group  of  product-oriented  persons  engages  in  a  project 
together,  their  emphasis  on  process  and  product  throughout  the  task 
would  look  something  like  this: 

Extreme  Product  Orientation 

Product 

U 

c 
o 


<j    .J**^*  Process 


Time  Continuum 


The  product  would  have  primary  focus  throughout  the  project.  The 
group  would  put  a  moderate  amount  of  energy  into  establishing 
procedure  (as  a  substitute  for  process)  and  then  expect  the  procedure 
to  run  on  automatic  pilot.  What  the  product  people  fear  from  the 


Critique  and  Commentary/25 


process  people  is  that  the  process  people  would  want  this  diagram  to 
be  reversed:  a  high  value  on  process,  with  only  a  token  discussion  of 
product  at  the  beginning  which  is  then  dropped  in  favor  of  personal 
growth. 

When  process  people  do  a  project  together,  their  emphasis  on 
process  and  product  would  create  a  slightly  different  model: 
Extreme  Process  Orientation 


rV/ 


<    — 


\ 


y 


^""\  Process 


Product 


Time  Continuum 

The  process  people  would  place  a  high  value  on  process  and  establish 
that  first,  while  focusing  on  product  from  time  to  time;  however,  the 
focus  on  product  would  always  be  clearly  secondary  to  the  focus  on 
process.  In  actuality,  the  process  people  do  use  power  to  achieve  a 
product  —  i.e.,  an  exclusive  focus  on  process,  on  personal  growth. 
What  the  process  people  fear  is  that  the  product  people  would  want 
this  diagram  reversed:  a  continuous  high  value  on  product,  while 
focusing  on  process  only  when  crises  arise. 

Part  of  the  struggle  and  miscommunication  between  the  groups 
comes  from  these  different  models  and  different  fears.  Both  groups 
are  engaged  in  the  same  process  —  i.e.,  glorifying  their  own  models 
and  fearing  the  exact  reverse  —  while  aiming  for  different  products. 
They  accuse  each  other  of  being  the  exact  reverse  of  themselves, 
which  the  other  group  then  justly  denies. 

An  Integration  Model 

What  would  an  integration  of  these  two  models  look  like?  I  use  the 
term  "integration"  rather  than  "balance"  because  we  need  a  model 
which  does  more  than  just  add  together  the  best  of  both  models.  We 
need  a  model  which  is  qualitatively  different  and  which  can  serve  to 
move  us  out  of  an  either-or  stance  into  a  both-and  reality.  What  I 
would  propose  is  a  model  which  would  look  something  like  this: 


Integration  Orientation 


U   - 


Process 
^-Product 


Time 


26/Quest 


In  this  model  both  process  and  product  emphasis  would  be  within 
the  same  general  range,  rather  than  one  very  high  and  one  very  low. 
Both  would  be  valued  highly,  "with  each  being  given  the  same  or 
slightly  more  or  less  attention  at  any  given  time. 

Part  of  our  sense  of  limitation  can  come  from  a  short-term  rather 
than  a  long-term  perspective.  If  we  stop  the  diagram  at  point  "A",  we 
would  feel  that  process  is  being  valued  over  product;  whereas,  if  we 
stop  the  diagram  at  point  "B",  we  would  feel  that  product  is  being 
valued  over  process.  In  the  short  term,  process  seems  disruptive  to  the 
product  people.  In  the  short  term,  product  seems  too  restrictive  to  the 
process  people.  So  we  can  see  that,  in  addition  to  needing  to  value 
both  equally,  we  must  cultivate  patience  and  trust  in  experiencing  our 
fluctuations. 

In  order  to  combine  the  two  approaches  effectively,  we  need  to 
look  at  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  each.  The  skills  of  the 
product  orientation  are  focus,  assertiveness,  sense  of  competence, 
analysis,  the  ability  to  limit,  rationality,  logical  deduction,  planning, 
predicting,  sense  of  closure  and  accomplishment.  The  limitations  of 
product  focus  are  that  it  is  an  externalizing  process,  that  the  focus  is 
exclusively  outside  ourselves.  We  create  the  pressure  of  the  "right" 
way  to  do  things,  the  deadline  which  "must"  be  met.  We  exist  in  a 
framework  of  scarcity  because  we  build  in  a  sense  of  urgency,  of 
limit,  of  either-or  (i.e.,  either  it  is  done  right  or  it  is  not  done  right). 
Our  focus  is  on  WHAT  with  little  attention  to  HOW.  We  look  at 
external,  physical  costs,  without  including  the  intra- 
personal/interpersonal  costs. 

The  skills  of  the  process  orientation  are  synthesis,  focus  on  the  per- 
sonal, caring  and  warmth,  personal  growth,  cooperation,  support, 
nurturance,  the  ability  to  extend  and  include  intuition,  flow  and 
flexibility,  openness  to  whatever  happens,  emotional  depth  and  con- 
tact. The  limitations  of  exclusive  process  focus  are  that  we  may  never 
move  out  from  the  personal  space.  The  group  functions  at  the  level  of 
the  person  having  the  most  difficulty.  Any  person  who  is  upset  for 
whatever  reason  has  the  right  to  stop  the  group  flow  and  insist  on 
exclusive  attention  until  she  feels  better. 

Integration  entails  knowing  and  accepting  that  each  trait 
characteristic  of  the  two  styles  is  important  in  and  of  itself.  It  is  a 
matter  of  each  being  helpful  and  appropriate  in  different  situations. 
Hopefully  what  we  are  striving  for  is  a  flexibility  in  approach,  the 
ability  to  respond  in  any  one  of  a  number  of  different  ways. 

For  example,  cooperation  allows  us  to  be  sensitive  to  where  each 
person  is  coming  from,  to  enable  each  person  to  perform  well  without 
feeling  judged,  to  offer  thoughts  freely  and  without  fear  of  criticism. 
An  over-emphasis  on  cooperation  may  discourage  individual 
expressions  of  initiative  and  creativity,  thus  perpetuating  a  situation 
in  which  the  group  effort  is  limited  to  the  skill  level  of  the  least  skilled 


Critique  and  Commentary/27 


group  member.  At  the  same  time,  excessive  competition  often  im- 
mobilizes persons  because  of  the  comparisons  involved,  creating 
situations  in  which  individuals  give  up  rather  than  be  judged  as  in- 
adequate. Gentle  and  understanding  competition,  on  the  other  hand, 
allows  individuals  or  groups  to  push,  excel,  to  constantly  strain  to  be 
better,  to  have  a  real  sense  of  satisfaction  at  having  achieved  a  given 
goal.  Both  of  these  approaches  have  strengths  and  weaknesses.  By  in- 
tegrating the  strengths  of  both,  we  can  develop  an  approach  in  which 
individuals  are  encouraged  to  do  the  best  of  which  they  are  capable, 
without  having  to  compare  themselves  to  others,  and  in  which  skill- 
sharing  is  valued  so  that  all  may  excel. 

Another  example  is  the  combining  of  the  intuitive  and  the  rational, 
or  non-linear  and  linear,  approaches.  Intuition  allows  us  to  express 
part  of  ourselves  which  "sees"  beyond  the  immediate  and  tangible. 
Any  creative  person  must  use  intuition  in  order  to  explore  or 
postulate  ideas  and  concepts  which  may  as  yet  have  no  obvious  fac- 
tual or  logical  basis.  Exclusive  intuitional  functioning,  however,  does 
not  allow  a  person  to  develop  and  make  practical  an  idea.  Rational, 
linear  thinking  allows  us  to  see  correlations,  implications,  and 
parallels,  to  systematize  our  concepts  into  a  working  model.  Rational 
thinking,  though,  may  lock  us  into  the  tangible  and  the  already 
known,  and  may  prevent  us  from  pursuing  ideas  which  we  cannot 
readily  "prove."  Both  of  these  approaches  can  be  helpful  if  we  will 
allow  ourselves  the  freedom  to  move  back  and  forth  between  creative 
intuition  (trusting  those  instincts  and  nudgings),  and  the  rational, 
analytical  skills  which  help  us  put  those  intuitions  into  perspective 
and  develop  them  into  functional  models. 

A  third  example  is  the  combining  of  flexibility  and  predictability. 
Being  flexible,  or  open  to  the  flow  of  life,  allows  us  to  have 
experiences  which  we  could  not  have  created  consciously  for 
ourselves.  Being  predictable  allows  us  to  mesh  our  lives  with  others, 
to  make  commitments  and  follow  through  on  them.  Trust  in  our  own 
or  another's  basic  caring  and  predictability  is  a  prerequisite  for 
growthful  flexibility.  Once  we  can  trust  that  intent  to  be  accountable 
in  our  commitments,  then  we  can  allow  for  variations.  It  is  when  we 
don't  trust  the  intent  that  we  get  hurt  by  unpredictability,  because  we 
then  fall  easily  into  the  trap  of  assuming  that  that  person  does  not 
care  enough  to  be  predictable.  We  can  also  help  ourselves  by  not 
scheduling  our  lives  so  closely  that  we  "don't  have  time"  for  any  un- 
scheduled experiences. 

Moving  a  step  closer  to  integration,  we  can  use  product  skills  to 
experience  process  more  effectively,  and  use  process  skills  to  achieve 
revolutionary  products.  We  can  build  on  skills  like  maintaining 
focus,  being  assertive  about  our  needs,  and  being  able  to  set  limits  in 
order  to  attend  to  process  issues  and  get  closure  on  them.  We  can,  in 
turn,  build  on  skills  like  using  fantasy  and  analogies,  building  syn- 


28/Quest 


thetically  on  each  other's  ideas,  and  being  supportive  of  experimenta- 
tion in  order  to  dream  and  implement  products  which  we  would  not 
otherwise  imagine.  For  example,  we  have  trouble  with  consistent 
political  analysis  when  we  view  the  "revolution"  as  occurring  in  the 
future,  disconnected  in  meaningful  ways  from  ourselves.  The  non- 
linear approach  can  help  us  understand  that  the  revolution  is 
happening  NOW  and  that  we  are  striving  to  increase  the  amount  of 
time  in  which  we  experience  it,  rather  than  striving  to  make  it  happen 
at  some  future  date.  At  the  same  time,  those  intuitive  flashes  about 
"this  is  the  revolution"  can  be  viewed  analytically  to  help  us  unders- 
tand better  how  we  need  and  want  to  be  with  each  other. 

Another  example  is  the  issue  of  granting  individuals  the  authority 
to  make  decisions.  Decision-making  is  a  risking  process.  In  making 
decisions,  we  try  something  and  leave  ourselves  responsible  for  the 
consequences  of  those  decisions.  If  we  refuse  to  allow  each  other 
those  opportunities,  we  block  not  only  our  own  growth,  but  that  of 
others  as  well.  In  one  sense,  we  should  always  make  decisions  only 
for  ourselves;  or,  stated  differently,  everyone  affected  by  a  decision 
should  have  a  voice  in  it.  In  reality,  however,  our  lives  are  so  in- 
tertwined that  our  decisions  always  affect  each  other.  By  taking  the 
opportunity  to  make  decisions,  we  are  pushed  to  experience  our 
relatedness  and  to  feel  what  the  consequences  would  be  for  the  others 
affected  by  our  decisions.  Thus,  we  can  learn  from  the  decision- 
making process  both  to  be  more  aware  of  each  other's  needs  and  to 
make  more  thoughtful  decisions. 

A  related  example  is  collective  process  in  group  decision-making. 
Consensus  decision-making  can  be  extremely  effective  in  an  ongoing, 
closed  group  where  trust  has  been  built  and  where  there  is  equal  com- 
mitment by  each  member  to  the  goals  of  the  group.  Consensus 
highlights  the  belief  that  there  is  no  one  right  answer,  but  that  an 
answer  can  be  arrived  at  with  which  everyone  can  live  comfortably 
and  through  which  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  other  has  been 
built.  Product  focus  can  help  us  define  the  issues  involved  and  what 
each  person  can  not  live  with,  and  provide  a  structure  for  achieving 
consensus.  Process  focus  can  ensure  that  everyone  contributes  so  that 
the  ultimate  decision  is  more  creative  and  complex  than  any  single 
proposed  solution  and  all  involved  share  in  the  responsibility  for  the 
consequences  of  the  decision  reached. 


Implications  for  Group  Projects 

We  come  together  from  very  different  spaces.  To  work  well 
together,  we  need  to  be  able  to  trust  each  other,  trust  that  others  will 
not  belittle  our  concerns,  trust  that  other  persons  will  take  respon- 
sibility for  their  own  energy  fields.   We  also  need  to  respect  our 


Critique  and  Commentary/29 


strengths,  our  priorities,  and  the  issues  we  each  raise.  We  need  to  be 
aware  of  maintaining  the  balance  of  power  —  neither  power-tripping 
nor  giving  up  power. 

As  we  have  seen  from  our  model,  any  group  needs  to  build  in  trust 
that  both  process  and  product  issues  are  valued  by  establishing 
ground  rules  which  make  this  clear.  As  a  beginning,  the  group  needs 
some  agreement  on  who  the  group  members  are  —  i.e.,  if  the  group  is 
open  to  new  members,  then  the  ground-rules  will  have  to  be 
renegotiated  each  time  a  new  member  enters  the  group.  The  group 
also  needs  an  understanding  about  what  will  happen  if  someone 
violates  a  ground  rule;  if  there  are  no  consequences  for  violating 
rules,  then  persons  are  unlikely  to  work  at  keeping  them.  One  helpful 


aspect  of  the  product  orientation  is  the  value  placed  on  setting 
priorities  and  time  tables.  By  using  product  structure,  process  can  be 
included  in  the  format  by  scheduling  it  in  as  a  priority.  For  example, 
we  can  have  an  initial  discussion  of  process,  with  time  scheduled  at 
intervals  for  feedback  about  feelings  and  reactions.  During  the  initial 
discussion,  we  can  share  with  each  other  what  process  techniques  we 


30/Quest 


have  found  helpful,  and  then  meld  these  into  a  mode  of  conducting 
our  business  for  that  group.  Some  techniques  will  be  generally 
applicable  to  all  groups;  others  will  be  useful  only  to  a  particular 
group. 

There  are  several  general  process  issues  which  always  emerge.  One 
of  these  is  how  to  insure  that  each  person  has  input.  Several  methods 
have  been  used  —  e.g.,  assigning  tokens  to  each  group  member  which 
must  be  turned  in  when  she  speaks,  providing  opportunities  for  both 
oral  and  written  input,  allowing  time  for  dyadic  or  small  group  dis- 
cussions of  complex  issues,  rotating  the  chairperson  or  facilitator,  etc. 
The  more  input  each  group  member  has,  the  more  committed  that 
person  will  be  to  the  product,  and  the  product  itself  will  be  enriched 
by  the  diversity  of  input. 

Another  issue  has  to  do  with  balancing  idea  —  generating  discus- 
sion, analysis  of  pros  and  cons,  and  arriving  at  consensus  of  closure. 
Often  we  forget  that  these  are  three  distinct  parts  of  group  problem- 
solving,  and  that  they  each  require  different  skills.  Generating  ideas 
occurs  best  in  a  time-limited  group  brainstorming  setting,  where  ideas 
may  be  offered  without  fear  of  criticism.  If  we  believe  that  we  must 
prove  our  worth  and  intellectual  prowess  by  condemning  others' 
ideas,  then  ideas  will  be  rejected  prematurely  and  without  full  con- 
sideration, thus  stifling  participation.  Premature  cirticism  also  occurs 
if  we  fear  that  ideas  will  be  acted  on  without  any  cirtical  evaluation,  or 
if  we  fear  that  all  the  time  will  be  spent  on  fantasies.  Critical  analysis 
calls  forth  the  ability  to  weigh  strengths  and  weaknesses,  prioritize 
needs,  and  imagine  the  consequences  of  various  strategies.  Critical 
analysis  occurs  best  when  members  respect  and  trust  each  other  so 
that  criticisms  are  neither  given  nor  received  as  personal  evaluations. 
Arriving  at  closure  is  often  neglected  in  groups  or  taken  for  granted. 
Part  of  our  reward  for  being  a  "good"  group  member  needs  to  be  a 
sense  of  accomplishment,  of  self-congratulation. 

Another  issue  concerns  how  to  build  in  a  value  on  diversity.  Since 
we  will  always  have  diversity  in  groups,  we  might  as  well  make  that 
diversity  work  for  us.  Not  every  one  in  a  group  needs  to  have  the 
same  priorities.  If  persons  do  not  share  some  common  goal,  then  they 
probably  need  to  form  more  than  one  group.  But  within  a  group  of 
women  sharing  a  common  goal,  different  women  can  focus  on 
various  aspects  of  the  task  to  which  they  feel  most  strongly  drawn 
and  for  which  they  have  the  most  energy.  Aspects  to  which  no  one  is 
drawn  need  to  be  rethought  in  terms  of  their  importance.  Maybe  that 
aspect  is  an  "ought"  that  could  be  dropped.  Maybe  it  could  be 
restructured  to  be  more  interesting  and  meaningful.  Or  maybe  it  just 
has  to  be  done  and  so  could  be  shared  in  rotation  by  everyone.  We 
need  to  work  at  turning  our  groups,  which  are  typically  as  weak  as 
their  weakest  member,  into  groups  which  are  as  strong  as  their 
strongest  member. 


Critique  and  Commentary/31 


Some  Concluding  Thoughts 

Life  is  a  continual  series  of  changes,  of  transitions.  Just  as  we  feel 
we  "have  it  together,"  new  perspectives  and  concerns  emerge,  new 
dynamics  develop.  We  need  the  flexibility  to  flow  with  those  changes, 
to  be  adaptable  rather  than  brittle.  We  also  need  the  structure  to  be 
able  to  apply  learnings  from  past  experience.  We  need  to  develop  the 
ability  to  limit  process  (since  work  expands  to  fill  the  time  allotted), 
without  eliminating  it  through  legalisms.  We  need  to  develop  the 
ability  to  make  our  life  roomy,  open  to  new  possibilities  and  growth, 
without  losing  sight  of  our  focus.  We  need  to  be  mirrors  for  each 
other,  gently  reflecting  back  to  each  other  what  we  are  doing  and  its 
consequences. 

Integration  begins  ultimately  with  ourselves.  We  are  the  only  ones 
we  can  successfully  change  and  we  make  those  changes  one  step  at  a 
time  —  experimenting,  having  trouble,  learning  from  mistakes, 
experimenting  again.  As  we  learn  to  accept  ourselves  and  our  own 
power  to  change  and  grow,  we  can  move  past  a  point  where  we  must 
view  the  world  in  "either-ors":  i.e.,  better  than/worse  than, 
process/product,  right/wrong.  We  come  to  recognize  those  moments 
in  our  experience  when  we  are  whole  and  able  to  choose  from 
strength  how  we  will  relate,  and  we  delight  in  the  possibilities  open  to 
us  for  learning  and  growing  together. 

Dorothy  I.  Riddle  is  a  clinical  psychologist  who  has  been  speaking 
and  writing  on  women  and  spirituality  for  the  last  five  years.  She 
currently  teaches  community  consultation  at  the  University  of 
Arizona,  Tucson. 

Process/Product  Split:  A  Misnomer 
By  CAROLINE  SPARKS 

Much  of  what  is  mistaken  for  differences  among  "product  people" 
and  "process  people"  are  really  differences  among  people  interested 
in  using  different  group  processes.  The  process-product  split  is 
generally  a  misnomer  resulting  from  a  confusion  in  terms.  Instead  of 
a  dichotomy  between  process  and  product,  there  are  four  identifiable 
elements  of  production.  Materials,  labor,  and  process  are  combined  to 
achieve  a  product: 


product 
process 

32/Quest 


The  product  is  the  end  result  of  an  effort  and  is  associated  with 
goals.  Materials  used  in  production  may  be  tangible,  like  machinery, 
or  intangible,  like  verbal  information.  In  the  most  general  sense, 
process  refers  to  the  way  materials  and  labor  are  used.  Whenever  an 
organization  sets  a  task,  people  must  sort  out  what  materials  and 
labor  are  needed  and  which  processes  should  be  used.  On  the  general 
level,  a  process-product  discussion  should  be  a  discussion  of  means 
and  ends.  In  that  sense,  it  is  very  much  related  to  the  theoretical 
framework  of  an  organization  and  the  goals  of  the  organization.  This 
is  not,  however,  the  discussion  in  women's  groups  caught  up  in  the 
kinds  of  arguments  that  Ginny  Crow  describes.  These  arguments  are 
most  closely  related  to  a  subset  of  the  process  area  —  group  process  or 
group  dynamics  —  which  is  concerned  specifically  with  interactional 
issues  among  group  members. 

One  kind  of  argument  about  process  is  a  disagreement  over  form  or 
structure.  In  the  women's  movement,  it  is  usually  an  argument 
between  those  wanting  a  mechanistic  process  and  those  wanting  an 
organic  process.  Mechanistic  processes  are  associated  with 
hierarchical  production  arrangements,  competitive  work, 
authoritarian  styles,  while  organic  processes  are  associated  with  con- 
sensual, co-operative,  egalitarian  styles.  Neither  approach  is  syn- 
onomous  with  product  or  with  action  and  it  is  erroneous  for  groups  to 
get  sidetracked  arguing  over  the  two  processes  as  though  they 
represented  differences  about  process  vs.  product. 

Another  kind  of  process  argument  is  a  disagreement  over  how 
much  time  is  to  be  spent  on  different  types  of  maintenance  activities. 
Any  time  a  group  sets  a  task  to  accomplish,  there  are  two 
maintenance  areas  accompanying  the  task:  task  maintenance  ac- 
tivities and  group  maintenance  activities.  Task  maintenance  is  the  set 
of  activities  performed  to  get  the  task  done;  group  maintenance  is  the 
set  of  activities  performed  to  keep  the  group  functioning  in  order  to 
get  the  task  done.  Both  are  process  problems  and  neither  can  be 
neglected  without  loss  of  effectiveness.  Heather  Booth  of  the 
Midwest  Academy  describes  the  group  maintenance  functions  as 
support  functions  for  people  assigned  to  task  accomplishment.1  Peo- 
ple may  be  assigned  to  one  or  both  areas  of  maintenance.  Most  effec- 
tive organizers  are  able  to  combine  attention  to  both  areas  and  see  that 
a  balance  is  achieved  between  the  two.  Again,  it  is  useless  for  groups 
to  argue  over  which  area  is  most  associated  with  product  or  action. 

The  reasons  that  disagreements  described  by  Ginny  Crow  occur 
repeatedly  in  the  women's  movement  may  be  explained  on  yet 
another  level.  Groups  can  be  analyzed  within  several  dimensions  at 
once.  These  dimensions  may  be  thought  of  as  different  frames  of 
reference  for  analyzing  what  is  happening  in  groups  at  any  given 
time.  All  three  dimensions  listed  below  are  areas  of  organizing  men- 
tioned often  in  the  movement,  but  rarely  synthesized.  For  analytic 


Critique  and  Commentary/33 


purposes,  the  dimensions  are  dichotomized  as: 

theory/action 
personal/political 
process/content 
Since  "process"  most  commonly  refers  to  "group  process/'  it  is  more 
appropriate  here  to  juxtapose  it  with  "content."  In  this  sense,  a  dis- 
tinction is  made  between  "content"  (attention  to  what  is  happening 


,     : 


*       ,4     >i 


^ 


&fy*& 


*>:■  \ 


"-..■.... 


%  ■ 


^4 


W 


^f 


| 


V' 


34/Quest 


or  is  being  said)  and  "process"  (attention  to  how  something  is 
happening  or  how  it  is  being  said).  This  distinction  enables  people  to 
view  events  on  different -levels:  process  observation  permits  one  to 
observe  ways  in  which  people  interact  while  content  observation  per- 
mits one  to  listen  to  what  they  are  saying  to  one  another.  Remaining 
exclusively  on  this  level  of  observation  will  not,  however,  provide  one 
with  information  on  why  people  are  saying  or  doing  something.  It  is 
necessary  to  view  the  interactions  from  other  dimensions  as  well. 

We  may  say  we  are  discussing  a  process  problem,  say  decision- 
making, when  in  fact  the  heart  of  the  problem  is  often  the  integration 
of  the  personal  and  the  political  —  the  mesh  between  the  individual 
and  the  collective.  Much  of  the  infighting  over  procedures  in  groups 
comes  down  to  confusion  over  how  much  attention  is  to  be  given  to  in- 
dividual members'  development  and  how  much  to  collective  develop- 
ment. 

When  people  argue  over  "process"  and  "product,"  often  one  of  the 
problems  is  that  one  group  is  using  language  appropriate  to  one 
dimension  while  the  other  group  is  using  language  appropriate  to 
another  dimension.  The  kind  of  discussion  Crow  depicts  can  be 
viewed  usually  as  one  group  discussing  process  while  the  other  is  dis- 
cussing action: 

theory/action 

personal/political 

process/content 

They  can't  hear  each  other  in  some  sense  because  they  are  discussing 

noncomparable  areas  that  need  not  be  in  opposition. 

The  main  reason  the  arguments  in  the  women's  movement  take  the 
form  they  do  is  that  the  nature  of  women's  struggle  for  liberation 
demands  holistic  changes  and  women  are  interested  in  creating  an 
organizational  milieu  permitting  integrative  development. 
Intergrative  development  presumes  an  integration  of  both  the  in- 
dividual group  member  and  the  organization  along  all  the  above 
dimensions.  Given  these  goals,  we  are  faced  with  developing  very 
complex  group  processes  with  few  tools  to  do  it.  It  is  inevitable  that 
arguments  over  process  develop.  Not  realizing  how  mammoth  the 
problem  really  is,  we  get  involved  in  arguing  over  the  areas  most 
familiar  to  us:  personalities,  content  of  meetings,  decision-making. 

The  feminist  movement  can  be  faulted  at  this  point  for  some 
glaring  omissions  in  development:  we  have  spent  little  time  distilling 
our  experience  in  ways  that  will  allow  us  to  proceed  beyond  our 
recurring  arguments  and  to  train  ourselves  and  others  in  new 
methods.  We  do  not  lack  experience  in  groups  —  thousands  of  us  now 
have  it.  We  lack  the  research,  theory  building  and  training  techniques 
that  should  be  derived  from  and,  in  turn,  contribute  to  our  activist 
experience.  Our  group  process  problems  are  another  indication  that 
we  are  working  with  an  ill-defined  feminist  theory  with  few  working 


Critique  and  Commentary/35 


parts.  We  do  not  need  to  berate  individuals  on  either  "side."  We  need 
to  create  what  is  missing. 

Complex  materials  are  not  learned  by  osmosis.  Even  observation,  to 
be  effective  learnings  must  be  structured  to  allow  discrimination.  The 
movement  still  assumes  either  all  women  come  to  a  task  equally 
prepared  or  that  everyone  can  pick  up  the  skills  with  little  training  or 
teaching.  However,  as  the  movement  becomes  more  sophisticated,  we 
recognize  that  we  have  to  train  ourselves  to  use  more  sophisticated 
hardware.  The  same  is  true  for  "soft-ware."  Its  use  also  requires 
training,  not  just  blind  doing.  Complex  new  group  processes  must 
have  articulated  methods  for  transmission  or  they  are  useless.  Our 
theory  and  practice  are  not  yet  up  to  the  task.  We  are  too  dependent, 
group  by  group,  on  a  few  knowledgeable  individuals  or  on  a  trial  and 
error  method.  Every  group,  as  a  result,  recreates  the  same  horrible 
crises,  bitterness,  or  success. 

Our  next  step  should  be  to  develop  training  that  allows  discrimina- 
tion of  various  dimensions  of  organizing,  delineation  of  skills  needed 
for  each,  and  techniques  that  enable  women  to  integrate  their 
experience.  Some  of  the  behavioral  sciences  material  is  useful,  some 
of  it  does  not  go  far  enough.  We  need  to  sort  out  the  useful  and  dis- 
card the  rest.  Those  of  us  who  are  interested  in  these  problems,  as 
Ginny  Crow  obviously  is,  need  to  share  information  about  what  has 
worked  or  what  has  been  tried  and  has  failed,  and  from  there,  create 
new  techniques  suitable  to  our  goals. 

'Heather  Booth,  The  Midwest  Academy,  Inc.,  600  West  Fullerton,  Chicago,  Illinois. 
This  is  an  observation  she  frequently  makes  in  speeches. 

Caroline  Sparks  is  a  member  of  the  Women's  Action  Collective  in 
Columbus,  Ohio. 


Women's 
Studies 


Women's  Studies  Program 

George  Washington  University 

2025  Eye  St.  N.W.  Room  212 

Washington,  D.C.  20052 


M.A.    degree    and    courses    for    non-degree 

students. 

New  focus:  Public  policy  related  to  families, 
education  and  employment. 

George  Washington  University  is  an  equal  opportunity  institution. 


36/Quest 


//  I've  Upset  You, 
You've  Got  the  Message 


By  MARY-THERESE  RICCIO 

graphics  by  Sharon  Grossman 

Growing  up  working  class  means 
a  lot  of  different  things  to  different 
people  —  even  among  people  from 
working  class  backgrounds.  It 
means  unfulfilled  dreams,  hard 
work,  survival,  and  the  myriad  of 
feelings  —  from  bitterness  to  guilt  — 
that  accompany  a  life  of  endless 
struggle.  It  also  means  a  remarkable 
ability  to  survive  in  a  situation  in 
which  material  deprivation  is  a 
dominant  theme  affecting  every 
aspect  of  life.  It  often  means  the 
most  disappointed  dreams  and  a 
longing  for  life  to  be  more  than  a 
constant  struggle  with  necessity. 

For  me,  growing  up  in  a  working 
class  family  that  was  trying 
desperately  to  be  middle  class  meant 
growing  up  in  a  culture  of  shame. 
The  way  we  lived  never  seemed  to 
measure  up  to  the  middle  class  stan- 
dards pictured  all  around  us,  so 
what  we  learned  was  an  ever- 
present  guilt,  the  feeling  that  we 
were  never  good  enough.  The 
assumption  in  this  capitalist,  com- 
petitive society  is  that  those  who 
have  more  —  the  "better"  job,  the 
nicer  car  —  are  "better."  Part  of  this 
involves  personalizing  success  and 
failure  instead  of  seeing  them  as 
linked  to  privilege.  Part  of  it  in- 
volves mystifying  how  people  get 


privilege.  We  are  told  that  we  can  all 
succeed  if  only  we  work  hard 
enough;  if  we  don't  succeed,  we 
have  no  one  but  ourselves  to  blame. 

So  working  class  people  blame 
themselves  for  not  being  more 
successful.  In  studies  done  by 
Sennett  and  Cobb,  working  class 
people  consistently  describe 
themselves  as  "nothing"  and 
"unimportant."  They  feel  that  they 
don't  measure  up  and  that  they  are 
not  good  enough.*  These  feelings 
are  reinforced  over  and  over  in  both 
subtle  and  overt  ways.  Even  when 
working  class  families,  like  my 
own,  do  manage  to  "make  it"  into 
the  middle  class,  they  enter  scarred. 
Attitudes  and  feelings  do  not 
change  just  because  a  job  does,  and 
these  families  in  transition  carry 
with  them  years  of  damage  from  the 
emotional  violence  done  to  working 
class  people  in  this  culture.  In  socie- 
ty at  large,  working  class  experience 
is  not  respected.  Working  class  peo- 
ple learn  to  disrespect  themselves, 
their  class,  their  culture,  and  even 
other  working  class  people  for  that 
matter. 

In  the  past  few  years,  a  growing 
number  of  working  class  feminists 
have  begun  to  reclaim  their  roots. 
Until  recently,  the  women's  move- 
ment had  focused  on  sisterhood  — 


*See  "Class  and  Feminism"  bibliography  at 
end  of  article. 


If  I've  Upset  You,  You've  Got  the  Message/37 


our  sameness.  Many  working  class 
women  involved  in  the  movement 
felt  a  sense  of  difference,  but  had  no 
words  for  it:  we  only  knew  that  we 
felt  funny  when  certain  things  were 
said  or  maybe  that  we  didn't  fit  into 
certain  assumptions  made  by  the 
women  we  worked  with.  Some  of  us 
always  had  to  leave  meetings  early 
to  go  to  work  or  to  pick  up  the  kids 
while  everyone  else  seemed  to  have 
the  time  to  stay  and  stay.  As  long  as 
we  did  not  confront  our  differences 
—  different  material  conditions, 
values,  attitudes,  feelings,  needs, 
etc.  —  we  ran  the  risk  of  speaking 
only  to  the  needs  of  a  select  group, 


of  acting  and  making  decisions 
based  on  false  assumptions.  It  is  es- 
sential, however,  to  acknowledge 
our  differences,  as  well  as  our 
samenesses  in  order  to  establish  a 
common  ground  from  which  we  can 
begin  to  work  together. 

The  women's  movement  is 
developing  an  increasing  class  con- 
sciousness and  a  growing  openness 
to  looking  at  our  differences.  Many 
women  of  all  classes  are  learning  to 
respect  working  class  experience. 
But  while  some  women  have  gotten 
the  jargon  down,  their  more  authen- 
tic class-related  assumptions  slip 
out  in  everyday  attitudes.  Listen  to 
the  put-downs  of  the  mini-skirted 
waitress  with  the  beehive  and 
make-up.  Pay  attention  to  the  way 
the  telephone  operator  is  treated 
when  a  hurried  phone  call  needs  to 
be  made.  Many  working  class 
women  have  begun  to  recognize 
subtle  and  not  so  subtle  class  related 
oppression  within  the  women's 
movement  and  are  acknowledging 
their  anger  about  it. 

Some  of  this  anger  has  exploded, 
flying  in  the  face  of  anyone  who 
was  around  to  catch  it.  Granted, 
some  working  class  women  have 
dished  out  power-grabbing  garbage 
and  guilt  trips,  and  called  it  class 
anger.  We  all  make  mistakes,  and 
working  class  women  are  no  excep- 
tion. If  you  are  on  the  wrong  end  of 
this,  or  are  around  to  see  it 
happening,  you  should  call  it  what 
it  is.  Working  class  women  are  not 
asking  to  be  canonized  but  only  to 
be  respected  and  heard  from  for  a 
change.  And  this  includes  hearing 
the  anger  that  most  of  us  are  still 
pretty  clumsy  at  expressing.  We  can 
only    create    a    movement    that 


38/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


extends  beyond  middle  class  women 
by  expressing  and  dealing  with  this 
anger.  Like  the  Chinese  people 
during  the  revolution  who  met 
together  to  speak  bitterness  and  in 
this  found  the  strength  to  confront 
those  who  oppressed  them,  working 
class  women  need  to  speak  their 
bitterness  in  order  to  move  beyond 
it. 

The  way  class  is  being  dealt  with 
in  the  women's  movement  parallels 
the  process  by  which  many  of  us 
dealt  with  our  anger  about  sexism. 
At  first,  a  lot  of  stored-up  anger 
exploded  at  men  as  the  "enemy". 
Over  time,  we  learned  that  it  was 
the  institutions  which  perpetuated 
oppression  of  women,  poor  people 
and  people  of  color..  We  were  more 
able  to  channel  our  anger  into 
political  action  and  to  deal  directly 
with  the  oppressive  actions  of  in- 
dividual men  as  they  occurred. 

We  still  have  much  to  learn  about 
how  to  speak  bitterness  around 
class.  At  times,  the  anger  can 
become  personalized  with  middle 
class  women  (or  a  specific  middle 
class  woman)  being  seen  as  the 
enemy.  This  gets  tricky.  If  I  am  in  a 
situation  with  a  middle  class  woman 
and  feeling  personally  attacked  by 
her  around  a  class  issue,  it  is 
sometimes  difficult  to  realize  that 
she  is  not  the  enemy.  EXAMPLE:  I 
am  in  a  women's  group  and  a  mid- 
dle class  woman  who  defines  herself 
as  a  feminist,  and  could  give  you  the 
correct  line  on  class,  is  talking  about 
a  project  she  has  worked  on.  The 
project  provided  a  service  for 
working  class  women,  and  while 
explaining  it,  this  woman 
offhandedly  describes  these 
working  class  women  as  "dumb." 


My  response  is  to: 

A.  Go  for  her  throat  and  draw 
blood. 

B.  Gasp.  Stop.  Think.  Express  my 
angry  feelings  at  what  she  said.  Let 
her  know  that  I  mean  business 
while  at  the  same  time  letting  her 
know  that  this  is  not  a  personal  at- 
tack on  her,  but  on  her  thinking. 
She  needs  to  get  her  thinking 
straight. 

C.  Get  the  hell  out  of  that  room  and 
back  to  my  working  class  women's 
group. 

Now,  figuring  out  the  best  way  to 
respond  to  this  situation  is  a  tough 
nut  to  crack.  If  I  rule  out  physical 


If  I've  Upset  You/39 


violence  as  a  possibility,  I  need  to 
find  a  way  to  express  my  anger  to 
this  woman.  Like  I  said  earlier,  I  see 
the  expression  of  this  class-related 
anger  as  a  process.  Those  working 
class  women  who  are  just  beginning 
to  get  in  touch  with  their  anger  may 
need  an  "A"-type  response.  In 
some  situations,  "A"  may  be  the 
only  response  which  will  allow  a 
working  class  woman  to  maintain 
her  dignity.  Women  who  have  had 
more  opportunity  to  express  and 
sort  through  their  class-related 
anger  may  be  able  to  swing  a  "B" 
response.  And  there  will  be  times 
when  answer  "C"  may  be  a 
working  class  woman's  only  way  of 
surviving  in  the  women's  move- 
ment. 

It  is  important  for  working  class 
women  to  express  their  class-related 
anger  and  to  struggle  with  middle 
class  women  to  clarify  the  class 
reasons  for  their  bitterness  and 
anger.  This  does  not  mean  that 
working  class  women  should  take 
responsibility  for  changing  middle 
class  women.  Each  of  us  is  responsi- 
ble for  changing  our  own  op- 
pressive attitudes  and  behaviors.  It 
does  mean  we  as  working  class 
women  should  make  our  criticisms 
as  useful  as  possible  if  we  want  peo- 
ple to  hear  us  and  change.  But  there 
are  times  when  working  class 
women,  for  their  own  sanity,  will 
not  be  able  to  stick  around  and 
clarify  things. 

Learning  to  speak  bitterness  is 
not  an  easy  thing.  There  are  hun- 
dreds of  little  daily  unfairnesses 
that  are  class-related  in  the  lives  of 
working  class  women.  Most  of 
them  go  unspoken  and  make  it  dif- 
ficult for  women  of  different  classes 


to  work  together.  One  of  many 
examples  for  me  was  the  time  I  saw 
Susan,  an  upper-middle  class 
woman  I  had  known,  at  a  women's 
event.  I  asked  her  what  she  was 
doing,  and  she  spoke  to  me  proudly 
about  being  accepted  into  a 
prestigious  law  school  and  told  me 
how  glad  she  was  that  she  could 
start  using  her  talents.  She  said  she 
had,  after  graduation  from  college, 
spent  a  year  working  in  "dead-end" 
jobs  that  were  "nowhere"  for  her. 
She  was  happy,  she  said,  to  begin 
utilizing  her  potential.  Now,  it's 
really  fine  that  women  are  going  to 
law  school;  I  believe  women  should 
have  every  opportunity  to  utilize 
their  potential.  But  all  I  could  think 
of  was  the  week  before  when  I  met 
with  my  working  class  women's 
group.  My  friend,  Carolyn,  a 
welfare  mother,  had  been  talking 
about  wanting  to  to  go  law  school, 
and  we  spent  a  big  chunk  of  the 
meeting  trying  to  figure  out  how  we 
as  a  group  could  raise  the  money  for 
her  to  just  take  the  Law  School  Ap- 
titude Test.  Damn!  The  contradic- 
tion between  Carolyn's  life  and 
Susan's  pains  me  and  drives  me 
nuts.  Susan  should  certainly  be  able 
to  go  to  law  school,  but  so  should 
Carolyn.  I  wanted  to  tell  Susan  how 
painful  the  unfairness  of  the  situa- 
tion was  for  me  and  how  much  I 
hated  it.  I  wanted  to  tell  Susan  that  I 
had  had  301  "dead-end"  jobs  in  the 
past  ten  years,  that  I  had  just  come 
to  the  lecture  after  cleaning 
someone's  house  all  day  for  a  few 
measly  bucks  and  that  I  resented 
how  easy  she  had  it  economically.  I 
wanted  to  tell  Susan  that  the  con- 
tradiction between  her  life  and  my 
life,    Carolyn's    life    and    other 


A0/Quest 


working  class  and  poor  women's 
lives  hurt  and  angered  me.  Instead,  I 
said  something  like,  "oh  yeah? 
That's  nice  .  .  .  .",  and  got  the  hell 
away  from  Susan.  For  me  to  speak 
bitterness  to  Susan  would  have 
been  to  say  these  things  to  her.  I  am 
not  saying  that  Susan  should  feel 
guilty  or  that  she  should  not  go  to 
law  school.  I  am  saying  that  I 
needed  to  speak  my  pain  and  anger 
about  the  contradictions  of  our  lives 
and  that  both  of  us  needed  to  look 
at  it.  Then  maybe  Susan  and  I  could 
begin  to  work  for  change  together, 
clearly  and  openly.  But  attempting 
to  work  together  without  speaking 
bitterness,  when  there  are  things 
that  need  to  be  said,  is  usually  fake, 
forced,  ineffective,  and  no  fun. 
Now  I'm  not  pretending  that  there's 
any  magic  formula  to  make  this 
process  easy  and  clear.  But  only  by 
speaking  to  our  differences,  our 
pain,  our  bitterness,  can  we  begin  to 
develop  a  growing  respect  and  com- 
passion for  each  person's 
experience  and  an  understanding  of 
class  differences  that  will  ultimately 
not  separate  us  but  enable  us  to 
work  together. 

Expressing  class-related  anger  is 
not  an  end  in  itself  but  only  one 
step  towards  a  long-term  goal  of 
revolutionary  change.  Its  short- 
term  goal  is  bringing  about  a 
growing  respect  and  compassion  for 
working  class  experience  and 
struggle.  If  I  just  spit  out  my  anger 
and  walk  away,  chances  are  that  the 
target  of  my  anger  will  learn  no  real 
respect  for  working  class  people, 
and  will  just  watch  what  she  says 
around  them.  We  must  learn  not 
only  to  express  angry  class-related 
feelings,  but  to  stay  and  struggle  to 


make  class  connections  around  the 
anger  and  in  the  process  build  class 
consciousness.  This  is  what  it 
means  to  channel  personal  pain  into 
political  action  —  the  first  step 
towards  change. 

Author's  Note:  I'd  like  to  give  credit  to 
Suzannah  Greentree  and  Meece  Riccio  for 
their  honest  support  with  these  ideas. 

Bibliography 

Quest  has  published  a  number  of  articles 
on  class  and  feminism.  We  see  it  as  an  impor- 
tant issue  and  are  publishing  this  brief 
bibliography  to  aid  those  who  wish  to  read 
further. 

Anne  Marie  Troger,  "Organizing  That 
Works,"  in  Vol.  I,  #2,  Money,  Fame,  and 
Power. 

Alice  Quinn,  "Insanity  and  Control:  a  Class 
Trap,"  in  Vol.  I,  #2,  Money,  Fame,  and 
Power. 

Karen  Kollias,  "Class  Realities:  Create  a  New 
Power  Base/'  in  Vol.  I,  #3,  The  Selfhood  of 
Women. 

Caroline  Sparks,  Bat-Ami  Bar-On,  and 
Cherlyn  Paul,  "Designs  for  Income 
Sharing,"  in  Vol.  II,  #3,  Organizations  and 
Strategies. 

Jackie  MacMillan,  "Prostitution  as  Sexual 
Politics,"  in  Vol.  IV  #1,  Kaleidoscope  Two. 
Vol.  Ill,  #3,  Work,  Work,  Work,  and  Vol. 
Ill,  #4,  Race,  Class,  and  Culture  both  contain 
several  articles  on  the  subject  of  class  and 
feminism. 
Other  Sources: 

Charlotte  Bunch  and  Nancy  Myron,  eds. 
Class  and  Feminism  (Baltimore,  Md.:  Diana 
Press,  1974). 

Lessons  from  the  Damned:  Class  Struggle  in 
the  Black  Community  (Available  from  Times 
Change  Press,  Penwell  Road,  Washington, 
NJ  07882). 

Lillian  Breslow  Rubin,  Worlds  of  Pain:  Life 
in  the  Working-Class  Family  (New  York: 
Basic  Books,  1976). 

Richard  Sennett  and  Jonathan  Cobb,  The 
Hidden  Injuries  of  Class  (New  York:  Ran- 
dom House,  1972). 

Mary-Therese    Riccio    lives   and 
works  in  San  Francisco. 


If  I've  Upset  You/41 


It's  Always  the 
Women: 

An  Interview 

with  Community  Organizer 

Marie  Nahikian 

graphics  by  Kay  Lindsey 


The  following  is  an  interview 
with  Marie  Nahikian  (MN), 
housing  activist  and  community 
organizer  in  Washington,  DC,  who 
is  currently  running  for  the  DC 
City  Council.  The  interview  was 
conducted  by  Juanita  Weaver,  (I), 
transcribed  by  Betty  Wheeler  and 
edited  by  the  Quest  staff. 

I:  I  guess  we'll  start  by  finding  out 
something  about  you.  How  would 
you  describe  yourself? 

MN:  I'm  a  woman,  clearly,  and  I 
guess  my  motivations  are  based 
mostly  in  my  experiences.  I've  been 
dealing  with  issues,  basically 
economic  issues,  from  a 
community-organizing  point  of 
view,  for  a  long  time.  That  wasn't 
something  I  set  out  to  do;  it's  a 
matter  of  seeing  what's  around  you 
and  then  figuring  out  how  you're 
going  to  deal  with  it. 


I:  You've  been  organizing  for 
about  ten  years,  so  you  started 
when  you  were  in  your  twenties, 
right?  How  did  that  happen  in- 
itially? 

MN:  The  tendency  to  look  at  what 
is  going  on  with  people  around  me 
largely  came  out  of  family 
experience.  My  mother  was  always 
taking  care  of  somebody  else.  My 
father  was  always  helping  someone 
with  a  problem. 

When  I  was  in  college  in  1967, 
the  concept  of  black  power  was  just 
coming  to  the  forefront.  I  was  one 
of  the  editors  of  a  student 
newspaper  at  the  University  of 
North  Carolina,  Greensboro,  and 
also  was  involved  with  a  literary 
magazine  and  student  government. 
The  black  women  students'  associa- 
tion on  campus  became  very  in- 
volved with  the  cafeteria  workers, 
who  were  fighting  a  typical  union 


42/Quesf,  vol.  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


battle  over  wages  and  hours.  The 
black  women  organized  the 
students  in  support  of  the  cafeteria 
workers,  since  obviously  most  of 
the  workers  were  black.  The  stu- 
dent body,  however,  was 
predominantly  white.  The  role  that 
I  played  was  the  role  I  have  con- 
tinued to  play  —  somebody  who 
could  understand  both  sides  of  the 
picture  —  working  with  the  black 
students'  group  not  as  part  of  that 
group,  but  as  a  kind  of  translator. 
We  were  able  to  organize  the  whole 
student  body  to  boycott  the 
cafeteria.  We  set  up  food  lines  —  it 
was  a  classic  '60s  college  scene. 

But  the  thing  that  amazed  the  un- 
iversity administration,  which  saw 
civil-rights  and  worker  confron- 
tations in  Chapel  Hill  and  at  Duke, 
was  that  they  never  expected  it  out 
of  a  predominantly  women's 
college.  We  kept  that  boycott  in  the 
cafeteria  going  with  the  majority  of 
the  students  for  almost  two  weeks 
before  the  cafeteria  workers  finally 
got  a  contract  with  some  of  the 
things  that  they  wanted  in  it.  That 
was  the  first  political  organizing  I 
did,  and  it  grew  from  there. 

I  came  to  Washington  to  work 
for  the  U.S.  Student  Press  Associa- 
tion. We  put  together  the  first 
national  conference  to  look  at 
questions  of  ecology  and  the  en- 
vironmental crisis.  This  was  in 
January,  1970. 

From  there,  I  went  to  work  for  a 
trade  association  as  their  staff 
writer,  making  $13,000  a  year,  more 
money  than  I  ever  thought  possible 
or  than  my  family  had  ever  made.  I 
was  writing  manuals  about  jobs  in 
the  scrapyard.  We  were  involved  in 
an    employment-training    contract, 


for  the  hard-core  unemployed.  I  did 
a  series  of  manuals  on  driving  a 
truck,  and  operating  a  crane,  and 
spent  a  lot  of  time  in  the  scrapyards 
with  a  hard  hat  learning  how  to  do 
the  jobs  in  order  to  write  the  books. 
The  men  couldn't  believe  there  was 
a  woman  in  steel-toed  boots, 
goggles  and  hard  hat  climbing  up 
the  crane. 

This  experience,  which  was  an 
attempt  to  deal  with  the  social 
problem  of  hard-core  unemploy- 
ment amongst  the  unskilled,  made  it 
seem  futile  to  me  to  convince  these 
guys  that  they  needed  a  job  so  badly 
that  they  should  put  up  with 
working  for  two  dollars  an  hour  in 
horrible  working  conditions.  The 
program  ended  and  we  were  all 
fired. 

We  all  went  on  unemployment. 
That  was  my  first  experience  with 
unemployment,  and  I  was 
traumatized.  All  my  life  I  had  been 
told  that  you're  supposed  to  have  a 
job  and  be  a  productive  member  of 
society. 

From  there  I  went  to  work  for  the 
Institute  for  Policy  Studies.  I  went 
to  work  as  a  secretary,  although  I 
was  really  editing  one  of  the  co- 
director's  books.  Before  finishing 
his  book,  I  had  gotten  involved  in 
community  stuff,  largely  through  a 
man  that  I  met  who  said,  "Hey, 
come  on,  I  want  you  to  come  to 
these  meetings."  That  experience  of 
building  the  neighborhood- 
government  project  in  Adams 
Morgan  was  my  first  community 
organizing.  I  have  spread  out  too 
much  more  of  a  city-wide  base  right 
now,  but  that's  been  a  ten-year 
process. 

I   spent   two   years   building   the 


It's  Always  the  Women/43 


Adams  Morgan  Organization,  and 
became  its  first  executive  director.  I 
remained  an  organizer,  never  taking 
an  elected  office.  I  was  the  paid 
staff.  There  are  some  people  in  the 
neighborhood  to  this  day,  who,  if 
they  want  to  deal  with  something, 
will  call  me  —  just  because  a  per- 
sonal relationship  has  been  es- 
tablished. Those  personal 
relationships  are  the  key  to  whether 
organizing  works  or  not. 

People  often  do  things  because 
they  believe  in  people.  I  hope  that 
one  of  the  things  I've  always  done  is 
to  engender  a  belief  in  what  people 
can  do  when  they  deal  with  an 
issue,  not  just  a  belief  in  me  as  a 
person. 

Subsequently,  I  was  appointed 
by  the  mayor  to  the  Rental  Accom- 
modations Commission  as  a  tenant 
commissioner,  reinforcing  the  city- 
wide  base  that  I've  moved  into. 

I:  How  did  you  come  to  your  sense 
of  power? 

MN:  It  was  a  pretty  agonizing 
process  to  suddenly  be  willing  to 
say,  "Yes,  I  do  have  power,  and  I 
can  use  it  responsibly."  Maybe  it  is 
a  process  of  growing  up.  Also,  even 
though  I've  been  doing  organizing 
and  I've  been  involved  with  lots  of 
projects  over  the  past  ten  years, 
there  was  still  a  part  of  me  that  said, 
"Well,  you're  going  to  go  off  and  do 
all   those   things   that  you're   sup- 


posed to  do.  You're  going  to  have  a 
family.  You're  going  to  get  married, 
and  you're  going  to  have  a  profes- 
sion; you're  going  to  make  it  in 
society."  I  just  turned  thirty  about  a 
year  ago,  and  by  the  time  you're 
thirty  you're  supposed  to  have  all  of 
those  things  taken  care  of.  And  it 
was  an  emotional  crisis  for  me.  That 
was  when  I  was  finally  willing  to 
say,  "Hey,  Marie,  you  know  you're 
never  going  to  fulfill  the  mold,  and 
it's  all  right.  Somewhere  along  the 
line  that's  all  right.  You're  going  to 
be  living  off  your  $183  Social 
Security  when  you  get  old  just  like 
everyone  else  is." 

The  difficulty  is  that  I  come  from 
a  working-class  background,  a 
moderate-to-low-income  Southern- 
white  family.  My  mother  was  a 
cook  and  my  father  worked  at  the 
post  office.  Part  of  the  most  dif- 
ficult thing  was  learning  to  be 
proud  of  that,  and  be  proud  of  the 
fact  that  my  class  didn't  have 
anything  to  do  with  who  I  was  as  a 
person. 

Another  part  is  understanding 
how  the  political  system  and  the 
economic  system  work.  Because  I 
think  one  of  the  great  dilemmas  of 
all  times  is  to  be  working-class  and 
to  be  educated.  You're  always  on 
that  fence  of  knowing  that  you 
could  do  whatever  you  wanted  to. 

I  know  what  my  life  is  going  to 
be.  A  friend  of  mine  said  to  me, 
"You    know,    Marie,    one    of    the 


U/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


things  that  amazes  me  about  you  is 
that  you  really  are  pretty  basically 
happy."  And  I  thought  about  it  for 
a  minute  and  I  said,  "Yeah,  I  guess  I 
really  am."  I  said,  "This  is  my 
home,  this  is  where  I'll  be,  unless 
the  speculation  runs  me  out." 
That's  what's  important. 

I:  In  coming  to  terms  with  your 
power,  could  you  say  that  once  you 
truly  faced  the  fact  that  these 
stereotypes  did  not  apply  to  you,  it 
became  clear  that  you  knew  what 
you  were  going  to  do? 

MN:  Yes,  I  think  it  made  it  much 
clearer.  I  was  also  in  therapy.  I  went 
to  the  therapist  initially  in  an 
emotional  crisis,  and  she's  a  very 
reality-based  person.  One  of  the 
things  the  process  of  therapy  has 
helped  me  to  do  is  to  come  to  terms 
with  who  I  am  and  to  feel  comfor- 
table with  that.  Therapy  is  a  very 
middle-class  process,  but  I  have 
found  out  in  the  process  that  I  have 
a  hell  of  a  lot  of  anger  about  a  lot  of 
things.  The  key  question  then 
becomes,  can  you  defuse  that  anger 
so  that  it's  properly  directed,  in- 
stead of  internalizing  it,  as  most 
women  do,  and  chastising  yourself 
for  who  you  aren't. 

I:  How  would  you  describe  your 
work? 

MN:  Well,  I  think  that  my  role  in 
DC  over  the  past  ten  years  has 
changed.  I  am  considered  more  a 
leader  now  than  just  an  organizer, 
although  I'm  much  more  comfor- 
table in  an  organizer  role. 

There's  a  very  fine  line  between 
being  in  the  background  —  which  is 


what  an  organizer  does  —  and  being 
a  leader.  If  you're  a  good  organizer, 
a  group  comes  to  you  because  they 
know  that  you've  helped  other 
groups.  People  come  to  me  and  I 
say,  "Hey,  let's  take  a  look  at  what 
your  situation  is.  Tell  me  about 
your  notices  to  vacate.  What  do  you 
want  to  do?"  And  sometimes  you 
have  to  spend  a  lot  of  time  getting 
people  to  be  able  to  talk  about  what 
they  want  to  do.  You  know,  if  they 
had  the  world  at  their  feet  and  could 
do  anything  they  wanted  to  do, 
what  would  they  do? 

Once  you  get  a  sense  of  what 
they  want  to  do,  then  the  role  of  an 
organizer  is  to  lay  out  all  the  op- 
tions. But,  you  have  to  be  very 
careful  not  to  cut  people  off.  You 
have  to  be  realistic  and  pragmatic 
on  the  one  hand,  and  say,  "It's 
going  to  be  hard,  you're  going  to 
have  to  challenge  laws,  you're  going 
to  have  to  do  this  and  this  and  this." 
but  at  the  same  time  you  have  to 
give  them  some  sense  of  hope,  that 
what  they're  going  to  do  means 
something. 

And  sometimes  the  hardest  thing 
is  to  find  something  that  is  in  their 
own  self-interest  —  because  for  me 
that's  why  people  do  things.  People 
don't  do  things  because  they're 
good  for  the  group,  or  they're  good 
for  the  block.  They  don't  do  that 
naturally.  Our  society  doesn't  do 
that.  So  you  start  with  what  their 
own  self-interest  is.  And  once  you 
talk  about  their  self-interest  and 
once  you  get  them  to  believe  that 
they  can  defend  and  stand  up  for 
their  own  self-interest,  then  they're 
able  to  step  outside  of  that.  Then 
they're  able  to  say,  "Hey,  this  really 
does  mean  something  for  somebody 


It's  Always  the  Women/45 


else."  This  is  what  any  good 
organizer  does. 

If  you're  a  leader,  you  walk  in, 
you  tell  people  what  they  should  do. 
And  for  me  that's  a  very  fine  line 
because  in  a  sense,  in  being  an 
organizer  you  often  do  have  to  tell 
people,  particularly  if  they're  not 
comfortable  about  making  the  deci- 
sion. But  you've  got  to  involve  peo- 
ple in  the  decision-making  process, 
because  otherwise  it  all  falls  on  you, 
and  you  become  a  leader  with  this 
group  of  people  behind  you  that 
have  to  carry  along  with  you.  You 
have  to  work  very  hard  to  build 
self-initiative  and  some  kind  of  self- 
responsibility. 

I:  The  groups  that  you  deal  with  in 
this  city  are  mixed  racially,  and  cer- 
tainly made  up  of  both  men  and 
women.  How  do  you  as  a  white 
woman  get  the  trust  of  minorities, 
and  how  do  they  perceive  you? 

MN:  The  trust  that  a  lot  of  black 
and  Latina  women  in  DC  that  I've 
worked  with  has  come  over  a  period 
of  time.  When  I  first  began  working 
with  the  community  in  Adams 
Morgan,  which  is  where  I  still  live,  I 
think  there  was  some  initial  resent- 
ment at  my  being  a  pivotal  role.  But 
the  thing  that  is  important  about  the 
situation  I  was  in  with  the  Adams 
Morgan  Organization  is  that  it  was 
a  diverse  economic,  racial  and 
cultural  group.  There  was  never 
any  trust  of  each  other.  That  was 
built  up  over  a  period  of  time.  And 
it's  been  largely  through  actions, 
and  through  what  I've  done  — 
whether  it's  dealing  with  legislation 
at  the  city  council,  a  rent-control 
law  or   an   anti-speculation   bill  — 


that  trust  has  come. 

But  I  still  confront  that  problem 
every  time  I  go  into  a  new  group. 
They've  got  to  see  you,  and  they've 
got  to  know  what  you  have  to  say 
before  there's  any  reason  to  trust 
you.  I've  begun  to  work  with 
groups  of  folks,  and  with  in- 
dividuals in  the  city,  who  as  a  whole 
do  not  trust  white  folks,  and  there 
are  good  reasons  not  to.  Often  they 
may  do  nothing  more  than  call  me 
and  say,  "What  do  we  do  now,"  or 
"What  do  you  think  we  can  do 
about  this  and  who  should  we  talk 
to  here?"  And  that  may  be  the  most 
I'll  ever  do,  because  it's  important 
for  them  to  have  their  own 
leadership. 

One  of  the  fundamental 
problems,  I  think,  in  dealing  in  an 
urban  society,  is  that  particularly 
with  poor  folks,  they've  gotten  very 
used  to  a  system  that  says,  "We  will 
let  you  survive  barely,  but  we  will 
not  allow  you  to  have  any  sense  of 
your  own  self- worth  or  any  sense  of 
your  own  power."  So  one  of  the 
things  you  have  to  deal  with  is  peo- 
ple looking  at  you  and  saying,  "Ah, 
well,  here  comes  the  answer  to  our 
prayers."  And  then  when  you  begin 
to  tell  people  that  you're  not  going 
to  do  it  for  them,  that  you  can  tell 
them  how  to  do  it,  and  maybe  give 
them  some  information  and  some 
tools,  but  they're  the  ones  who  are 
going  to  have  to  do  it,  that 's  a  very 
scary  process  for  people  who've 
never  had  any  sense  that  they  could 
do  anything  before. 

The  most  fundamental  thing 
you've  got  to  do  is  you've  got  to 
deal  with  what  people  feel.  If  they 
don't  feel  it,  then  there's  nothing 
they're  going  to  do  about  a  problem. 


16/Quest 


I  get  upset  with  groups  that  try  to 
organize  from  ideological  stands  — 
lots  of  rhetoric,  lots  of  good  things 
you  say  and  people  don't  feel  it. 

One  of  the  most  tangible  things 
about  organizing  and  being  a  leader 
is  being  willing  to  say,  "I  do  have 
power."  And  because  power  has 
been  so  abused,  you  often  get 
frightened  of  being  willing  to  admit, 
"Yes,  I  do  have  power,  and  I  can 
affect  those  things,  and  I  will  use 
that  power  responsibly."  Maybe 
that's  the  reason  why  a  lot  of  people 
have  trouble  saying,  "I'm  not  just 
an  organizer,  I'm  effectively  a 
leader."  An  organizer  never  has  to 
own  up  to  power.  S/he  can  stay  in 


the  background;  it  can  look  like 
organizing  is  a  very  manipulative 
process. 

One  of  the  things  that  I  have 
found  and  that  amazes  me  is  that 
when  you  go  into  a  building  to  do 
tenant  organizing  or  you  go  and 
speak  to  a  group,  you  can  look  at 
the  group  and  you  can  tell  who  are 
going  to  be  the  strong  people,  who 
are  going  to  be  willing  to  struggle. 
And  the  thing  about  DC 
neighborhoods  and  DC  com- 
munities is  that  it's  always  the 
women.  It's  always  the  women  who 
carry  the  ball  for  us,  the  women 
who  do  the  organizing,  and  the 
women    who    do    all    the    support 


It's  Always  the  Women/47 


functions,  whether  it's  holding  a 
bake  sale  to  raise  money  to  pay  a 
lawyer,  or  saying,  "We're  going 
down  to  the  mayor's  office  and 
we're  going  to  sit  there." 


I:   What  does  that  say  to  you?  Why 
do  you  think  that  is? 

MN:   There  just  seem  to  be  more 
women  who  are  politically  involved 


48/Quest 


and  active,  who  I  guess  you  could 
term  working-class,  than  there  are 
men.  Men  are  consistently  more  up- 
wardly mobile.  A  lot  of  people 
would  insist  that  I  was  upwardly 
mobile  and  very  ambitious.  And  I 
am  ambitious.  I'm  ambitious  about 
things  that  I  think  are  important. 

Women's  perspectives  are  much 
more  basic.  In  some  ways  you  could 
say  it's  an  ethical  principle,  but  I 
think  that  women  are  more  con- 
cerned about  more  than  their  in- 
dividualistic lives.  They  are  willing 
to  take  a  look  at  how  they  impact  on 
other  people's  lives.  And  if  you 
wanted  to  boil  that  down  to  a  prin- 
ciple, what  you're  really  talking 
about  is  the  old  fundamental  Chris- 
tian principle  of  "do  unto  others  as 
you  would  have  them  do  unto  you," 
or  "love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself." 
When  I  say  that  to  people 
sometimes  they  just  say,  "Wait  a 
minute.  What  has  this  go  to  do  with 
politics?  What  has  this  got  to  do 
with  ideology?  What  has  this  got  to 
do  with  anything?  But  it's  basic. 

I:  Since  you  find  that  in  most 
groups,  women  will  carry  through, 
how  does  this  change,  or  does  it 
change,  your  organizing 
techniques? 

MN:  No,  I  don't  think  it  changes 
my  organizing  techniques,  except 
that  I'm  much  more  sensitive  to 
their  fears.  Any  time  you  deal  with 
organizing  people  to  change 
something  that's  fundamental, 
whether  it's  housing  or  unemploy- 
ment compensation  laws  you  know 
that  women  are  willing  to  take  more 
risks.  And  I'm  always  sensitive  to 
giving  them  a  lot  of  support  because 


I  know  that  they're  the  ones  who 
are  going  to  carry  the  day-to-day 
nitty  gritty;  they're  the  ones  who 
are  going  to  go  around  to  other  peo- 
ple and  reassure  them. 

I  think  that  women  work 
together  more  cooperatively.  They 
are  more  naturally  inclined, 
probably  out  of  life  experiences,  to 
look  to  each  other  for  support  and 
help.  Men  often  have  another 
hidden  agenda,  maybe  it's  that  they 
want  to  get  some  kind  of  recogni- 
tion out  of  it.  Society  tells  them  that 
they're  required  to  produce, 
Women,  having  never  been 
"required"  to  produce  in  terms  of  a 
profession  or  whatever,  are  more 
open  to  doing  the  little  things  that 
have  to  be  done.  Men  are  not  in- 
terested in  having  bake  sales  to  raise 
money. 

I:  In  all  your  organizing,  what  has 
been  your  experience  with  support 
from  the  women's  movement,  and 
what  would  be  your  hope  for  that? 

MN:  I  would  say  on  an  individual 
level,  there  have  been  many  women 
involved  in  the  women's  movement 
who  have  been  supportive  and 
expressed  respect  for  the  impor- 
tance of  what  we're  doing.  But  the 
women's  movement  as  a  whole 
doesn't  want  to  deal  with  issues  like 
housing.  It's  easier  to  deal  with 
things  like  the  ERA,  or  affirmative 
action  for  women,  or  rape,  or  basic 
feminist  questions  like  abortion  or 
lesbianism  or  whatever. 

People  have  said  to  me,  "You 
know,  you've  never  really  been  a 
part  of  the  women's  movement," 
and  I  think  that's  probably  true. 
Partly  because,   I   guess,   I  have  a 


It's  Always  the  Women/49 


much  more  basic  perspective.  For 
me,  taking  on  a  housing  struggle 
when  you're  a  woman  with  three  or 
four  kids  is  the  most  incredibly 
political  commitment  you  can  ever 
take  on.  Compare  that  with 
something  like  abortion.  Abortion's 
a  fundamental  issue  that  I  think 
people  have  very  strong  feelings 
about.  But  abortion  is  also 
something  you  can  go  out  and  deal 
with  and  you  come  home.  And  then 
maybe  a  few  days  later  or  the  next 
day  you  deal  with  it  again.  But  you 
never  walk  away  from  the  housing 
struggle.  You  never  can  leave  it 
because  it's  there  staring  you  in  the 
face  every  moment  of  your  life.  And 
it's  the  most  fundamental  thing  of 
your  life,  where  you  live.  A  per- 
sonal, self-interest  point  of  view  is 
where  most  people's  political  in- 
volvement starts.  Maybe  it's  a  class 
thing.  When  you  organize,  if  you're 
a  good  organizer,  you  start  with 
where  people  are  at.  With  people 
that  I  work  with  and  families  that  I 
work  with,  the  most  important 
thing  is  where  they're  living.  They 
got  an  eviction  notice,  and  what 
does  that  mean?  You  start  there. 
Some  of  the  more  ideological 
groups  who  are  organizing  around 
jobs  or  unemployment  or  whatever, 
go  in  to  talk  to  a  group  and  im- 
mediately lay  out  this  global  scheme 
of  how  housing  is  only  a  part  of 
general  economic  oppression  of 
workers,  that  we're  really  talking 
about  a  global  struggle,  etc.  People 
don't  relate  to  that.  It's  not.a  part  of 
something  that  they  can  take  in. 
And  when  you  talk  about  people 
making  fundamental  changes  — 
about  how  they  view  themselves  in 
the  context  of  the  political  system, 


you've  got  to  start  at  a  very  small 
point.  Some  people  argue  with  me 
about  that,  and  I  know  there  are  a 
lot  of  other  people  who  feel 
differently.  I  can  only  say  that  this 
is  what  works,  out  of  my 
experience. 


I:  How  much  do  you  want  to 
change?  I  want  to  change 
everything,  practically.  I  want  to 
change  every  institution. 

MN:  That's  a  good  question.  I 
think  I  probably  agree  with  you 
that  almost  every  institution  in  our 
society  needs  to  be  changed.  I  think 
that  you  and  I  will  never  see  that  in 
our  lifetimes.  I'm  finally  resigned  to 
the  fact  that  we  are  not  going  to 
wake  up  one  day  and  there's  going 
to  be  a  revolution.  It's  going  to  be  a 
very  small  step  at  a  time,  and  con- 
sequently I  may  be  more  willing  to 
make  compromises  along  the  way, 
because  every  little  step  gets  a  little 
bit  closer.  But  some  things  I  won't 
compromise  —  things  that  are  fun- 
damental in  terms  of  individual 
liberties  and  individual  rights  — 
because  there  is  a  constant  confron- 
tation between  what  is  best  for  a 
whole  group  of  people  versus 
what's  best  for  individual  rights. 

I'll  give  you  a  good  example 
that's  closer  to  my  own  organizing 
experience.  There  is  a  provision  in 
the  new  rent-control  law  that  says 
that  tenants  have  a  right  to  bargain 
with  their  landlords,  and  that  if 
seventy  percent  of  the  tenants  make 
an  agreement  with  their  landlord,  it 
can  be  implemented.  A  fundamental 
question  is,  what  about  the  other 
thirty    percent   who   didn't   agree? 


50/Quest 


They  could  well  be  the  most  correct. 
And  that's  a  tough  one.  In  the  one 
situation  where  I  saw  this  happen, 
the  majority  of  the  group  wanted  to 
equalize  rents  throughout  the 
building.  A  small  minority  of  the 
group  who  had  lived  in  the  building 
a  long  time  and  were  paying  less 
rent  didn't  want  their  rents  equal. 
That's  a  tough  one. 

That's  why  I  believe  much  more 
in  group  democracy  rather  than  in 
the  individual  voting-booth  kind  of 
democracy;  participatory 
democracy  versus  representative 
democracy.  I  think  people  need  the 
experience  of  having  to  deal  with 
other  people  and  how  they  respond, 
because  that  makes  a  difference  in 
how  I'm  going  to  react. 

I:  Okay,  in  these  little  steps  in 
these  apartment  houses  filled  with 
people  that  have  successfully 
resolved  their  problem,  what  is  your 
hope  beyond  that?  Do  you  see  it  as 
a  band-aid? 

MN:  Oh,  I  think  that  in  many 
ways  it  is  a  band-aid.  A  group  of 
tenants  negotiates  the  ability  to  stay 
in  the  building  and  two  years  later 
the  fight's  the  same  thing.  Or  a 
group  of  tenants  loses  here  and  then 
they  move,  and  lo  and  behold,  here 
it  is  staring  them  in  their  face  again, 
in  another  building.  And  that  is  a 
phenomenon  you  always  see,  it 
never  goes  away.  Once  you  get  in- 
volved in  that  kind  of  struggle, 
you're  in  it  for  life.  At  some  point 
people  are  going  to  be  faced  with 
having  to  make  the  decision  again, 
and  they're  going  to  remember. 
They're  going  to  remember 
something    about    that    group 


experience  and  making  the  collec- 
tive, cooperative  commitment. 
They're  also  going  to  have  learned  a 
little  bit  more  about  how  to  operate. 
Tenants  in  this  city  are  outraged  at 
what's  happening  to  them,  because 
for  the  first  time  they  understand 
that  they're  not  only  buying  the 
building,  paying  the  taxes,  paying 
the  bills,  but  they  give  the  man 
money  in  his  pocket  and  tax 
benefits  to  boot.  People  didn't  un- 
derstand that  five  or  six  years  ago. 
It  never  occurred  to  them  that  they 
are  going  to  pay  for  the  fact  that 
three  tenants  in  the  building  didn't 
pay  their  rent,  because  the  landlord 
is  going  to  charge  that  off  to  them  in 
their  rent  increase  next  year. 
They're  slowly  beginning  to  un- 
derstand how  all  those  pieces  fit 
together.  And  until  people  unders- 
tand and  can  feel  how  they  fit  into 
what's  happening  and  know  how 
they're  being  used  and  know  how 
they're  being  oppressed,  even  if  it's 
in  a  very  small  way,  we'll  never  see 
change. 

I:  And  so  you  see  your  action  as 
empowering  individuals  to  solve 
their  own  problems. 

MN:  Sure.  And  to  have  some 
understanding  about  what  they're 
trying  to  solve.  In  Southeast  last 
week  I  ws  talking  to  a  group  of 
tenants,  and  they  said,  "We  don't 
want  to  move."  And  I  said,  "Whose 
responsibility  is  it  that  your  life  is 
being  disrupted?  Where  does  the 
responsibility  lie?"  And  you  know, 
there  was  a  lot  of  discussion  back 
and  forth,  and  finally  this  one 
woman  stood  up  and  she  said, 
"Well,  it's  partly  my  responsibility, 


It's  Always  the  Women/51 


because  I  was  just  going  to  get  up 
and  leave  anyhow.  But  I  don't  want 
to  leave."  So  she  said,  "Once  I've 
decided  that  that's  my  responsibili- 
ty, what'll  I  do  then?"  And  I  say, 
"The  government  —  it's  got  to  deal 
with  you.  And  you  also  lay  it  at  the 
feet  of  the  man  who  gave  you  the 
eviction  notice.  Then  he's  got  to 
deal  with  you." 

In  the  first  organizing  we  ever  did 
around  real-estate  speculation,  a 
developer  came  in,  bought  up  the 
houses,  and  was  going  to  throw  the 
families  out.  This  was  in  1972,  and 
when  I  got  to  talk  to  this  guy,  the 
developer,  it  turns  out  he's  the  little 
guy,  he's  the  little  entrepreneur  who 
grew  up  in  the  neighborhood.  He 
could  not  understand  why  what  he 
was  doing  was  wrong.  He  was 
doing  everyting  he'd  been  told  was 
the  right  thing  to  do.  He  grew  up  in 
one  room  —  it  wasn't  like  he  came 
from  a  monied  family  —  and  I  can 
remember  him  saying  to  me,  "I 
don't  understand  what  I've  done 
wrong.  What  have  I  done  wrong?"  I 
was  mystified.  What  had  he  done 
wrong?  Then  I  realized  that  accor- 
ding to  the  way  the  system  works 
and  everything  he'd  been  told  and 
everything  he'd  learned,  he  had 
done  everything  right.  But  in  the 
context  of  our  telling  him,  "You're 
wrong,  and  you  can't  do  this,"  what 
we  were  talking  about  were  fun- 
damental changes  in  what  was  right 
and  what  was  wrong.  And  that's 
not  something  that  happens  very 
quickly. 

I:   Are  you  going  to  run  for  City 
Council? 

MN:   One  of  the  considerations  in 


my  running  for  City  Council  has 
been  my  ability  to  own  my  own 
power,  and  to  determine  that  people 
do  have  respect  for  me. 

Running  for  City  Council  and 
running  for  political  office  in 
general  is  a  very  different  kind  of 
thing  than  taking  on  a  new  issue. 
When  people  come  to  me  and  say, 
"Look,  this  is  a  problem;  what  do 
you  think  we  should  do  and  how  do 
we  do  it?"  there  are  no  risks  in- 
volved in  that.  When  the  problem 
becomes  personalized,  there  are  all 
kinds  of  risks  involved  and  you  say, 
"Wait  a  minute.  Am  I  going  to  take 
these  kinds  of  personal  risks?" 

I:   What,  for  example? 

MN:  Ego.  I  don't  want  to  lose,  you 
know?  If  you're  going  to  run,  you 
may  lose.  And  I  don't  need  that.  I 
have  resolved  that  I  can  run  and 
win,  and  I  understand  that  it's  not 
going  to  have  anything  to  do  with 
who  I  am  as  a  person,  who  I  am  as 
an  individual  and  my  own  self- 
worth.  But  it's  a  process,  it's  a 
system.  It's  a  game  that  gets  played. 
And  I've  been  able  to  take  myself 
outside  of  that. 

The  other  thing  is  that  it  is  a 
process  of  really  putting  yourself 
wide  open,  and  saying,  "Here  I 
am,"  and  inviting  people  to  inspect 
every  facet  of  your  life,  and  that's 
very  scary.  For  instance,  last  week  I 
was  sitting  out  front  with  a  group 
of  friends  and  somebody  said,  "I 
know  what  we  should  do.  I  think 
we  should  all  get  drunk."  And  I 
said,  "Why  in  the  world  do  people 
want  to  get  drunk?"  And  somebody 
made  the  point  to  me  that  you 
ought  to  get  drunk,  Marie,  because 


52/Quest 


DCCITY 

COUNCIL 


if  you  run  for  City  Council  you 
won't  be  able  to  sit  on  the  front 
stoop  and  get  drunk  anymore. 

But  it's  clear  that  I  want  to  run 
and  I  think  I  can  win,  given  the 
right  situation.  What  we  have  tried 
to  do  is  to  pull  together  what  I  think 
is  a  very  exciting  coalition  of  peo- 
ple, people  who  will  do  work  for  me 
and  who  are  committed  to  putting 
forth  not  just  a  personality  and  not 
just  a  process  of  name-recognition. 
I  think  we  can  do  that  and  play  the 
pragmatic  political  game  and  still 
raise  issues  that  are  not  being  raised 
in  a  way  that  they  should  be  in  the 
city.  I've  put  together  a  group  of 
young,  progressive  political  folks 
who  are  black  and  white,  and  have 
never  worked  together.  It's 
exciting;  it's  the  one  thing  that  the 
political  system  never  expects  to 
happen  in  DC  and  it  could  well 
have  a  fundamental  impact  on 
where  things  go.  It's  a  process  of 
getting  people  willing  to  talk  about 


issues  like  economics  and  class,  and 
ideology  versus  race.  What  has 
happened  is  there's  an  assessment 
going  on  now  among  everybody 
about  whether  or  not  a  white 
woman  is  the  candidate  to  do  that. 
What  it  really  boils  down  to  is 
that  I  won't  run  without  all  the 
pieces.  And  I'm  not  willing  to  take 
the  same  risks  on  a  personal  level 
that  I  would  organizing  an  issue. 
You  have  to  do  things  that  are  ab- 
solutely the  antithesis  of  what  you 
believe  in.  You  have  to  learn  how  to 
do  that.  It's  amazing  to  me  that  I 
think  I  can  have  more  impact  from 
the  inside  than  I  can  from  the  out- 
side. 

I:   Why  do  you  think  that? 

MN:  You  need  that  constant 
pressure  from  the  outside.  But  in 
terms  of  bringing  about  substantive 
social  change,  you've  got  to  have 
people  on  the  inside  who  are  sym- 
pathetic and  who  have  some  sense 
of  what  needs  to  be  done.  We've 
begun  to  identify  people  within  the 
system,  within  the  workings  of  the 
District  government  and  various 
agencies,  who  are  sympathetic  to 
what  needs  to  be  changed.  It's  nitty- 
gritty  little  things  like  how 
regulations  are  developed.  If  there's 
nothing  on  the  inside  giving  people 
tools  on  the  outside  to  use,  then  it's 
always  just  a  head-on  confronta- 
tion. 

I:  How  do  you  identify  yourself 
politically?  I  mean,  radical,  refor- 
mist, radical  socialist  — 

MN:  I  don't  know.  I've  never  tried 
to  put  a  label  on  it.  If  I  run  for  City 


It's  Always  the  Women/53 


Council  I'll  run  as  a  Democrat.  The 
Democratic  party  controls  the  city 
in  terms  of  politics,  and  it's  impor- 
tant to  relate  to  that.  I  have  a  lot  of 
respect  for  people  who  have  been 
involved  in  the  Democratic  Party 
process  in  the  city.  I  know  where 
their  heads  are.  I  clearly  lean  toward 
being  a  socialist  —  not  in  any 
traditional  ideological  sense.  I  think 
any  time  you  begin  to  build 
socialism  in  this  country,  you  do  it 
for  the  situation  you're  in. 

I:  Are  you  afraid,  of  being  co- 
opted? 

MN:  Oh  yes,  I'm  afraid  of  being 
co-opted.  I  think  everybody  is 
afraid  of  being  co-opted.  On  the 
Rent  Commission  if  I  was  not 
willing  to  compromise  on  some 
points,  I  would  have  been  totally  in- 
effective. You  win  some  and  you 
lose  some  in  that  kind  of  situation. 
There  are  fundamental  principles 
that  I  will  never  compromise;  but  if 
you're  building  real  social  change, 
changes  in  the  way  people's  lives 
function  and  how  much  control 
they  have  over  their  lives,  it 
happens  in  very  small  steps.  There's 
never  going  to  be  a  "revolution"  in 
this  country,  because  the  battle  isn't 
worth  it.  It  happens  in  very  small 
increments  and  very  small  steps. 

I:  My  answer  for  not  being  co- 
opted  is  to  have  a  group  who  will  be 
honest  with  me,  to  keep  me  honest. 

MN:  My  group  is  not  defined.  One 
of  the  things  that's  been  very  dif- 
ficult for  me,  is  that  I  have  often 
been  out  there  alone.  When  I,  as  a 
young    white,    was    dealing    with 


racism  in  terms  of  community 
organizing,  a  lot  of  young  whites, 
who  would  have  naturally  been  my 
peer  group,  thought  I  was  a  little 
weird.  They  said,  "How  could  you 
do  that,"  and  "Are  you  a  white 
woman  who  thinks  she's  black?" 

One  of  the  men  involved  in  my 
campaign,  who  is  black  and  very 
savvy,  asked  me,  "Do  you  know 
that  you're  a  white  woman?"  And  I 
said,  "Yeah,  I  know  I'm  a  white 
woman."  I  understood  why  he  was 
asking  that  question.  It's  very  easy 
to  think  that  you're  something  else, 
you  know? 

I  think  over  the  past  three  or  four 
years,  what  has  been  important  to 
me  is  having  a  group  of  friends  who 
understand  where  I'm  coming  from, 
and  can  relate  to  that.  That's 
probably  been  the  thing  that  has 
kept  me  together. 

Finding  people  who  make  me 
know  that  I'm  right,  that  it's  all 
right  for  me  not  to  worry  about 
trying  to  professionally  achieve  a 
$30,000-a-year  job  and  all  the 
things  that  go  with  that,  is  impor- 
tant. 

Another  one  of  the  things  that 
has  held  me  together  is  that,  at  times 
when  I've  had  jobs  that  paid  me  a 
lot  of  money,  I  didn't  change  my 
basic  lifestyle.  You  get  locked  into  a 
lifestyle.  You  get  locked  into  having 
to  pay  X  amount  of  rent.  You  get 
locked  in  to  having  to  spend  X 
amount  of  money  on  clothes.  I  don't 
think  that  was  something  I  was 
aware  of  consciously.  It  was 
probably  just  my  own  natural  in- 
stincts of  how  I  grew  up  and 
knowing  that  money  was  not  in- 
finite. You  get  to  have  respect  for 
the  fact  that  you've  got  a  little  right 


54/Quest 


now,  but  you're  not  going  to  have 
any  a  year  from  now. 

I:  There  are  resources  and  there  are 
energies  in  the  women's  movement, 
and  there  is,  in  your  perception,  a 
lack  of  understanding  of  the  issues 
that  you're  working  on,  lack  of 
willingness  to  put  energy  into  them. 
What  do  you  think  that  the 
women's  movement  could  do  for 
you,  if  anything? 


wasn't  involved  in  this,  it  was 
something  that  I  observed.  Inter- 
national Women's  Year  and  the 
conference  in  Texas  had  no  plat- 
form on  housing.  And  when  I  asked 
why,  they  said,  well,  housing  is  not 
a  women's  issue.  I  think  it's  the 
most  basic  women's  issue,  par- 
ticularly for  women  who  have  their 
own  household,  for  women  who 
don't  have  the  same  opportunity  to 
jump  into  the  economic  system  at 


MS>>>  °^  1/[/lny^^n^ 


fh(F\ 


MN:  I  think  that  the  women's 
movement  has  got  to  be  willing  to 
accept  that  some  issues  other  than 
what  can  really  be  defined  as  strictly 
women's  issues,  are  just  as  fun- 
damental and  important  for  women. 
Let    me   give    you    an    example.    I 


the  same  level  as  most  men.  For 
minority  women,  it's  the  most  basic 
issue.  I  remember  being  asked  by 
the  DC  Commission  on  the  Status 
of  Women  to  develop  a  whole  plat- 
form on  housing.  I  laid  it  out.  It  was 
never    included   because   it   wasn't 


It's  Always  the  Women/55 


seen  as  a  women's  issue.  And 
knowing  that  it's  women  who  are 
the  most  affected  as  a  group,  and 
that  it  is  women  who  are  often  the 
most  fundamentally  involved  in  the 
struggles  around  issues  like  housing 
or  tax-reform  —I  think  it's  got  to 
become  more  integrated  with  the 
women's  movement.  It's  very,  very 
important. 

In  part,  I  think  there  is  a  class 
problem.  For  example,  I  think  a  lot 
of  women  feel  that  fighting  for  the 
ERA  is  a  luxury.  I  mean,  I  unders- 
tand why  it  isn't  a  luxury,  but  a  lot 
of  women  I  work  with  don't  have 
time  to  deal  with  something  as 
wonderful  as  having  a  law,  a 
Constitutional  Amendment,  that 
says  women  are  equal,  when  they're 
trying  to  deal  with  immediate  sur- 
vival. I  would  love  to  see  women 
somehow  take  on  the  whole  issue  of 
public  assistance  and  welfare  as  a 
women's  issue.  And  I've  never  seen 
anybody  begin  to  make  that  kind  of 
argument. 

If  you  want  to  put  it  in  class 
terms,  here's  the  best  example  I  can 
give  you.  I  have  a  girlfriend  who 
bought  a  house  in  a  block  in  DC 
which  was  a  typical  bad  block  five 
years  ago,  I  mean  the  pimps  were 
there,  and  the  prostitutes  were 
there,  and  the  druggies  were  there, 
and  she  used  to  get  very  irritated 
with  things  like  needles  in  her  yard, 
and  just  the  whole  scene.  But  the 
thing  she  never  worried  about  was 
whether  her  house  was  going  to  be 
okay,  because  she  knew  people  in 
the  neighborhood  and  they  knew 
her,  and  she  was  widely  accepted. 
She  never  worried  about  sending 
her  child  out  to  play,  because  even 
if  the  child  was  on  the  street  corner 


she  knew  the  prostitutes  were  going 
to  look  out  for  her  and  make  sure 
nothing  was  going  to  happen  to  her. 
One  day  she  came  home  from  work; 
she  was  confronted  by  one  of  the 
prostitutes  on  the  corner  who  said, 
"Hey,  your  little  dog  got  loose,  and 
Mr.  So-and-So  down  the  street  has 
it."  And  she  went  down  and 
collected  her  dog.  In  the  last  five 
years,  the  block  has  changed. 
Middle-class  whites,  upper-income 
folks  have  moved  in.  She's  the  only 
black  family  left  on  the  block,  the 
prostitutes  are  gone,  the  drug  ad- 
dicts are  gone,  no  longer  does  she 
have  crap  and  garbage  dumped  in 
her  yard.  The  quality  of  life,  in  that 
sense,  is  much  better.  But  she  now 
worries  about  whether  she  can  send 
her  daughter  out  to  play,  and  she 
came  home  from  work  and  found 
the  same  small  little  dog  dead  in  the 
street.  Everybody  knew  that  was 
her  dog.  Nobody  called  her,  nobody 
bothered  to  take  the  dog  in.  People 
who  don't  have  a  whole  lot  of 
money  have  to  work  together  to 
survive.  In  a  low-income  building 
you  always  find  people  will  share 
their  food  stamps  because  someone 
ran  out  this  month,  whereas  where 
more  affluence  comes  —  or  more 
supposed  or  assumed  affluence, 
even  though  it  may  not  really  be 
affluence  at  all  —  people  don't  have 
to  make  those  kind  of  responses. 
You're  your  own  person. 

I:  My  response,  although  I  want  to 
leave  it  at  that,  is  that  it  sounds 
almost  too  good  to  be  true. 

MN:  I  don't  know  if  it's  some- 
thing that  is  globally  true.  All  I 
know  is  that  I  could  tell  you  lots  of 


56/ Quest 


stories  along  the  same  lines. 

I:  One  last  question:  do  you 
consider  yourself  a  feminist? 

MN:  If  you  mean  the  way  the  word 
is  used  in  the  media,  I'd  say  no,  I 
don't  think  -I'd  consider  myself  a 
feminist.  As  to  what  it  means  to  me 
personally  and  what  I  think  it 
means  to  other  women  who  call 
themselves  feminist,  I'd  say  yes. 

I:   What  do  you  think  that  means? 

MN:  I'm  a  feminist  in  the  sense 
that  I  feel  very  strongly  about  what 
women  can  do,  and  what  women  as 
women  accomplish,  and  I  feel  very 
strongly  and  very  aware  of  my  role 
as  a  woman,  and  there's  a  real  con- 
sciousness about  that.  But  if  being 
feminist  means  that  I  work  only 
with  women,  or  that  I  think  that 
women  have  to  get  their  stuff 
together  before  I  think  women  can 
deal  with  the  rest  of  society,  then 
I'm  not  a  feminist.  Because  that's 
not  the  way  the  real  world  works. 


A  MAGAZINE  OF  LESBIAN  CULTURE  Aty0 


£y 


*o 


^\as3-i  do  rpt 


*fi*5 


Tomalo  Publications 


c? 


3°V 


jjjxtS.Sop ,\ 


r-pnn,  Q 


DYKE 


.  2  s 


V 


A  QUARTERLY 


''"VALYSIS  AND  INTERVIEWS0 


yes!  i  want  10  subscribe  to 

new  womenfe  times 

name 

address : 

city . state/ 


\a*T  MdroC  ***<  OC6GQ 

7%^cJh«%4C4r,Ht*)  nU+Lf   lord  sub 


It's  Always  the  Women/57 


Women 

in  Their  Communities 


Photograph  essay  by  JEB 

Women  in  their  communities  are  becoming  more  skilled  and  determined. 
The  skills  range  from  growing  a  garden  to  organizing  against  rape  and 
from  running  printing  presses  to  practicing  ancient  healing  arts.  The  com- 
munities range  from  country  counties  to  enormous  cities  and  from  villages 
to  suburbs.  Here  in  Washington,  D.C.,  where  I  live,  we  have  taken  to  the 
streets  in  support  of  more  jobs,  the  ERA  and  the  demands  of  the  Longest 
Walk.  Here  and  elsewhere,  women  have  protested  restrictions  on  abortion 
rights,  the  Bakke  Decision,  nuclear  power  plants  and  anti-gay  bigotry. 
Everywhere  women  are  filling  the  streets  with  music,  theater  and  running. 
We  share  with  each  other  at  great  gatherings  like  the  Michigan  Women's 
Music  Festival  and  in  closer  circles  at  our  Women's  Centers.  We're  boycot- 
ting Nestle's  and  J. P.  Stevens;  white  sugar  and  Florida  orange  juice;  Atlan- 
tic/Warner records  and  unratified  states.  We're  stepping  into  new  spaces 
and  energies:  uncovering  our  herstory,  discovering  our  spirituality  and 
respecting  our  bodies.  We're  working  in  health  care  centers  and  child  care 
centers.  We're  struggling  with  the  separations  of  age,  race,  class  and 
sexuality.  But  we  are  also  understanding  more  about  everything  we  have  in 
common  which  can  unify  us.  I  hope  this  selection  of  photographs  conveys 
the  optimism  I  have  about  our  determination  to  fight  for  the  changes  we 
know  are  necessary  for  the  survival  of  us  all. 
JEB 


our  , 

bodies 
our 

mic 


58/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


copyright  1978  JEB 


Women  in  Their  Communities/59 


Women  in  Their  Communities/61 


62/Quest 


} 


Women  in  Their  Communities/63 


Organising 

Vtural  Women 


By  ALLIE  CORBIN  HIXSON 

graphic  by  Sue  Lenaerts 

"I'm  for  equal  rights,  but  you 
can't  be  a  'women's  libber'  if  you 
believe  in  the  Bible."  So  ran  the 
quotation  under  the  full-color  por- 
trait of  the  just-named  Kentucky 
beauty  queen  in  a  recent  Louisville 
rotogravure  magazine.  And  that,  in 
a  nutshell,  sums  up  the  confused 
state  of  too  many  of  our  younger 
women,  to  say  nothing  of  the  out- 
right hostility  of  the  older 
homemakers,  on  the  question  of 
ERA  in  our  rural  communities  in 
Kentucky. 

Yes,  I  know  why  women  in  rural 
areas  are  suspicious  of  those  of  us 
who  belong  to  feminist 
organizations  and  who  go  about 
talking  for  the  Equal  Rights 
Amendment.  They  have  been  sold  a 
bill  of  goods,  mainly  by  the  agents 
of  the  power  structure  in  the  com- 
munity: the  all-male  city  council, 
the  Rotary  Club  and  the  Chamber 
of  Commerce,  the  local  political 
party  chairmen,  the  Farm  Bureau 
agency  .  .  .  reinforced  by  whatever 
civic  group  that  has  its  own  built-in 
auxiliary  mechanism  for  main- 
taining the  unwritten  (but  strictly 
observed)  code  of  men  in  decision- 
making roles  and  women  in  subser- 


vient service  alliance.  Anyone  who 
calls  this  time-hallowed  structure 
into  question  must  be  prepared  for 
automatic  labelling  as  "intruder," 
"agitator"  or  "women's  libber." 
The  inner  circle  of  the  community 
hierarchy  will  shut  her  out  and 
render  her  "invisible." 

Yes,  I  know  why  these  sincere 
but  guileless  women  in  small  towns 
are  frightened  and  kept  in  line  by 
what  they  hear  from  the  pulpit 
every  Sunday  morning,  Sunday 
night,  and  perhaps  again  at 
Wednesday's  prayer  meeting.  There 
is  a  direct  channel  from  the  Phyllis 
Schlafly  propaganda  mill  in  Alton, 
Illinois  through  the  mouth  of  the 
local  fundamentalist  preacher  to  the 
ears  of  the  most  vulnerable  segment 
.of  our  society  —  the  rural  women  in 
the  Bible  Belt. 

Despite  the  encroachment  of  ur- 
banization, the  culture  of  many 
small  towns  with  populations  under 
10,000  still  reflects  a  clinging  to 
nineteenth-century  modes  of 
behavior  between  the  sexes;  the 
conditioned  acceptance  of  this 
"mystique"  (to  borrow  Betty 
Friedan's  word)  is  the  root  of  the 
problem  in  achieving  equality  for 
women.  It  renders  them  vulnerable 
to  the  distortion  and  scare  tactics 
used  so  successfully  by  the  anti- 
ERA   forces.   Custom  surrounding 


64/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


the  family  tends  to  give  credence  to 
the  threat  promulgated  by  Schlafly 
and  the  Birchers. 

"Don't  you  believe  the  Bible 
when  it  says  the  man  should  be  the 
head  of  the  house?"  I  was  asked  in 
all  sincere  simplicity  by  the  wife  of 
the  local  judge.  "Besides/'  she 
added  quickly  as  if  to  clinch  the 
argument,  "Bob  lets  me  do  anything 
I  want  to  do." 

This  incident  points  up  the 
"closed  mind"  condition  we  face  in 
the  attempt  to  win  over  the  farm 
wives  and  working  women  in  the 
smaller  townships  such  as  mine. 
They  are  women  whose  lives  are 
defined  by  the  patriarchal  family, 
the  church,  the  school  and  the  local 
textile  factory  or  other  business 
upon  which  they  depend  for  their 
livelihood. 

In  my  county,  a  good  number  of 
these  women  are  bringing  in  the 
only  paycheck,  and  it  is  a  bit  of  a 
joke  among  the  farmers  that  some 
of  their  neighbors  are  called 
"gophers"  —  they  take  their  wives 
to  the  sewing  factory  to  work  and 
"go  for"  them  again  at  4  P.M.  In 
many  cases  these  women  hand  over 
their  wages  to  their  husbands  to 
maintain  the  myth  of  the  male 
breadwinner. 

Despite  the  fact  that  economic 
conditions  have  forced  farm  women 
out  of  the  homes,  and  despite  the 
fact  that  they  are  exploited  and 
exhausted  by  the  treadmill  they  are 
bound  to  (a  J. P.  Stevens-owned  fac- 
tory), they  dare  not  complain  or 
even  acknowledge  their  oppression. 
Consequently,  the  area  mental 
health  clinicians  tell  me,  a  majority 
of  their  depression  patients  are 
women    who    have    broken    down 


after  a  few  years  in  the  factory 
where  they  must  cope  with  a  highly 
competitive  piece-production 
system  compounded  with  worrying 
about  their  homes  and  children  (no 
child  care  facilities)  and  bearing  the 
burden  of  a  disgruntled  husband 
ashamed  to  have  his  wife  "making 
the  living." 

Because  the  prevailing  mores  dic- 
tate a  cover-up  of  this  changing 
status  in  parental  roles,  these 
women  will  neither  act  nor  speak  in 
any  way  that  would  ally  them  with 
those  who  could  help  them  —  their 
sisters  in  the  women's  movement.  If 
you  invite  them  to  a  Business  and 
Professional  Women  (BPW)  or 
American  Association  of  University 
Women  (AAUW)  luncheon  to  dis- 
cuss national  child  care  legislation, 
for  instance,  a  guarded  look  will 
come  into  their  eyes  as  they  thank 
you  politely  but  refrain  on  grounds 
of  other  commitments.  The  same  is 
true  for  women  working  as 
secretaries  or  clerks  in  the 
businesses  around  the  town  square. 
If  you  prolong  the  discussion 
because  you  sense  the  woman 
herself  is  aware  of  the  need  for  the 
program,  you  will  soon  back  her 
into  the  old  defense  —  her  husband 
says  she  should  not  get  involved  in 
any  other  organizations,  with  all  the 
church  and  school  responsibilities 
she  already  has. 

An  Outsider 

All  this  became  clear  to  me  from 
my  experiences  after  my  husband 
and  I  gave  up  our  respective  careers 
in  Louisville  four  years  ago  to  move 
to  our  acreage  on  the  Green  River 
some  ninety  miles  south  of  the  city 


Organizing  Rural  Women/65 


and  twenty  miles  from  the  farming 
community  in  Green  County  where 
I  had  been  born  and  raised.  While  I 
had  not  lived  in  this  part  of  the 
country  for  thirty  years,  I  had  made 
periodic  visits  to  my  folks;  it  never 
occurred  to  me  that  I  would  be 
returning  to  settle  among 
"strangers"  instead  of  "my 
people."  Hence,  it  came  as  a  bit  of  a 
shock  when  I  discovered  that  I  was 
being  treated  as  an  "outsider"  and, 
though  the  customs  of  my 
childhood  community  had  remained 
pretty  much  the  same,  /  had 
changed. 

The  first  eye-opener  came  when  I 
joined  the  local  Democratic 
Women's  Club  and  found  soon 
thereafter  that  I  was  the  only 
woman  who  had  any  idea  of  even 
expressing  herself  in  public  on  a 
controversial  issue,  let  alone  active- 
ly supporting  a  woman  candidate.  It 
was  after  two  bake  sales  and  one 
county-wide  campaign  barbecue 
rally  (in  which  I  did  my  share  of 
slinging  potato  salad  into  out- 
stretched platters)  that,  much  to  my 
chagrin,  on  the  subsequent  election 
morning,  I  turned  out  to  be  the  only 
woman  of  the  club  who  appeared  at 
the  courthouse  door  to  hand  out 
buttons  and  bumper  stickers  for  the 
first  woman  ever  to  run  for  Lieute- 
nant Governor  in  Kentucky. 
Furthermore,  it  was  abundantly 
clear  that  in  this  county  no  one 
expected  her  to  win  with  TEN  MEN 
also  contesting  for  the  seat.  In  my 
neck  of  the  woods,  all  elective  of- 
fices were  to  be  filled  by  men  and 
since  the  position  of  Lieutenant 
Governor  was  viewed  as  the 
training  ground  for  the  gover- 
norship, that  slot  most  certainly  had 


to  be  filled  by  a  man! 

All  day  long  I  stood  my  lonely 
vigil,  bearing  as  gracefully  as  possi- 
ble the  sly  jokes  of  the  old  men  sit- 
ting around  the  polls  and  returning 
with  some  bravado  the  more  overt 
taunts  of  the  younger  "dogs"  —  all 
the  while  wishing  myself  far  away 
and  vowing  never  again  to  get 
caught  in  such  a  situation. 

Then,  as  miracles  do  happen,  my 
lady  candidate  won  the  election 
despite  the  loss  of  my  county's 
votes;  the  tables  were  turned.  With 
great  satisfaction  I  sent  "get  well" 
cards  to  the  guys  who  had  ribbed 
me  most,  and  my  stock  as  a  woman 
dabbling  in  politics  went  up  over- 
night. Simultaneously,  I  began  to  be 
less  a  "furriner"  and  both 
Democratic  and  Republican  women 
whom  I  met  on  the  street  now 
started  to  recall  that  I  was  born  just 
a  few  miles  away  and  that  they 
knew  my  people.  Even  the  men 
began  to  talk  to  me.  The  young 
newspaper  editor  was  eager  to  be 
friendly  and  the  sly  jabs  at  women 
and  the  off-color  jokes  began  to 
appear  less  frequently  in  the 
columns  of  his  paper.  (He  continues 
to  this  day  to  publish  everything  I 
write  about  the  ERA  or  IWY  and 
chides  me  for  not  keeping  him  more 
informed  about  my  public 
appearances).  Winners  attract; 
losers  are  shunnd.  It  was  as  simple 
as  that. 

But  now  I  was  even  more  a  threat 
to  the  Democratic  Women's  Club, 
for  the  women  could  see  their 
political  role  only  as  fundraisers, 
cooks  and  bottle  washers  for  the 
male  politicians.  I  had  broken  the 
rules  governing  political  conduct 
for  a  woman.  Even  though,  in  the 


66/Quest 


w&f#m&w&w&#** 


Organizing  Rural  Women/67 


community,  my  face  had  been  saved 
by  the  candidate's  victory,  stepping 
over  the  line  in  no  way  qualified  me 
for  inclusion  in  the  political  club 
controlled  by  the  county  party 
chief. 

Still,  I  kept  on  attending  the 
monthly  meetings,  anticipating  that 
at  the  coming  annual  family  Christ- 
mas dinner,  with  the  November 
election  behind  us,  I  would  see  at 
last  some  convivial  interchange. 
Not  so.  The  women  rushed  back 
and  forth  between  the  dining  hall 
and  the  clubroom  kitchen  bringing 
out  huge  platters  of  roast  turkey, 
steaming  dumplings,  salads,  pies, 
cakes,  and  then  stood  back  along 
the  walls  like  silent  sentinels  while 
their  husbands  and  children  lined 
up  and  filled  their  plates,  with, 
eventually,  the  men  going  to  one 
end  of  the  long  tables  and  the 
women  to  the  other.  The  power 
structure  as  usual!  During  the  en- 
tire meal  the  ladies  sat  quietly 
together  while  the  male  voices  filled 
the  room  with  jokes  and  guffaws.  I 
was  dismayed,  but  I  refused  to  give 
up  completely  —  yet  that  point  was 
just  around  the  corner  of  the  new 
year. 

January,  and  club  election  time, 
came.  Since  I  had  contributed  so 
much  to  the  group  by  writing  all  the 
newspaper  publicity  for  the  park 
rally  before  the  election,  they 
wanted  me  to  make  that  job  my  of- 
ficial assignment.  When  the  Presi- 
dent telephoned  me  the  following 
week  to  ask  me  to  be  Publicity 
Chairman  for  the  coming  year,  I 
said  I  would  serve  and  went  on  to 
say  that  at  the  next  meeting  I  would 
be  glad  to  discuss  what  was  begin- 
ning to  happen  over  at  the  State 


Capitol  where  the  bill  to  rescind  the 
Equal  Rights  Amendment  had  just 
been  introduced  (this  was  1976).  I 
told  her  that  our  newly-elected 
Lieutenant  Governor  would  be  put- 
ting her  career  on  the  line  for 
preservation  of  our  1972  state 
ratification  and  that  our  club 
members  needed  more  information 
about  the  issue.  I  explained  that 
since  Lieutenant  Governor  Thelma 
Stovall  presided  over  the  Senate, 
she  would  have  considerable  clout 
in  that  body  but  would  face  a  tough 
challenge  from  the  House  in  the 
General  Assembly,  as  it  was  com- 
posed of  a  large  number  of  newly- 
elected  young  representatives  who 
had  won  their  campaigns  with 
promises  to  work  for  rescission. 
The  President  agreed  to  give  me 
time  on  the  program;  she  asked  me 
to  write  up  a  radio  announcement 
about  it  to  draw  a  good  crowd,  and  I 
went  to  the  meeting  a  few  days  later 
loaded  with  brochures  and  primed 
to  discourse. 

Much  to  my  surprise,  however,  I 
sensed  immediately  upon  entering 
the  room  that  all  was  not  well  —  the 
air  was  thick  with  tension.  All  the 
vibes  told  me  that  prejudice  against 
female  contenders  for  "men's  jobs" 
had  not  disappeared  at  all  but  mere- 
ly receded  beneath  the  surface.  As 
members  of  a  political  club,  they 
owed  loyalty  to  their  party,  and  to 
those  who  had  won,  but  they  did 
not  take  any  special  pride  in  the  fact 
that  for  the  first  time  the  second 
most  powerful  political  figure  in  the 
state  was  a  woman.  They  were  not 
about  to  recognize  the  need  for  dis- 
cussion of  a  "women's  libber"  bill 
for  equal  rights. 

The  President  conducted  the  elec- 


68/Quest 


tion  in  a  most  leisurely  and  drawn- 
out  manner  and  then  tried  the  ruse 
of  officially  adjourning  the  meeting 
before  calling  on  me.  I  interrupted 
her  motion  to  adjourn  to  say  I 
would  not  speak  after  half  the  peo- 
ple left  and  insisted  that  they  follow 
the  announced  agenda  as  agreed  on 
by  the  President.  Her  motion  to 
adjourn  was  not  seconded  and  the 
members  listened  intently  but 
silently  as  I  proceeded  to  lay  out  a 
few  facts  about  the  ERA,  stressing 
their  need  as  women  to  know  what 
was  at  stake.  They  asked  few 
questions  and  two  or  three  had,  in 
fact,  quickly  left  so  as  not  to  be  in 
the  room  during  a  discussion.  Their 
men  had  patronage  jobs  and  it  was 
well  known  that  the  Big  Cheese 
who  controlled  those  jobs  (and 
those  women)  had  been  most  ada- 
mant against  a  female  for  Lieute- 
nant Governor. 

I  returned  home  that  evening 
both  angry  and  depressed.  I  was 
angry  that  the  woman  felt  no  loyal- 
ty or  evidenced  in  the  slightest  any 
bond  of  sisterhood  that  would 
require  them  to  support  a  gallant 
woman  in  high  office  who  was 
prepared  to  risk  her  career  for  the 
sake  of  all  women.  I  was  depressed 
since  it  now  was  clear  that,  in  my 
town,  women  were  perfectly  con- 
tent to  be  solely  the  servicers  of  the 
male  machine.  I  was  convinced  also 
that  it  would  be  many  a  moon 
before  any  woman  could  get  a  foot 
in  the  door  in  any  back-room  power 
politics  in  either  party  of  this  coun- 
ty. I  was  hurt,  furthermore,  because 
I  had  come  to  like  these  women  as 
individuals  and  knew  they  liked  me 
as  a  person.  I  had  been  pleased  to 
tell  myself  that  after  a  twenty-year 


teaching  career  I  could  adapt  to 
domesticity,  even  sharing  skills  in 
the  culinary  arts  with  some  of  these 
homemakers  (I  had  labored  long 
and  been  unduly  proud  of  the  jam 
cake  I  made  on  one  occasion  for  a 
fundraiser).  Now  all  was  in  ashes  — 
the  moment  of  truth  had  come.  My 
long  submerged  desire  to  be  in 
politics  seemed  doomed  at  the  out- 
set. Worst  of  all,  I  felt  betrayed  by 
my  own  sex  —  and  all  the  comfor- 
ting words  my  husband  came  up 
with  were  of  no  avail.  Even  though 
I  had  made  personal  friendships 
there,  I  knew  my  membership  in 
this  group  was  over. 

I  stayed  on  the  farm,  attended  no 
more  meetings,  and  "mooned"  for  a 
month  or  so.  Then  the  witches' 
brew  began  to  boil  at  the  State 
Capitol  and  as  the  Schlafly  forces 
went  to  work,  I  set  aside  local 
politics  to  jump  into  the  fray  in 
alliance  with  my  old  colleagues  in 
the  city.  We  formed  the  Pro-ERA 
Alliance,  made  up  of  sixty  women's 
organizations  from  all  across  the 
state,  mostly  from  urban  centers. 
We  took  on  the  preservation  of 
Kentucky's  ratification  as  our 
primary  objective  and  the  education 
of  the  people  at  large  on  the  issue  as 
our  secondary  goal.  Responsibility 
for  the  state  was  divided  along  con- 
gressional district  lines  and  I  was 
named  coordinator  for  my  district. 

I  began  a  round  of  speaking  to 
local  clubs  -  AAUW,  BPW, 
Homemakers,  wherever  I  could  get 
a  foot  in  the  door.  I  even  got  invited 
to  speak  to  the  local  Rotary  Club  in 
my  county,  where  I  was  politely  in- 
troduced as  the  wife  of  a  man  who 
had  just  moved  to  the  community 
and   had   put   considerable   money 


Organizing  Rural  Women/69 


into  the  town  by  building  a  new 
ranchouse  and  improving  a  large 
plot  of  wasteland  for  a  beef  cattle 
enterprise.  But  there  was  no  desire 
to  discuss  the  question  of  the  pros 
and  cons  of  ERA  beyond  my 
presentation.  From  comments  made 
by  some  of  the  Rotarians'  wives 
later,  I  gathered  that  my  speaking 
ability  had  awed  them,  but  that  they 
had  not  been  stimulated  in  the  least 
to  spread  the  word  about  the  status 
of  women. 

I  now  set  about  organizing  a 
small  core  of  supporters  in  the 
Green  County  BPW.  As  working 
women,  they  were  reluctant  to  leave 
their  jobs  and  family  affairs  to  go  to 
the  Pro-ERA  meetings  in  Louisville 
but  they  did  write  letters  to  their 
legislators  and  when  the  crisis  came, 
they  sent  telegrams  in  the  name  of 
the  Club  to  all  their  legislators. 

By  this  time  I  had  become  a  close 
friend  to  Lieutenant  Governor 
Stovall,  whom  I  had  not  known 
personally  when  I  first  campaigned 
for  her.  I  was  elected  Kentucky 
Chair  of  the  Coordinating  Com- 
mittee for  IWY;  she  was  named 
Honorary  Chairperson.  She  sup- 
ported me  throughout  that  enter- 
prise, and  now,  along  with  me  and 
two  other  Kentucky  women,  has 
been  named  to  the  Continuing 
Committee  of  the  National 
Women's  Conference. 

In  the  spring  of  '76  the  coalition 
of  women's  groups  beat  back  by  a 
narrow  margin  the  rescission  effort. 
(We  knew  then,  however,  that  we 
would  have  to  fight  again  in  the 
1978  session,  as  fierce  pockets  of 
anti-ERA  sentiment  had  found  a 
natural  breeding  ground  along  the 
route  I  have  indicated  above.)  All 


the  while  the  local  pundits,  in  my 
county  and  in  others  like  it, 
watched  from  the  sidelines  as  this 
battle  shaped  up  between  the 
"libbers"  and  the  "pink  ladies;"  the 
stage  was  set  for  the  insidious  "war 
between  women.""' 

I  am  really  still  more  educator 
than  would-be  politician,  but  I  have 
promised  my  hometown  anti-ERA 
State  Senator  who  so  recently  voted 
against  my  equality  that  this  would 
be  his  last  term.  I  vowed  to  run 
against  him  for  sure.  I  believe  he  is 
somewhat  disturbed  because  he 
knows  that  I  have  acquired  visibili- 
ty and  some  clout  in  the  state  as  a 
leading  advocate  for  women's  rights 
and  that  the  area  BPW,  AAUW, 
and  League  of  Women  Voters 
groups  stand  with  me  against  his 
position  on  ERA.  He  can  no  longer 
ignore  half  his  constituency. 

Attempting  to  unseat  an  es- 
tablished male  legislator  is  fraught 
with  peril.  Yet  women  must  engage 
in  the  contest.  Getting  the  word  to 
more  rural  women  on  the  necessity 
for  political  involvement  is  not 
easy.  But  rural  people  are  now 
caught  up  in  the  media  exposure  of 
the  controversy  and  are  more 
willing  to  listen  than  they  have  been 
and  they  do  need  the  facts.  It  is  un- 
likely that  there  is  enough  time 
before    March    1979    to    educate 

^Kentucky's  attempt  to  rescind  the  Equal 
Rights  Amendment  was  vetoed  by  Lieute- 
nant Governor  Stovall,  acting  in  her  legal 
capacity  as  Governor  in  the  absence  of  the 
Governor,  on  March  20,  1978,  on  the 
grounds  of  illegality  to  rescind  and  blatant 
infringement  of  rules  by  the  Senate  and 
House  of  Representatives  contrary  to  the 
guidelines  of  the  State  Constitution.  It  is  a 
precedent-making  step  by  a  noble  advocate 
of  women's  rights. 


70/Quest 


enough  people  to  secure  their  par- 
ticipation in  the  ERA  ratification 
drive.  But  Phyllis'  poison  may  yet 
find  its  antidote,  and  if  it  does,  it 
will  be  due  in  no  little  measure  to- 
that  common  bond  which  the  city 
woman  shares  with  her  rural 
counterpart  —  the  femaleness  that 
no  longer  may  be  contained  in 
auxiliary,  second-class  status.  The 
recent  Rural  American  Women's 
Conference  bears  eloquent 
testimony  to  this;  I  was  thrilled  to 
work  with  my  rural  sisters  from  all 
over  the  country  who  had  come  to 
Washington  to  add  their  voice  to 
the  demand  for  equality  and  justice 
for  women. 

Breaking  Through 

Several  things  happened  in  1976 
after  my  first  rescission  fight  to 
show  me  I  had  met  with  some 
success  in  breaking  through  the 
wall.  The  women  in  Green  County 
who  had  worked  with  me  to  try  to 
change  the  anti-ERA  stand  of  our 
local  Representative  were  incensed 
by  his  callous  attitude,  and  apparent 
ignorance  and  obliviousness  to  the 
concerns  of  his  female  constituents. 
They  suggested  calling  a  meeting  of 
the  three  adjacent  community  BPW 
groups  to  demand  an  explanation  of 
this  legislator's  vote  against  ERA.  I 
was  pleased  when  they  took  the 
man  to  task  and  disturbed  his 
equilibrium  to  the  point  where  he 
confessed  that  it  was  the  first  time 
he  had  held  a  meeting  to  hear  the 
views  of  women.  There  were  other 
signs  that  were  creating  waves  on 
the  local  scene.  In  the  fall,  I  worked 
with  the  BPW  to  organize  a  public 
forum    —    the    first    such    town 


meeting  for  the  county  —  to  support 
the  candidacy  on  the  school  board 
of  a  woman,  another  "first"  for 
Green  County. 

Although  well  known  as  the  wife 
of  one  of  the  best  local  doctors,  and 
highly  respected  by  members  of  the 
Historical  Club  for  her  reserach  in 
the  area,  this  woman  had  never 
made  a  speech  in  public.  As  I  write 
this  she  is  fully  responsible  for 
preparing  our  second  county  forum 
featuring  talks  by  three  legal 
experts  on  the  court  system,  which 
was  the  target  of  a  drastic  overhaul 
in  the  1976  legislative  session.  Since 
her  election  to  the  School  Board, 
Barbara  Simmons  has  accompanied 
me  to  several  women's  meetings  and 
is  Green  County  BPW's  represen- 
tative on  the  Kentucky  Women's 
Agenda  Coalition,  which  we  have 
put  together  in  this  state  to  imple- 
ment the  goals  of  the  IWY.  During 
the  1978  Kentucky  General 
Assembly,  we  succeeded  in  passing 
a  Displaced  Homemakers  bill, 
child-custody  legislation 
guaranteeing  that  an  abused  woman 
leaving  her  home  will  not  be 
charged  with  child-abandonment, 
and  a  bill  requiring  emergency 
treatment  on  a  24-hour  basis  for 
rape  victims.  We  publicized  the 
need  for  legislation  to  protect  the 
rights  of  battered  women  and  will 
present  this  legislation  again  in  the 
next  session). 

Barbara  says  I  have  changed  her 
life  by  involving  her  in  the  women's 
movement.  While  I  was  organizing 
the  IWY  program  in  Kentucky,  I 
named  her  director  of  the  project  to 
search  out  the  stories  of  women  in 
every  county  of  the  state  who  have 
contributed    to    their    communities 


Organizing  Rural  Women/71 


but  are  not  in  the  history  books. 
The  end  product  is  a  highly 
acclaimed  booklet,  Kentucky 
Women  Remembered,  published 
with  IWY  funds  in  limited  edition. 
A  final  postscript:  Last 
November  I  went  down  to  the 
courthouse  to  cast  my  ballot  for 
local  and  state  officers,  and  as  I 
entered  the  polling  area  I  was  met 
by  another  woman  handing  out 
campaign  cards.  She  greeted  me 
warmly,  introduced  herself,  and 
lowered  her  voice  only  slightly  to 
say,  "I  really  admire  you  for  all  that 
you  do  to  take  up  for  us  women." 
The  Lord-Goddess  be  praised,  I 
thought  to  myself,  I've  made  it  at 
last  as  a  "liberated"  rural  woman. 


But  the  test  will  come  when  I  start 
campaigning  in  the  fall  of  1978  for 
Thelma  Stovall  for  Governor.  The 
question  then  will  be  not  only,  "Do 
you  want  a  woman  for  high  public 
office,  but  do  you  want  an  associate 
of  'women's  libbers'  in  the  Gover- 
nor's chair." 

I'm  betting  on  Thelma,  on  myself 
and  all  those  silent  rural  women 
who  are  awakening  at  last  from 
their  long  sleep. 

Dr.  Allie  Corbin  Hixson  is  a 
member  of  the  American  Associa- 
tion of  University  Women  ERA  Ad 
Hoc  Committee,  Washington,  and 
serves  as  chairperson  of  the  Ken- 
tucky Women's  Agenda  Coalition. 


Announcing:  2  New  Books X1 


From 
A.R. 


FREEING 
OUR 
LIVES 


feminist 


ape    prevent 


Fighting  Back: 

a  self-defense  handbook 


WOMEN  AGAINST  RAPE 

Member  of  Women  s  Action  Collective 
PO  Box  02084 
Columbus  Ohio  43202 


FREEING  OUR  LIVES  and  FIGHTING  BACK  are  two  new 

publications  from  Women  Against  Rape  in  Columbus, 
Ohio.  These  books  develop  strategies  that  communities 
can  use  to  reduce  the  threat  of  rape  in  women's  lives. 


5?o£ 

~~  cd  c  ro 
e    -  o  o 
■q-  o  as  -C 
*-  Q-o 
05  t  c 

u  £  £-0 

id:  to00 

2>oao, 
u.u-£ 
—  11 3  — 
°~v  <v  >. 

Clo-"  *"   03 

88bS 


00 
00 

CM  IT) 

co-o- 

"D  "O 

c  c 

CO  03 
OO 
OO 


!^»8 

""  "^  1/3 

00       '- 

0  LO   ™    "O 

00  CM 


c  c 
a;  03 

03    03 

5  5 

03  —  ~ 


03  & 

03  ^ 

~2    V3    e?~ 

03    03"C    C 

*  o^  8 

o9  a3  £  £ 

"3^   C/3    ^    n 

£0^°2 

03(~)    w    03 

03    C/>    t  — 
03    03    ,_    C/3 

(-><->  — 


03    S    i^ 
-C    03    03 

CT0  0 
£001 

$  C\J  "?   ' 

°OCM 


<£>  '      _ 

utlO 

c  c  o 

CD    03  c£) 

oo«>e 
o  o  _ 
in  co  03 
y=>  y=>  o 

03  03  .y 
03  03  y 
55  ro 

03    03    C^ 


ro 


OO 


fee 
■D 
O  C 
O  03 
CO  O 
fe<»0 


lT    CLU  03 

o  °°  o 

■p.  —    03  — 

LU  _   O  _ 


ij  CD   5 
03QDO 

C/3    03Q3         T 

03    C    C  £    C 

o)  o  o  o  ^-° 
£  >-  >*  >-°  w 

a.  a  a.  a.  £  J 

5 " " "OO 


72/Qwesf 


Baby  bottle  disease-therms  bigmoney  ink. 


Declining  birth  rates 
in  western  countries  have  sent 
infant  formula  manufacturers 
looking  for  new  markets.  They've 
found  them  mostly  in  the  Third 
World. 

But  no  more  than  10%  of 
third-world  mothers  — those  who 
can't  breast-feed  — have  any  real 
need  for  formula.  So  the  manufac- 
turers launched  aggressive  mar- 
keting and  advertising  campaigns 
to  convince  the  other  90%  that 
bottle-feeding  is  modern  and  sci- 
entific, breast-feeding  backward 
and  primitive. 

These  campaigns  have 
been  incredibly  successful. 
In  Singapore,  in  1951,71%  of  all 
babies  from  low-income  families 
were  breast-fed.  Twenty-years 
later,  only  5%  were. 

But  the  problem  is  much 
more  serious  than  just  promoting 
an  expensive  and  unnecessary 
product. To  use  infant  formula 
safely  requires  pure  water,  a  way 
to  sterilize  bottles  and  nipples, 
and  enough  money  to  buy  the  nec- 
essary amount  of  formula.  A  re- 
frigerator is  also  needed  unless  the 
formula  is  to  be  prepared  every 
few  hours. 

Because  exclusive  bottle- 
feeding  can  cost  over  80%  of  their 
total  income,  many  families  over- 
dilute  infant  formula,  which 


leads  to  malnutrition. 

They  must  also  mix  the 
formula  with  contaminated  water, 
because  that's  the  only  water 
available. They  can't  afford  fuel  to 
boil  water,  so  the  bottle  and  nipple 
become  contaminated  too.  Then 
the  prepared  bottle  usually  bakes 
in  the  sun. The  result  is  diarrhea, 
which  also  leads  to  malnutrition. 

Malnutrition  causes  irre- 
versible brain  damage  in  infants. 
If  prolonged,  it  brings  death.  The 
problem  is  so  widespread  that 
doctors  speak  of  an  epidemic  of 
"baby  bottle  disease'' 

By  the  time  baby  bottle 
disease  is  diagnosed  (if  it  ever  is), 
it's  usually  too  late  to  do  anything 
about  it.  because  the  mother's 
own  milk  has  already  dried  up. 

Chronic  malnutrition 


directly  due  to  the  unsafe  use  of 
infant  formula  by  mothers  who 
could  have  breast-fed  has  killed 
thousands  of  third-world  babies 
and  caused  severe  mental  retarda- 
tion in  countless  others. 

Church  groups  here  have 
used  stockholders'  petitions  and 
lawsuits  to  force  some  U.S.  for- 
mula manufacturers  to  discon- 
tinue their  promotion  of  infant 
formula  to  mothers  who  can't 
afford  to  use  it  safely. 

But  Nestle,  the  gigantic 
Swiss  transnational  which  sells 
more  than  a  third  of  all  the  infant 
formula  in  the  world,  is,  by  its 
structure,  immune  to  such  pres- 
sures. They  ignore  moral  argu- 
ments. The  only  way  to  get  at 
them  is  a  boycott.  A  partial  list  of 
Nestle  products  (and  products  of 
companies  they  control)  is  at  the 
bottom  of  this  page. 

For  more  information 
about  the  boycott,  or  to  help  us 
organize  it,  or  to  contribute  to  the 
cost  of  running  it,  contact  the 
Infant  Formula  Action  Coalition 
at  1701  University  Ave  SE,  Minne- 
apolis, MN  55414. 

But  most  important,  when 
you  see  a  Nestle  product,  remem- 
ber what  it  represents  —  third- 
world  babies  who  died  for 

the  lack  of  their  mothers' 
__ —       milk. 


Crunch  Nestle  quick. 


Boycott  anything  with  the  name  Nestle  on  it,  including  Taster's  Choice,  Quik,  Nescafe,  Nestea,  Decaf,  Crunch,  Souptime  and 
Lactogen;  all  Libby's  and  Stouffer's  products;  as  well  as  Crosse  &  Blackwell's,  Keiller.  Maggi,  McVities,  Crawford,  Jaines  Keller  &  Son; 
also  Deer  Park  Mountain  Spring  Water,  Jarlsburg  and  Swiss  Knight  cheese. 

Prepared  by  Public  Media  Center,  San  Francisco. 


Organizing  Rural  Women/73 


74/Quest 


Weaving 
the  Web  of 
Community 


By  DOROTHY  ALLISON 

graphics  by  Morgan  Gwenwald 

"The  way  we  live  and  work  changes 
the  way  we  think 
(and  vice-versa) 
And    when    changes    in    con- 
sciousness become  changes  in  ac- 
tion and  behavior 
The  revolution  has  begun" 

Ulrike  Grund 

"Anarcho-Feminism" 

ISIS,  (No.  5,  October  1977)  p.  50 

The  "feminist  community"  is  an 
amorphous  idea.  By  "our  com- 
munity/' we  usually  mean  loosely- 
defined  groups  in  which  we  live, 
work  or  interact  in  political 
struggle.  This  vagueness  is  often 
destructive  to  our  sense  of  ourselves 
as  members  of  a  group. 

In  contrast,  a  collective  must  be 
very  well-defined.  Membership  in  a 
collective,  as  in  a  well-organized  ac- 
tion group,  is  based  upon  individual 
and  group  recognition.  Mutual 
responsibility,     commitment, 


political  discussion  and  long-range 
plans  all  require  a  clear  concept  of 
membership.  As  feminists,  we  have 
a  history  of  associating  such 
definitions  only  with  elitism  or 
systems  of  exclusion.  We  need  to 
address  these  issues  in  different 
terms  and  recognize  that  organizing 
is  as  much  a  process  of  developing 
mutual  intimacy  and  group  and  in- 
dividual skills,  as  it  is  of  achieving 
specific  goals. 

In  community  life,  small  groups 
of  individuals  who  share  trust  and 
intimacy  inevitably  develop.  These 
groups  form  the  core  of  the  com- 
munity's self-definition.  Most 
feminists  define  themselves  first  as 
members  of  a  group  —  either  of  a 
broad  ideological  group,  such  as  les- 
bian or  non-aligned  feminists,  or  of 
a  specific  action  group,  such  as 
ALFA,  Quest,  or  a  rape  crisis  center. 
Collectives  and  action  groups,  then, 
help  to  provide  the  definitions  and 
concepts  of  identity  absent  in  our 
amorphous  community  of  feminists 
who  lack  a  recognized  body  of 
theory  or  a  national  organization. 


Weaving  the  Web  of  Community/75 


Collectives  may  be  organizing 
blocs  in  the  community.  They  con- 
tribute not  only  to  the  achievement 
of  specific  objectives,  but  also  to  the 
individual's  sense  of  herself  as  a 
woman  organized  with  other 
women.  She  feels  stronger  and  less 
isolated. 

The  contributions  of  the  collec- 
tive to  the  community  are  many.  In 
the  best  of  collectives,  the  most  im- 
portant contribution  is  the  integra- 
tion of  personal  life  and  political 
theory.  When  a  collective  also  takes 
as  one  of  its  primary  objectives  the 
development  of  individual 
strengths,  of  whole  and  healthy 
women  who  see  themselves  as 
political,  our  goal  of  a  life  of  ac- 
tivism without  martyrdom  or 
"burn-out"  comes  closer. 

Living  in  this  society  as  radical 
feminists  poses  certain  problems: 
making  a  living  and  doing  political 
work  as  well  as  integrating  our  lives 
as  members  of  a  loosely-defined 
community  with  a  realization  that 
we  are  basically  alone.  As  I  grow 
older  in  the  movement,  I  find 
myself  in  a  network  of  political 
camaraderie  rather  than  friendship, 
and  the  inadequacies  in  that  form  of 
relationship  grow  more  difficult  to 
ignore.  The  loss  of  lovers,  the 
failure  of  projects  and  the  constant 
struggle  for  survival  demand  more 
lasting  answers  to  accumulated 
alienation.  Part  of  the  value  of  the 
collective  is  that  it  addresses  that 
alienation;  it  provides  an  alternative 
to  the  traditional  family.  It  binds 
and  defines  us  in  a  community,  and, 
if  done  well,  constitutes  a  living 
political  theory.  It  is  important  to 
analyze  the  collective  in  each  of 
these  contexts. 


The  "Traditional"  Family 


The  family  is  our  initial  com- 
munity. From  the  family  we  take  our 
names,  our  class,  our  history  and 
most  of  the  communities  to  which 
we  have  access.  However  alienated 
from  our  families  we  may  grow  to 
be,  we  never  entirely  escape  them. 
We  grow  up.  We  recreate  them.  We 
take  lovers,  maybe  move  in 
together,  maybe  have  children. 
Even  those  of  us  who  live  alone  are 
subject  to  the  awful  feeling  that 
something  is  missing,  that  there 
should  be  others  to  share  our  lives. 

Historically,  the  family  has  been  a 
patriarchal  institution  where  male 
domination  is  reproduced  and  sup- 
ported. All  other  traditional  func- 
tions of  the  family  can  be  seen  as 
serving  this  purpose.  In  a  non- 
patriarchal  society  would  they  still 
be  necessary?  How  can  an  intimate 
lesbian-feminist  community  model 
be  created?  A  movement  which 
began  with  the  individual  process  of 
self-discovery  cannot  assume  only 
one  solution  to  this  or  any  other 
problem.  We  are  a  movement  of 
many  different  women,  each 
existing  in  a  network  of  different 
circles,  and  we  need  not  just  one, 
but  a  range  of  models. 

One  way  of  assessing  what  kind 
of  family  alternative  is  useful  in  a 
lesbian-feminist  comunity  is  to  look 
at  the  traditional  functions  of  the 
family.  Briefly  stated,  they  are:  (1) 
reproduction,  or  survival  of  the 
group;  (2)  regulation  and  control  of 
the  sexual  impulse;  (3)  protection, 
support  and  maintenance  of  in- 
dividual members;  (4)  cultural 
transmission;  (5)  status  ascription; 


76/Quest,  vol.  IV,  no.  4,  fall,  1978 


and    (6)   societal   identification,   or 
naming.1 

The  first  function  is  survival  of 
the  group,  or  reproduction.  If  new 
members  are  not  born  into  the  unit, 
they  must  be  integrated.  Even  in  a 
lesbian  context,  some  of  us  may 
have   children   who   will  grow   up 


access  to  women.  This  function  is 
an  integral  part  of  the  capitalist 
property  system.  It  identifies  who 
shall  inherit  class  privilege  and 
property.  It  also  defines  who  is 
promiscuous  and  who  is  il- 
legitimate, and  it  provides  a  system 
of  social  sanctions  against  both. 


considering  the  group  as  their  fami- 
ly. But  the  formation  of  the  group 
itself,  and  its  growth,  depend  on 
finding  and  integrating  new 
members.* 

The  second  function,  The  regula- 
tion and  control  of  the  sexual  im- 
pulse, is  the  method  by  which  men 
maintain  sexual  control  over  and 

*Of  course  the  group,  once  formed,  may 
decide  it  does  not  wish  to  grow.  If  that  is  so, 
however,  it  should  he  a  clear  and  common 
assumption  and  its  long-range  implications 
should  be  thoroughly  discussed. 


This  function  explicitly  enforces 
heterosexuality.  The  only  good  sex 
is  sex  in  marriage.  This  means 
women  who  are  raped  or  forced  into 
prostitution  and  their  children  are, 
therefore,  the  most  helpless 
members  of  society. 

As  lesbian-feminists,  how  should 
we  view  the  regulation  and  control 
of  sexuality?  Is  it  really  sex  that  is 
being  regulated,  or  is  it  the  birth  and 
status  of  children?  In  Houston, 
earlier  this  year,  I  was  particularly 
struck    by    the    vehemence    with 


Weaving  the  Web/77 


which  the  anti-ERA,  homophobic 
crowd  insisted  that  lesbianism  leads 
to  bestiality,  incest  and  sex  in  the 
streets.  "Nothing  would  be  holy/' 
one  said.  What  would  be  holy;  what 
would  be  sane  and  acceptable  in 
sexual  relationships  in  a  lesbian- 
feminist  society? 

The  third  function  of  the  family 
is  protection  and  support,  the 
physical  and  emotional 
maintenance  of  individual 
members.  The  family  is  both  an  in- 
dividual's economic  unit  and  her 
psychological  base. 

My  own  experience  of  the  use 
and  value  of  the  family  is  associated 
most  closely  with  this  function.  As 
a  working  class  child,  I  learned  that 
the  family  was  the  last  stronghold, 
the  refuge  from  those  who  might 
seek  to  use  us  for  their  own  ends.  I 
might  be  thrown  against  the  wall  in 
my  stepfather's  rage,  or  carry  the 
scars  of  my  sister's  teeth,  but  out- 
side the  house  it  was  always,  "What 
bruise?"  The  people  outside,  after 
all,  were  more  dangerous.  They 
couldn't  be  trusted  to  be  on  your 
side.  Inside  the  family,  the  food,  the 
warmth,  the  clothes,  whatever  was 
available,  was  shared. 

More  important  still  is  the 
strength  of  the  emotional  bond.  My 
mama  loved  me  and  so  did  my 
sisters;  whatever  I  did  they  ap- 
preciated, because  it  was  somehow 
part  of  them.  A  friend  might  be  glad 
for  you,  but  a  friend  wouldn't  share 
that  intimate  identification,  that 
pride  or  fear,  with  the  same  un- 
questioning support.  The  benefits 
of  this  function  are  those  most 
necessary  for  any  alternative  form 
and  are  present  in  my  own  collec- 
tive. 


The  fourth  function  is  cultural 
transmission  and  socialization. 
Children  have  to  learn  the 
difference  between  right  and 
wrong.  They  have  to  learn  values 
and  history.  Families  choose  the 
standards  and  customs  which  will 
be  emphasized,  generally  along 
class  and  ethnic  lines.  But  socializa- 
tion never  ends.  Our  ethics  grow 
and  change  based  on  our  experience 
and  the  experiences  of  those  close  to 
us.  As  women  who  seek  to  create  a 
feminist  reality,  we  are  engaged  in 
mutual  socialization,  in  the  explora- 
tion of  what  a  truly  feminist  culture 
would  be  and  how  we  can  instill  and 
sustain  feminist  values. 

As  a  lesbian-feminist,  I  am  in 
search  of  my  own  history.  I  collect 
gossip,  anecdotes  and  myths  about 
the  women  with  whom  I  prefer  to 
identify.  This  ranges  from  informa- 
tion about  women  in  history,  like 
Virgina  Woolf  or  a  16th  century  les- 
bian, swordswoman,  to  what  my 
lover  said  to  her  first  lover  when 
they  initially  went  to  bed  together. 
This  creates  and  sustains  identity 
and  personal  pride.  It  is  reflected  in 
"in-jokes,"  in  stories  heard  so  often 
they  can  be  briefly  retold  to  the  con- 
fusion of  outsiders  and  the  delight 
of  "family."  All  such  elements  con- 
tribute to  a  collective  sense  of  what 
is  right  and  wrong,  as  well  as  deter- 
mine who  is  inside  the  family  and 
who  is  not.  In  an  intentional  com- 
munity or  family  there  should  be 
some  process  of  cultural  transmis- 
sion. 

The  fifth  and  sixth  functions, 
status  ascription  and  societal  iden- 
tification, are  often  linked.  The 
selection  of  a  common  name  is 
becoming  a  tradition  among  collec- 


78/Quest 


tives  and  intentional  communities. 
Names  are  chosen  for  their 
meaning.  Some  groups  never  get  to 
the  choice  of  a  name  because  they 
never  find  a  label  that  seems  most 
powerful  or  fitting.  At  first  I 
thought  these  functions  should  be 
discarded;  they  merely  feed  the  es- 
tablished status  system,  identifying 
us  once  again  as  our.  father's 
daughters.  However,  several  things 
have  since  occurred  so  I  now  think 
this  function  should  not  be  entirely 
abandoned. 

I  believe  in  the  power  of  names.  I 
know  that  a  name  is  sometimes 
more  than  a  label  for  the  thing,  It 
communicates  more;  a  name  carries 
history.  When  I  meet  someone  and 
she  identifies  herself  as,  "I  used  to 
be  on  the  staff  of  WICCA,  then  I 
moved  to  Atlanta  and  worked  with 
ALFA  until  'Kamphofeminique'  got 
their  land  co-op  organized,  and  I 
went  down  there  and  started 
helping  out  at  WOMANSPACE/' 
immediately  I  know  who  that 
woman  is,  and  something  about  her 
politics,  her  lesbian-feminist  con- 
sciousness, and  a  lot  about  her  par- 
ticular interests  and  skills.  Would 
we  want  to  discard  this  iden- 
tification? 

I  also  started  wanting  to  be  my 
mother's  daughter,  wanting  a  name 
that  would  reaffirm  my  link  with 
her.  Shall  I  be  Dorothy  Ruth's 
daughter?  Should  I  abandon  my  sir- 
name,  since  it  was  given  to  me  by 
my  stepfather,  and  use  my  given 
name?  But  unfortunately,  I  have 
not  found  a  name  that  seems  mine; 
since  I  persist  in  feeling  that  a 
chosen  name  should  resonate,  both 
in  meaning  and  in  emotional 
association,    I    continue    without 


change.  I  want  that  link  to  myself. 

However,  equally  important,  the 
usual  choice  of  names  has  always 
seemed  to  tend  towards  anonymity 
and  invisibility.  Are  we  changing 
our  identities  as  easily  as  we  change 
our  names?  If  a  woman  tells  me  she 
is  now  Susan  B.  Sapphoflower  and 
doesn't  want  to  discuss  her  former 
identity,  I  wonder  if  she  might  not 
just  as  easily  become  Sue  Smith  in  a 
few  years  and  then  not  want  to  be 
reminded  of  her  lesbian-feminist 
phase.  What  do  we  lose  of  ourselves 
when  we  change  names?  What  is 
the  link  between  owning  our  names 
—  and  the  history  they  convey  — 
and  our  capacity  to  instill  the  trust 
and  commitment  necessary  among 
political  activitists? 

Are  there  non-traditional  func- 
tions which  belong  in  an  intentional 
family?  There  is  one  without  which 
a  collective,  a  tribe  or  any  alter- 
native model  cannot  survive.  The 
family  has  kinship;  the  collective 
must  have  "communitas"  or  psy- 
chological kinship.2  The  word  im- 
plies a  shared  feeling  of  belonging 
and  merging.  Joan  Cassells  iden- 
tifies it,  for  example,  with  the 
ecstatic  sense  of  oneness  found 
among  women  marching  with  other 
women,  surrounded  by  hostile 
spectators.3  It  is  a  concept  par- 
ticularly suited  to  the  feminist 
movement.  It  is  embodied  by  the 
term,  "sisterhood." 

This  sense  of  psychological 
kinship,  that  we  are  a  "group  in 
which  each  is  intimately  related  to 
the  other,  and  the  welfare  of  the  one 
is  bound  up  with  the  welfare  of  the 
others,"4  is  essential.  This  is  the  se- 
cond primary  function  of  my  own 
collective. 


Weaving  the  Web/79 


So  What  Is  An  Alternative? 

For  me,  the  terror  of  realizing 
myself  as  a  lesbian  was  feeling  that  I 
was  losing  access  to  any  family. 
First,    my    own    family    would,    of 


course,  renounce  and  abandon  me. 
But  worse,  the  message  of  the 
world,  of  my  first  lover  and  the 
other  lesbians  I  saw  and  read  about 
was  that  lesbians  come  in  pairs  and 
the  pairs  don't  last.  The  lesbian  is 


SO/Quest 


not  only  the  outlaw,  she  is  the 
woman  alone.  But  if  we  do  not 
choose  to  accept  either  loneliness  or 
monogamous  unit  after  mono- 
gamous unit,  what  do  we  have  to 
look  to?  What  alternatives  are 
available? 

In  1973,  when  we  entered  the 
first  stage  of  our  collective,  we  had 
no  models  for  a  lesbian-feminist 
alternative,  except  for  rumors  of  the 
Furies  collective.5  Florida  offered 
me  only  the  example  of  a  vaguely 
leftist  land  co-op  where  a  number  of 
ex-hippies,  political  people  and 
back-to-the-land  converts  had 
settled.  I  didn't  see  any  way  a 
sterile,  working  class  lesbian  fit  into 
that  picture. 

Alternative  living  experiments  in 
this  country  continue  to  be 
dominated  by  middle  and  upper 
class  heterosexuals  whose 
variations  on  the  nuclear  family  still 
seem  feeble  to  me.  On  the  whole 
there  are  few  communal  or  Utopian 
models  which  do  not  continue  to  be 
institutionally  male  dominated. 
Buying  a  plot  of  land  back  in  the 
hills  and  retreating  there  with  a  few 
trusted  individuals  does  not  insure 
that  the  "revolutionaries"  involved 
will  not  recreate  the  reactionary 
society  they  think  they  are  aban- 
doning, particularly  when,  as  is  so 
often  the  case,  the  land  is  paid  for 
by  white  men  with  money  or  access 
to  it.6  The  name  on  the  deed,  the 
loudest  voice,  the  male  the  tax 
assessor  assumes  to  be  the 
"breadwinner,"  the  guy  who 
happens  always  to  be  the  one  to 
drive  the  truck  into  town,  the  few 
who  always  go  out  to  talk  to 
trespassers,  sheriffs  or  reporters  — 
all  are  the  class  system  recreating 


itself.  The  unfailing  result  is  a 
hollow  alternative,  a  traditional 
society  with  a  few  reforms  whose 
actual  effect  is  to  deflect  confronta- 
tion and  change. 

It  is  important  to  discover  what 
the  real  decision-making  process  is 
and  who  actually  participates. 
Where  is  the  real  power?  What  is 
the  effect  of  the  outside  world's 
assumptions  about  who  the  leaders 
and  decision-makers  should  be? 
What  can  be  done  in  a  conscious 
alternative  to  prevent  a  duplication 
of  the  status  quo  and  to  confront 
outsiders'  insidious  assumptions? 

In  the  absence  (at  that  time)  of 
working  lesbian-feminist  models,  I 
looked  elsewhere  —  in  fiction  and 
history,  and  finally  I  found  Joanna 
Russ,  especially  her  novel,  The 
Female  Man.7  Whileaway's  econ- 
omy is  basically  self-limiting  and 
Russ  is  portraying  a  starkly  under- 
populated society  with  resource 
problems.  Still,  its  social  organiza- 
tion is  very  different  and  logical.  It 
is  a  viable  lesbian  culture.  Reading 
about  Whileaway  filled  me  with 
great  sense  of  longing,  although  I'm 
not  advocating  taking  off  for  the 
hills  and  duplicating  Whileaway. 
The  book's  most  powerful  line,  for 
me,  was:  "[On  Whileaway]  you 
cannot  fall  out  of  the  kinship  web 
and  become  sexual  prey  for 
strangers,  for  there  are  no  strangers 
—  the  web  is  worldwide."8  Every 
day  of  my  life  I  ache  with  the 
absence  of  that  web,  and  I  struggle 
somehow  to  create  it.  At  times  I  per- 
suade myself  of  the  existence  of  a 
worldwide  web  of  feminists  sharing 
a  common  analysis  and  common 
goals.  But  in  my  more  realistic 
moments,  I  am  brought  back  to  the 


Weaving  the  Web/81 


tangible,  the  intentional  family  or 
collective  I  and  a  few  others  have 
created. 

The  Collective 

The  collective  is  an  alternative  to 
the  existing  structure  of  society. 
Changing  social  relations  is  a 
process  rather  than  a  product  of  a 
revolution.  In  other  words,  you 
make  the  revolution  by  actually 
changing  social  relations  .  .  .  Con- 
cretely, this  means:  organize 
yourselves,  not  somebody  else." 

An  effective  collective  is  capable 
of  confrontation.  In  part,  this 
depends  upon  the  strength  of  the 
individuals  within  the  collective. 
We  believe  the  development  of 
strong  individuals  should  be  one  of 
the  goals  of  a  collective.  This 
process  depends  on  the  theory  upon 
which  the  group's  action  is  based, 
and  on  the  practice  of  internal  con- 
frontation and  criticism/self- 
criticism. 

The  collective  can  confront  the 
larger  society  by:  (1)  providing 
living  and  working  arrangements  as 
an  alternative  to  the  dominent 
models;  (2)  supporting  the  in- 
dividual feminist  activist;  (3) 
providing  direct  experimentation 
with  income-sharing  and  mutual 
education;  and  (4)  functioning  as  an 
action  group.  An  extensive  pattern 
of  sharing  residences,  goods  and 
services  would  have  a  considerable 
effect  on  the  American  economy.10 
However,  without  the  work  of  ac- 
tion groups,  even  large  numbers  of 
collectives  would  be  largely  passive, 
and  could,  in  fact,  be  co-opted  and 
absorbed  into  society. 

I  define  a  collective  very 
specifically.    It   is    a   group   whose 


members:  (1)  possess  a  sense  of 
psychological  kinship;  (2)  pool  all 
resources  for  mutual  protection  and 
support;  (3)  share  a  sense  of 
history,  a  political  analysis  and  a 
common  purpose;  and  (4)  work 
together  toward  a  common  goal.11 

A  Cross-Class  Collective: 
Money  and  Property 

Many  of  what  we  call  collectives 
are  actually  support  groups  —  those 
people  who  talk  to  us,  reassure  us 
and  support  us  with  words.  The 
major  difference  between  a  "collec- 
tive" and  a  "support  group"  is 
economic.  A  support  group  is 
valuable,  but  what  kind  of  support 
groups  does  the  feminist  movement 
really  need?  When  do  we  stop  being 
a  movement  of  words  and  become  a 
material  and  economic  web?  I  have 
often  needed  more  than  verbal  sup- 
port, and  many  others  in  our  com- 
munity are  in  similar  situations. 

—What  about  the  community 
organizer  who  has  worked  for  fif- 
teen years  at  subsistence  wages, 
used  her  savings  to  pay  for 
newsletters  and  community 
emergencies,  and  who  has  now  lost 
her  lease  and  cannot  find  an  apart- 
ment she  can  afford? 

—What  about  the  feminist  artist 
who  has  done  the  layout  for 
countless  projects,  contributed 
those  cartoons,  pictures  and  posters 
we  all  loved  and  got  for  free,  who 
now  sits  in  the  hospital  with  a 
bleeding  ulcer,  or  cancer,  or  simple 
exhaustion,  and  wonders  if  welfare 
is  going  to  pay  for  it,  because  she 
can't? 

—What  about  the  woman  who 
handles  the  rape  hot-line  five  nights 


82/Quest 


a  week,  gets  beaten  up  when  she  ac- 
companies a  woman  to  court,  fights 
back  and  is  charged  with  assault? 
Maybe  the  community  will  take  up 
a  collection  and  pay  her  medical 
bills,  but  what  is  a  defense  com- 
mittee going  to  do  to  heal  the 
damage  to  her  mind  and  her  life? 
—  What  about  the  lesbian- 
feminist  whose  long-term  rela- 
tionship breaks  up  so  messily  that 


she  doesn't  even  fight  to  keep  any 
of  her  property  or  think  about  her 
future,  but  then  finds  herself  alone 
and  unable  to  face  the  prospect  of 
seeking  a  new  relationship  to  help 
her  pay  the  rent  and  get  through  the 
long  nights  when  all  she  can  do  is 
drink? 

We  need  that  web.  We  need  not 
only  income-sharing  and  group 
houses,    support    groups,    trusted 


Weaving  the  Web/83 


people  to  work  with  and  good  work 
to  be  done,  but  the  commitment  of 
other  women  we  can  trust  and  love 
and  depend  on,  no  matter  what. 
THAT  should  be  the  definition  of  a 
collective. 

Within  my  collective,  we  think  of 
ourselves  as  a  lesbian  alternative 
family.  On  forms  we  list  each  other 
as  next  of  kin,  beneficiaries  or 
sometimes  sisters.  In  the  five  years 
of  our  existence,  we  have  developed 
an  implicit  trust  in  and  commitment 
to  each  other  and  to  our  view  of  the 
ideal  feminist  society. 

This  psychological  kinship  is,  at 
its  base,  political.  We  came  together 
as  lesbian-feminist  activists.  We 
fight,  misunderstand,  and  oc- 
casionally prove  unable  to  match 
our  ideals,  but  we  believe  that 
within  our  bond  we  need  not  always 
come  to  consensus.  We  believe  that 
our  lives  are  revolutionary,  and  we 
view  the  collective  not  as  a  privilege 
which  allows  us  financial  space  and 
emotional  energy  for  our  work,  but 
as  a  necessity,  a  secure  base  for 
political  activity. 

After  a  year  of  talking  about 
what  we  were  going  to  do  about 
possessions,  we  finally  bought  a 
rubber  stamp  and  started  stamping 
shared  property.  By  then  we  had 
lived  together,  shared  clothes, 
books  and  community  work,  but 
the  formal  acts  of  labeling  property 
as  communal,  and  opening  a  joint 
checking  account,  put  everything  in 
a  different  context. 

Sharing  property  is  not  par- 
ticularly revolutionary:  the  concept 
of  "what's  mine  is  yours"  is  com- 
mon enough  among  lovers.  The  dif- 
ficulties arise  when  you  are  no 
longer    lovers,   when   there  is   one 


central  checking  account  and  all 
money  goes  into  that  account,  and 
when  you  start  deciding  as  a  group 
what  will  be  bought  with  the 
group's  money.  "Struggle"  is  a  mild 
word  for  the  result.  But  the  positive 
side  of  the  struggle  around  money  is 
that  no  other  action  serves  so  well  to 
clarify  politics  and  goals. 

Pooling  income  and  resources 
triggers  a  series  of  conflicts,  and  in 
our  case,  a  long  exploration  of  how 
our  class  backgrounds  continue  to 
shape  us.  For  example,  how  do  you 
deal  with  buying  clothes,  with  gifts 
of  money  from  relatives,  and  with 
major  property  such  as  a  car  or 
land?  Some  of  our  answers  are  com- 
promises: we  keep  the  car  in  one 
name,  but  the  collective  pays  all  up- 
keep, and  we  use  and  think  of  it  as 
group  property.  Soon  we  will  have 
to  buy  another  one.  Our  decision 
about  whose  name  to  put  it  in  will 
depend  on  which  one  of  us  needs  to 
establish  credit.  A  collective  must 
treat  the  laws  of  society  very 
pragmatically,  trying  to  protect 
itself  from  interference  while  main- 
taining its  political  integrity. 

Early  on  we  developed  the  term, 
"the  house,"  to  cover  joint 
purchases.  We  say  "the  house"  will 
buy  that,  whether  it's  food,  clothes 
or  the  budgeted  allotment  of  books 
and  journal  subscriptions,  or  major 
purchases,  like  a  typewriter  or 
guitar.  We  differentiate  between 
"house"  and  individual  money.  For 
individual  money,  we  give 
ourselves  allowances,  a  figure 
which  varies  depending  on  our 
combined  income.  Gifts  of  money 
are  more  likely  to  come  to  those  of 
us  from  middle  class  backgrounds 
and    rarely    to    the    working    class 


84/Quest 


child.  Our  solution  has  been  to 
agree  that  any  gift  of  money 
automatically  becomes  "house" 
money,  and  when  asked,  we  en- 
courage gifts  of  money  rather  than 
goods.  Extra  income  (earned  outside 
a  regular  full-time  job)  is  divided 
equally  between  the  individual  and 
the  "house"  savings. 

We  assume  we  will  always  work. 
However,  we  do  not  penalize  each 
other  when  we  are  out  of  work. 
Equal  allowances  continue, 
although  the  amount  may  be 
minimal  until  the  unemployed  per- 
son finds  a  job.  Generally,  our  in- 
come is  not  only  sufficient  but 
allows  "house  savings"  and  major 
purchases.  We  are  sharing  our 
privilege  and  experiences. 

The  assumptions  which  underlie 
our  money  arrangements  rise  out  of 
our  political  convictions.  Each  time 
we  come  to  a  confrontation  about 
money,  we  try  to  balance  our  per- 
sonal attitudes  with  our  concepts  of 
what  would  be  a  feminist  solution. 
The  only  way  this  can  work  effec- 
tively is  for  the  collective  to  concen- 
trate on  developing  a  clear  political 
ethic.  To  discuss  issues  only  when  a 
crisis  arises  is  very  poor  strategy. 
The  time  to  make  decisions  about 
how  and  when  money  should  be 
used  is  before  highly  charged 
emotional  sessions  are  triggered. 

Tithing 

Shortly  after  we  began  to  pool  all 
funds,  we  instituted  another  impor- 
tant practice.  Tithing  is  an  ancient 
and  honorable  custom  among 
Christians,  and  I  only  wish  it  could 
be  equally  established  among 
feminists.  We  all  know  how 
marginal  many  of  our  projects  and 


institutions  are.  The  need  for 
money  never  ends.  Generally, 
however,  we  assume  that  most  of  us 
have  little  to  spare.  Collective  living 
frees  money  that  can  be  donated  to 
feminist  projects.  In  our  case,  we  do 
not  tithe  a  specific  percentage  of  our 
income.  Rather,  our  tithing  varies  in 
a  pattern  similar  to  our  allowances. 
We  have  sent  our  money  to  both 
organizations  and  individuals,  in- 
cluding subscribing  to  feminists 
journals  to  help  them  survive.  We 
make  choices  based  on  our  own 
priorities  and  interests,  but  the  es- 
sential concept  continues  to  be  that 
systematic  sharing  of  resources  is  a 
basic  responsibility  of  any  feminist. 

Mutual  Education 

Education  is  a  broad  concept.  It 
doesn't  mean  just  taking  courses  or 
going  to  school.  The  major  work  of 
feminist  political  analysis  is  connec- 
ting observed  oppression  to  a  plan 
of  action.  We  need  to  ground  our 
politics  in  our  lives,  and  that  rarely 
happens  in  isolation.  What  is 
needed  is  discussion,  argument  and 
the  search  for  consensus. 

We  work  at  education  through 
participating  in  other  groups,  as 
well  as  through  working  things  out 
among  ourselves  and  taking  advan- 
tage of  every  possible  opportunity 
to  broaden  ourselves  and  our 
analysis.  As  a  collective,  we  need  to 
share  a  common  political  experience 
and  address  issues  as  a  group.  But 
we  also  realize  there  is  a  danger: 
living  and  working  together  in  a 
collective  can  lead  people  to  assume 
an  unquestioned  agreement,  to 
think  in  terms  of  "what  do  we  think 
about  that?"  The  group  must  also 
put  a  strong  emphasis  on  allowing 


Weaving  the  Web/85 


and  encouraging  individual 
differences. 

We  try  to  attend  conferences,  to 
read  widely  in  both  the  feminist 
press  and  in  the  media  of  other 
liberation  struggles,  and  to  discuss 
issues  together,  such  as  the  fact  that 
our  experiences  vary  so  widely  that 
we  have  trouble  addressing  each 
other  as  equals.  We  are  not  only 
products  of  different  class 
backgrounds,  but  our  educational 
experiences  are  radically  different; 
such  simple  things  as  the  experience 
of  travelling  can  create  feelings  of 
inferiority  and  jealousy. 

Since  we  see  mutual  education  as 
a  collective  responsibility,  we  have 
tried  to  address  these  questions 
from  that  perspective.  When  we 
moved  from  Tallahassee  to  DC,  for 
example,  we  decided  to  use  the  op- 
portunity to  let  one  of  us  make  a 
long  trip  alone.  Part  of  our  reason 
was  that  she  was  the  only  one  of  us 
who  had  never  travelled  before.  She 
felt  that  it  made  a  difference  in  her 
feelings  of  confidence  and  self- 
worth.  We  could  not  deny  her  that 
opportunity  just  because  she  hadn't 
had  it  before  she  joined  the  collec- 
tive; what  she  and  her  family  could 
not  provide,  the  "house"  covered. 
Since  then,  we  have  collectively  sent 
one  person  to  another  state  to 
graduate  school  as  well  as  paid  for 
various  courses  we  wanted  to  study 
in  DC.  Projects  which  seem 
primarily  personal  and  non-political 
are  usually  covered  only  partly  by 
the  "house,"  on  the  principle  that 
the  act  of  spending  pocket  money 
increases  the  commitment  to  and 
perceived  importance  of  such 
projects.  Whenever  we  make  such  a 
choice,  we  discuss  it  in  detail;  one  of 


our  criteria  is  that  the  person  taking 
the  course  of  study  commits  herself 
to  working  hard  at  it,  and  to  sharing 
the  experience  with  the  rest  of  us. 

The  Flaws 

Our  concern  with  the  develop- 
ment of  collective  members  as  in- 
dividuals grows,  in  part,  from  some 
of  the  most  common  criticisms  of 
collectives.  Listed  in  priority,  these 
perceived  flaws  are:  (1)  the 
emphasis  on  unconscious  confor- 
mity;12 (2)  the  stifling  of  creativity; 
(3)  the  inefficiency  of  consensus 
decision-making13  and  (4)  the 
tendency  for  the  collective  to  cut 
itself  off  from  the  outside  world.14 
There  are  many  examples  of  abuses 
within  collectives,  and  these 
dangers  are  partly  inherent  in  the 
collective  process.  The  criticism  that 
the  collective  is  a  personal  solution 
to  a  political  problem  can  be  true. 
That  continues  to  be  my  criticism  of 
many  heterosexual  alternative 
living  experiments,  and  lesbian- 
feminist  theory  is  not  a  sufficient 
reply. 

However,  none  of  these  criticisms 
persuades  us  to  abandon  the  collec- 
tive model.  Rather,  they  give  us 
clear  areas  of  struggle.  I  continue 
with  my  collective  because  I  see  it  as 
very  effective  in  making  changes 
both  in  ourselves  and  in  the  groups 
in  which  we  have  worked,  and 
because  no  critique  has  presented 
any  better  alternative.  All  of  these 
flaws  exist  in  any  organized 
political  action  group,  but  the 
collective  can  serve  a  real  purpose  in 
fulfilling  the  basic  needs  of  many 
individuals  while  providing  a 
framework  for  political  action.  In  its 
absence,  those  needs  continue.  If  an 


86/Quest 


institution  is  not  intentionally 
created,  it  will  birth  itself. 

By  now  some  of  our  responses  to 
these  criticisms  are  already  clear. 
We  do  not  accept  the  necessity  of 
consensus.  We  believe  that  within 
basic  political  agreement  there  is 
room  for  individual  opinion  and 
response,  and  we  try  to  emphasize 
individual  creativity  by  consciously 
nurturing  each  other  as  artists,  ac- 
tivists, and  individuals.  To  prevent 
ourselves  from  growing  isolated,  we 
make  sure  that  each  member  of  the 
collective  works  with  a  political  ac- 
tion group  outside  the  collective. 
This  alone  doesn't  solve  the 
problem,  however.  We  also  have  to 
keep  in  mind  our  own  retreatist 
tendencies,  and  judge  carefully 
when  withdrawal  or  nonalignment 
is  necessary. 

We  have  accepted  inefficiency  as 
a  necessity  within  limits.  Collective 
decision-making,  for  example,  takes 
a  lot  of  time.  Careful  discussion  and 
examination  of  issues  and  actions 
are  necessary.  It  is  exhausting, 
tedious,  and  sometimes  terribly 
frustrating.  Decision  by  inflexible 
code  or  hierarchy  would  be  more  ef- 
ficient, but  in  no  way  acceptable  to 
us. 

There  is  one  problem  in  collective 
living  that  we  rarely  have  seen  dis- 
cussed by  other  groups.  One  of  the 
most  dangerous  tendencies  for  the 
collective  member  is  not  only  to  let 
the  group  make  her  decisions,  but 
also  to  use  the  group  as  an  excuse 
for  escaping  decisions  or  confron- 
tations she  wants  to  avoid.  It  is 
possible  to  say,  "I  can't  do  that.  We 
discussed  it,  and  I  was  overruled." 
Each  member  of  a  feminist  collec- 
tive should  be  responsible  for  the 


decisions  of  the  whole,  and,  it  is  the 
responsibility  of  the  individual  to 
acknowledge  her  own  participation. 
It  is  far  more  reasonable  to  say, 
"We  decided.  There  are  some  things 
I'm  not  certain  about,  but  this  is  our 
decision."  The  difference  lies  in  the 
individual's  commitment  both  to 
the  group's  decisions  and  actions, 
and  to  her  own  roles  in  reaching 
those  decisions.  Where,  after  all,  is 
the  essential  difference  between 
hiding  behind  a  facade  of  group 
dependence  and  allowing  your 
decisions  to  be  made  or  seem  to  be 
made  by  a  man? 

Criticism/Self  Criticism 

Much  of  our  understanding  of 
the  flaws  in  our  own  collective 
process  has  developed  out  of 
criticism/self-criticism  (c/sc).  This 
is  a  term  badly  misused  within 
political  movements.  We  have 
developed  our  own  groundwork  for 
c/sc,  and  this  discussion  of  our 
method  and  philosophy  is  not  con- 
clusive. I  would  recommend  that 
any  group  interested  in  the 
technique  look  at  the  more  formal 
guides  available  from  Marxist  study 
group  and  then  experiment  within 
those  guidelines. 

Throughout  this  work,  I  have 
referred  to  the  need  for  a  network  of 
support,  for  that  web  of  which 
Joanna  Russ  wrote.  However,  the 
analogy  is  a  passive  one.  It  suggests 
the  underlying  net  of  the  tightrope 
walker.  Our  greater  need  is  a 
responsive,  challenging  support.  In 
a  "good"  family,  the  individual  is 
actively  shaped  and  socialized:  she 
is  challenged  for  avoidance  or  for 
destructive  behavior,  and  en- 
couraged to  become  a  strong,  active 


Weaving  the  Web/87 


and  responsible  person.  C/sc  is  the 
active  tool  of  this  concern;  the 
group  critiques  the  individuals;  the 
individuals  critique  the  group,  and 
the  individuals  critique  each  other. 
The  word  "critique"  should  be  un- 
derstood to  mean  praise  as  well  as 
criticism. 

What  does  it  mean  for  the  group 
to  criticize  the  individuals?  You 
must  check  yourself  against  your 
politics.  The  group  must  have 
ongoing  political  discussion.  What 
are  our  beliefs  and  how  is  our 
behavior  reflecting  them?  For  exam- 
ple, if  we've  been  discussing  "The 
Politics  of  Housework,"  we  should 
look  at  the  collective  patterns  of 
who  does  what,  when,  and  under 
what  expectations.  Is  one  person 
somehow  always  doing  the  cooking 
or  cleaning?  Has  she  fallen  into  (or 
been  put  into)  the  role  of 
housewife?  If  so,  what  must  be 
done  to  correct  the  problem? 

The  natural  outgrowth  of  critical 
examination  is  for  the  individuals  to 
critique  the  collective.  We  do  not 
look  at  how  the  individuals  are 
failing  the  model,  but  how  the 
model  itself  is  working  and  how  it 
should  be  changed.  For  example, 
should  collectives  assume  that 
collectivity  means  shared  living 
space?  Is  it  reasonable  for  us  to  in- 
clude within  our  models  the  concept 
of  sabbaticals?  What  would  such  an 
action  mean?  What  would  be  the 
practical  economic  problems  as  well 
as  the  less  obvious  psychological 
effects  of  such  arrangements? 

Both  these  approaches  are 
basically  theoretical  and  distant 
from  the  more  personal  way  c/sc  is 
usually  seen,  but  they  are  equally 
part    of    the    process,    and    they 


provide  a  very  useful  method  for 
approaching  special  concerns  in  a 
productive,  mutually-affirming 
manner.  However,  the  core  of  c/sc 
is  personal,  individual-to-individual 
criticism,  and  that  is  the  technique 
which  is  most  difficult  and  most 
productive. 

Successful  c/sc  requires  a 
number  of  clear  assumptions.  First, 
it  should  be  a  natural  part  of  the 
group's  process,  either  scheduled 
regularly  after  meetings  or  ritually 
performed  after  confrontations,  or 
scheduled  on  its  own.  It  should  be 
scheduled  often  enough  to  prove 
useful,  but  not  so  often  that  it 
becomes  the  primary  activity  of  the 
group.  Within  a  collective  it  is  im- 
portant that  the  principles  of  c/sc  be 
used  in  informal  situations  as  well 
—  e.g.,  the  careful  encouragement  of 
honest  criticism  offered  at  the  time 
rather  than  saved  up  for  a  "heavy" 
meeting.  Finally,  c/sc  should  be 
done  only  in  an  atmosphere  of  trust 
and  commitment,  without  which 
criticism  cannot  be  effective.  The 
desired  goal  is  a  living  and  working 
space  in  which  creative  work  is 
shared  and  supported,  where  there 
is  mutual  respect,  interest  and  en- 
couragement. Criticism  is  valuable 
only  when  it  is  offered  with  the  in- 
tention of  correcting  errors  and 
creating  positive  changes.  Envy, 
resentment  and  suspicion  destroy 
the  necessary  atmosphere. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  what  we 
consider  to  be  basic  how-to's  in  the 
process  of  good  criticism/self- 
criticism: 

1)  Always  keep  the  basic  trust 
and  commitment  clear.  When 
someone  you  care  about  is  listing 


88/Quest 


your  faults,  it's  hard  to  remember 
what  she  ever  liked  or  respected 
about  you.  The  positive  needs  to  be 
reaffirmed  within  the  criticism 
itself,  which  means  not  only  giving 
praise  as  well  as  reprimands,  but  oc- 
casionally also  stating  the  intentions 
of  the  criticisms. 

2)  No  one  is  allowed  not  to  res- 
pond to  either  criticism  or  the 
group's  actions.  Silence  is 
sometimes  necessary  for  an  in- 
dividual to  regain  her  balance  or  to 
clarify  her  thoughts,  but  if  it  con- 
tinues, the  group  should  address  it. 
It  helps  if  the  individual  takes 
responsibility  for  saying,  "I  need  to 
think  about  this,"  or,  "I  can't  say 
anything  right  now;  give  me  half  an 
hour." 

3)  No  one  should  be  prevented 
or  discouraged  from  speaking  by  a 
more  outspoken  member  of  the 
group.  If  it  takes  a  formal  structure 
(like  passing  a  talking  object),  then 
use  it.  In  accomplishing  the  goal, 
nothing  is  tacky  or  trivial  or  subject 
to  the,  "but  we've  done  that  before" 
complaint. 

4)  Anger  and  emotion  are  all 
right.  If  the  discussion  is  too  un- 
emotional, there  may  be  something 
wrong.  If  you  care  about  the  people 
and  the  situation,  that  caring  should 
show.  Often,  "let's  be  rational  and 
analyze  this  situation  quietly  and  in 
a  civilized  manner,"  is  either 
avoidance  of  anger  or  just  the 
"niceness"  socialized  into  women. 
It  lays  a  crust  on  wounds  that  need 
to  be  opened.  However,  if  someone 
always  gets  angry  and  starts 
shouting  or  crying,  then  the  group 
should  investigate  methods  either 
for  helping  her  work  out  of  that 
pattern,  or  for  helping  the  group  to 


respond  constructively  to  her.  In 
such  a  situation,  wrestling,  or  some 
joint,  hard  physical  activity,  may 
help  to  de-fuse  the  anger. 

5)  Praise  as  well  as  complain. 
Maybe  we  should  call  this  process 
"criticism/commendation,"  to  help 
people  remember  to  emphasize 
positive  accomplishments  as  well  as 
negative  acts.  If  a  woman  is  making 
progress,  making  changes,  doing 
good  work,  she  needs  to  hear  it. 
There  are  good  reasons  for  working 
together;  repeat  them. 

6)  Take  care  of  yourself,  not  the 
other  person.  Respect  her  ability  to 
ask  for  help.  Giving  it  when  it  isn't 
needed  is  paternalism,  and  it  means 
you  are  probably  not  taking  care  of 
yourself. 

7)  Don't  try  to  read  the  other 
women's  mind;  don't  try  to  second- 
guess  her,  and  don't  tell  her  what 
you  think  she's  thinking.  ASK 
HER,  or  tell  her  how  you  feel  about 
what  she's  doing.  You  have  to 
respect  the  individual's  perception 
of  her  reality.  If  you  feel  differently 
about  it,  you  have  to  say  so  as  your 
feeling,  not  as  though  your  opinion 
is  objective  fact. 

8)  Try  not  to  talk  to  the  other 
woman  the  way  your  father  talked 
to  you. 

9)  Sarcasm  never  helps.  It  never 
contributes  to  clarity  and  it  just 
triggers  an  angry  response.  Try  to 
stick  to  statements  of  fact  and  to 
your  own  feelings  and  avoid 
cleverness,  irony  and  condescen- 
sion. 

10)  Admit  suspicion  and  fear.  It 
will  not  go  away  if  you  hide  it. 

11)  Everyone  has  the  right  to 
change  her  mind.  To  say,  "But  last 
month  you  insisted  that  such  and  so 


Weaving  the  Web/89 


was  what  you  wanted,"  is  not  help- 
ful. Inconsistency  is  a  valid 
criticism,  but  it  is  most  pertinent 
when  it  is  a  pattern  of  behavior,  not 
merely  when  someone  says  she  has 
changed  her  mind. 

12)  If  the  group  assumes  that 
one  of  its  goals  is  to  break  down 
class  assumptions,  then  it  should 
recognize  that  political  superiority 
is  another  false  division.  No  one 
deserves  the  title,  "Most  Politically 
Correct,"  and,  therefore,  no  one  is 
entitled  to  guilt-trip  or  belittle  the 
work  of  others.  Nor  is  self-sacrifice 
any  justification  for  expecting 
others  to  match  your  actions  or 
commitments.  People  do  what  they 
want  to  do  or  what  they  believe  is 
right.  Discuss  that  —  not  why 
everyone  else  should  be  doing  what 
you're  doing. 

13)  The  secret  of  communication 
is  sometimes  relaxing  and  letting  go 
of  our  rulebooks.  Try  to  get  used  to 
the  idea  that  everything  is  subject  to 
change,  including  the  techniques  of 
criticism/self-criticism. 

Lesbian-feminist  collective  life  is 
a  whole.  It  does  not  break  down 
well  into  components.  We  need  to 
remember  that  we  are  not  always 
equal  to  our  theory.  Some  days  we 
like  to  pretend  that  we're 
superhuman,  to  think  that  a  friend 
can  point  to  some  essentially  nasty 
thing  we  have  done  to  her  without 
producing  in  us  equal  parts  of  guilt 
and  righteous  anger.  Our  greatest 
danger  is  feminist  sainthood.  We 
have  to  keep  in  mind  that  we  are  in- 
jured. We  have  been  repeatedly 
wounded  just  by  growing  up.  Our 
job  is  to  heal  each  other  and  our 
task  is  to  grow  to  strength. 


Conclusion 

For  me,  the  collective  model 
provides  a  more  human  answer  to 
my  own  needs  as  a  feminist  outlaw. 
I  survive  in  a  patriarchal  society  by 
supplying  some  service  to  that 
society  while  working  for  its  down- 
fall, and  I  must  believe  in  the 
possibility  of  success  —  that  we  can 
win  —  while  knowing  that  victory 
may  not  come  in  my  lifetime.  I  no 
longer  believe  in  the  ejaculatory 
male  model  of  revolution,  with  its 
John  Wayne  memorial  confron- 
tations leaving  the  dead  scattered 
about.  Rather,  I  believe  in  a  feminist 
cyclical  theory  and  the  development 
of  radical  communities. 

We  are  not  lone  rangers  or 
vigilantes.  We'd  be  better  off 
looking  to  the  Scottish  clans  to  see 
how  they  kept  a  people  and  a 
culture  intact  under  colonialism,  or 
to  the  Iriquois,  to  see  how  they 
organized  a  nation  without  in- 
dispensable chiefs.  My  conviction 
in  the  strengths  of  collectives  lies  in 
sustained  struggle  and  individual 
survival,  in  organizations  and 
alliances  that  both  affirm  us  and 
outlast  us  as  individuals,  and  in 
communities  of  women  whose  es- 
sential integrity  is  never  lost. 

I,  and  the  women  I  live  and  work 
with,  sometimes  feel  like  that  arrow 
in  ancient  mathematical  proofs, 
always  advancing  toward  the  target, 
yet  never  quite  reaching  it.  But  the 
act  of  advancing  is  the  revolution. 
The  target  is  a  wholly  new  society 
of  re-created  individuals.  The 
collective,  in  that  scheme,  is  both  a 
strategy  and  the  movement. 


90/Quest 


Footnotes 

'Robert  Bierstedt,  The  Social  Order 
(New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1970),  pp. 
395-9.  [For  a  good  feminist  analysis  of 
the  family  which  critiques  many  of 
these  functions,  look  at  Alice  Rossi's 
collection,  Family.] 

2Communitas  is  a  sometimes  difficult 
concept.  It  has  been  called  "antistruc- 
ture"  as  opposed  to  "structure."  Victor 
W.  Turner,  The  Ritual  Process:  Struc- 
ture &  Antistructure  (Chicago:  Aldine 
Press,  1969),  p.  96. 

3Joan  Cassels,  A  Group  Called 
Women  (New  York:  David  McKay  Co., 
1977),  p.  153. 

4Helford  Spiro,  "Is  The  Family 
Universal?"  56,  American 
Anthropologist  (1954),  pp.  839-46. 

5Within  the  lesbian-feminist  com- 
munity, we  now  have  contemporary 
examples  like  the  Womanshare  Collec- 
tive and  the  Olivia  Collective  to 
examine  for  the  practical  ramifications 
of  our  theoretical  models.  The 
Womanshare  book  and  the  article,  "We 
Don't  Just  Process  Records"  provide  a 
good  analysis  of  how  a  collective  can 
function.  [See  Sister,  Jan. /Dec,  1976), 
and  Womanshare  by  Sue,  Nelly,  Diane, 
Carol,  and  Bille  (Grants  Pass,  Oregon: 
Womanshare  Books,  1976).] 

More  than  role  models,  the 
experience  of  other  collectives  give  us 
an  opportunity  to  compare  different 
concepts  of  how  collectives  survive  or 
break  down.  Traditionally  we  have 
other  examples,  including  the  Spanish 
collectives  during  the  revolution,  and  a 
medieval  women's  community,  the 
Beguines.  The  Spanish  collectives  were 
interdependent  and  shared  a  strong 
sense  of  cooperation.  [See  Emma  Gold- 
man," Anarchism  and  Collectivity,"  by 
Clare  of  the  Moonstorm  collective,  (Vol. 
3,  No.  1,  Spring  1976),  p.  11].  The 
Beguines  operated  as  a  network  of 
houses  "each  containing  up  to  seven 
women  and  providing  a  wide  choice  of 


living  conditions."  [See  Gracia  Clark, 
1:4,  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
(Spring,  1975),  p.  76.] 

One  question  that  should  be  ad- 
dressed is  what  if  we  were  actually  a 
movement  of  many  interdependent 
collectives  in  both  urban  and  rural  set- 
tings, collectives  whose  work  could 
vary  from  music  to  printing  to  truck 
farming  to  battered  women's  retreats 
and  feminist  educational  institutes?  I 
believe  we  have  the  potential  for  such  a 
possibility,  and  the  base  for  it,  in  our 
slow  development  of  a  unified  feminist 
analysis.  But  the  organizing  principle  to 
link  all  these  groups  would  have  to  be 
agreement  on  our  method  of  struggle. 
The  Olivia  Collective,  in  their  analysis, 
emphasized  political  trust  and  commit- 
ment. (Sister,  pp.  8  &  9).  The  basis  for 
both  lies  in  our  ability  to  work  together 
and  to  agree  on  priorities  in  the  work  to 
be  done. 

6Nona  Glazer-Mahler,  ed.,  Old  Fami- 
ly, New  Family  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Van 
Nostrand,  1975).  Includes  a  study  of  ur- 
ban communes  done  by  Robert  B.  Stein, 
Lon  Polk,  and  Barbara  Bovee  Polk 
which  showed  a  majority  of  the 
respondents  continuing  to  list  many  of 
the  traditional  male/female  conflicts: 
unequal  sharing  of  work  load  (58%), 
child  rearing  (50%),  lack  of  communica- 
tion (63%),  and  dominant-subordinate 
relationships  (44%). 

7Joanna  Russ,  The  Female  Man  (New 
York:  Bantam  Books,  1975). 

8Russ,  p.  81. 

9The  Anti-Mass:  Methods  of 
Organization  for  Collectives  (Published 
by  the  Anti-Mass,  P.O.  Box  7411,  New 
Haven,  CT  06519,  1970.) 

10Glazer-Mahler,  p.  18. 

uThe  dictionary  calls  a  collective 
merely,  "a  cooperative  unity  of 
organization"  or  "people  or  things  con- 
sidered as  a  whole."  Under  this  criterion 
we  have  writing  collectives,  therapy 
collectives  and  research  collectives, 
most  of  which  would  not  fall  under  my 


Weaving  the  Web/91 


definition. 

,2Alison  Colber,  "Collective 
Breakdown,"  11:3  Women  Writing 
Newsletter  (Summer,  1976). 

"Olivia,  "We  Don't  Just  Process 
Records." 

"Anti-Mass. 

Dorothy  Allision,  former 
manager  of  the  Washington  Area 
Feminist  Federal  Credit  Union,  is 
currently  on  the  staff  of  Quest.  This 
article  could  not  have  been  com- 
pleted without  the  help  and  support 
of  Judith  Jones,  Flo  Hollis,  Sidney 
Oliver,  Tracey  Setel  and  Helen 
Young. 


*&*®v  warns*,  ^CW.  ^m<^  ^m(^=  ggfflag  *<a»fih>  ^ffiw,  ^sma^ 


1 


J       rfi> 


V-"     oO^      ~\^    r'^  -^ 


<?V0< 


^  » 

<<<•;>> 


.<    o<     ^u  j°  v  %<  "ORE 


SOUND 
COMPAN 


I 


l</^4/ 


<?>>?  WOMAN  SOUND 


92/Qwesf 


A  limited  offer 
of  feminist  classics. 


Volumes  I  and  II  of  Quest:  a  feminist  qu. 

ly,  in  convenient,  attractive,  durable  box  b 

ers  for  efficient  research,  easy  reference, 

keeping. 

Quest  articulates  and  explores  feminist  issues, 

in  original  essays  and  articles  by  leading  theor 

ists  and  activists,  including: 

Charlotte  Bunch  Mary  Daly 


CHANGF 


Rita  Mae  Brown 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Karen  Kolllas 
Alice  Quinn 
Lucia  Valeska 
Sandra  Flowers 
Sally  Gearhart 


Z  Budapest 
Joanna  Russ 
Bertha  Harris 
Cynthia  Washington 
Linda  Phelps 
Jackie  St.  Joan 
Joan  Landes 


Volume  I,  1974-75:  Processes  of  Change;* 
Money,  Fame  &  Power;  Selfhood  of  Women;  Wo- 
men &  Spirituality. 

Volume  II,  1975-76:  Future  Visions  &  Fanta- 
sies; Theories  of  Revolution;*  Organizations  & 
Strategies;  Leadership. 


To  order,  fill  in  coupon  and  send  check  to:  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C. 
20003. 

D  Please  send  Vol.  I  at  $25.00 

□  Please  send  Vol.  II  at  $25.00 

□  Please  send  Vol.  I  &  II  at  $45.00 

Name    

Address    

Zip    


*These  issues  available  only  in  complete  sets. 


Weaving  the  Web/93 


We  would  like  to  thank  all  the  people  listed  below  who  con- 
tributed to  Quest  from  June  1,  1978  to  August  31,  1978: 


Jean  D.  Andrew 

Patricia  Arvidson 

Byllye  Avery 

Faith  Balch 

Mabel  D.  Balen 

Karlyn  Barker 

Katherine  G.  Barr 

Jane  Bedno 

Joan  Biordi 

Robin  Birdfeather 

Elisabeth  Bohnen 

Barbara  A.  Bollmann 

Chris  Bose 

Gene  Boyer 

Ann  Bradford 

Lynne  St.  Brandon 

Janice  M.  Brandstrom 

Carol  Brown 

Victoria  Celeste  Brush 

Marjorie  K.  Bunch 

Winkie  Bunch 

Karen  Byers 

Eileen  M.  Byrne 

Claudia  Card 

Linda  J.  Carlson 

Lois  E.  Carlson 

Janice  Carrick 

Christine  A.  Carroll 

Virginia  Carter 

Frances  Chapman 

Sherrill  Cheda 

Jean  Christie 

Darlene  Cole 

Mary  Coleman 

Rev.  Davida  Foy  Crabtree 

Susan  E.  Craig 

Flora  Crater 

Frances  M.  Crotty 

Debra  Curtis 

Dorothy  Curzon 

Diva  Daims 

Linda  Damico 

Alice  Dan 

Judith  F.  Davis 

Judy  Davis 

Lynn  Davis 

Mary  H.  Deal 

Barbara  Deming 

Ira  Dennekamp 

Harriet  Desmoine 

Jann  Dieckmann 


Gloria  Donahue 

Patricia  A.  Dorner 

Susanna  Dourie 

Jan  Marie  Dubois 

Katterine  S.  Duff 

Cecille  Y.  Dumbrigue 

Alice  Echols 

Lee  Tatham  Egherman 

Carol  Ehrlich 

Sherry  Estes 

Jackie  Eubanks 

Jana  G.  Everett 

Patricia  Farris 

Roslyn  L.  Feldberg 

Mary  Felstiner 

Marilyn  M.  Ferrandino 

Nancy  J.  Flight 

Dr.  Edith  A.  Folb 

Sonja  Foss 

Estelle  Freedman 

Elizabeth  Freeman 

Susanna  L.  Frenkel 

Marilyn  Frye 

Su  Friedrich 

Sally  Miller  Gearhart 

Julia  M.  Gentile 

Margo  George 

Marilyn  M.  Gerrandino 

Elsa  Dik  Glass 

Karen  A.  Golden 

Diane  J.  Goldsmith 

Jackie  Goodair 

Ann  Gordon 

Helen  L.  Gray 

Patricia  Green 

Judith  Gregory 

Jane  Gurko 

Shirley  Haddad 

Donna  Haraway 

Sandra  Harding 

Joan  Harries 

Pan  Haskins 

Barbara  Hayler 

Lynn  Heidelberg 

Amy  Hines 

Debra  Hirshberg 

Dr.  Allie  Corbin  Hixson 

Harriet  A.  Iglehart 

Amy  Innes 

Elizabeth  Janeway 

Dr.  Sabine  [essner 


Judith  Johnson 
Nancy  Tips  Jones 
Miriam  G.  Keiffer 
Glory  Ann  Kerstein 
Isabel  C.  Kimble 
Lydia  Kleiner 
Marion  Knight 
Elizabeth  W.  Knowlton 
Gloria  E.  Konahue 
Elizabeth  Koontz 
Nancy  Krody 
Linda  J.  Kuhn 
Diann  Kunkel 
Donna  Landerman 
Marilyn  Langfeld 
Adele  Laslie 
Carol  Lease 
Robert  Lepage 
Gloria  Levin 
Jane  Librizzi 
Robert  Lightfoot 
Carol  S.  Lipton 
Denise  Lockard 
Tina  Lunson 
Peggy  Lyner 
Julia  Malpass 
M.E.  Manick 
Nancy  Markowe 
Joan  K.  Marshall 
Joy  Ellen  Martin 
Gayle  Martinson 
Jean  Marzone 
Yvonne  M.  Mattinly 
F.H.  Mautner 
Deborah  L.  McBride 
Linda  McGonigal 
Kathleen  McDaniel 
Mary  McKenney 
Aileen  McMurrer 
Katherine  L.  McQueen 
Elana  Mikels 
Angela  Miles 
Harriet  Miller 
Moon  Books 
Sylvia  D.  Moore 
Fanya  S.  Montalvo 
Colleen  Moreland 
Mary  M.  Morgan 
Nancy  Morris 
Britt  Muller 
Hal  Nelson 


94/Quest 


New  Dynamics  Associates 
Catherine  Nicholson 
Peggy  S.  Nicholson 
Dianne  O'Connell 
Frances  D.  O'Connell 
Mildred  O'Connell 
Carole  A.  Oglesby 
Harriet  Oppenheimer 
Cheryl  Orvis 
Florence  E.  Paine 
Karen  R.  Pauilis 
Mary  K.  Peabody 
Cynthia  Pearson 
Pamela  H.  Pearson 
Barbara  Peel 
Lee  Perkins 
Gerry  A.  Perrin 
Carol  Pierce 
Nancy  Pode 
John  A.  Pollack 
Minnie  Bruce  Pratt 
David  C.  Ptoebe 
Laura  Punnett 


Judith  E.  Rainbrook 

Leslie  Reeves 

Jeanette  Regan 

Maurine  Renville 

S.  Rochte 

Hollis  A.  Roper 

Tracy  Rosenhand 

Harriet  Ohlstein  Rothouser 

Nikki  Sachs 

Connie  Samaras 

Janice  Eddy  Sanfacon 

Rebecca  Sandridge 

Susan  M.  Savell 

Eleanor  M.  Schetlin 

Donna  Schuckman 

Sabine  J.  Sehlinger 

Betty  Carol  Sellen 

Janet  Sergi 

Carolyn  Shafer 

Janet  Shaver 

Sharon  Toffey  Shelpela 

Lynda  Simons 

Margaret  A.  Simons 


Bernice  Sisson 
Barbara  A.  Smith 
Susanna  P.  Smith 
Socialist  Review 
CM.  Spencer 
Catherine  Stimpson 
Judith  Stitzel 
Mary  Strickland 
Ruthann  Theodore 
Lenora  E.  Trussell 
James  R.  Turner 
Dorothy  G.  Wagner 
Sherrye  Walker 
Cynthia  C.  Wedel 
Denise  R.  Wheeler 
Sandra  M.  Whisler 
Rev.  Barbara  N.  Whitcomb 
Dawnel  C.  White 
Leila  Wrathall 
Cynthia  Wright 
Wendy  L.  Wright 
Iris  M.  Young 
Sarah  Young 


Triangle  Area  Lesbian  Feminists 


INTOPPWMRYAJOWRNAL 


CONTRIBUTIONS  WELCOMED 
IN  ANY  AREA  OF  THE 
HUMANTIE5  OR  THE  SOCJAL 
SCIENCES.  WE  AKE  ALSO 
INTERESTED  IN  ARTICLES  ON 
WOMEN'S  POSITIONER 
INVOLVEMENT  IN  ANY  OTHER 
AREAS  REVIEWS  OF  FILMS 
PLAYS  AND  ORIGINAL 
POEMS  AND  STOWES  ARE 
ALSO  WELCOME  AS  WELLAS 
GRAPHICS.  PHOTOGRAPHS  etc 


POVERTY  AND  WOMEN  IN  EARLY  W.A.i  TEACHING 
LESBIAN  LITERATURE;  WOMEN'S  EMIGRATION  TO 
CANADA,  BIOLOGY  AND  FEMINIST  IDE0L06Y; 
POLITICS  OF  RAPE  IN  RN.6.,  WOMEN  ART15T5 ; 
WOMEN  IN  5.  ITALY;  IDEOLOGY  OF  LOVE;  JANET 
FRAME  BIBLIOGRAPHY;  POEMS  AND  STORIES- 


SUBSCRIPTION  RATES-  A$2-50,  UK  £180,  US  $400  PA. 
INSTITUTIONS  A$6  00  RA,UK  £4  50  PA;US  51000  RA., 
SUBSCRIPTIONS/ARTICLES  ETC  TO  CAROLE  FEWER,  ENGLISH  DEPT 
UNIVERSITY  OF  QUEENSLAND, ST.  L1KIA  SRIS5ANE  4067, QU>,  AUSTWUA 


six  issues  a  year 

BOX  928  STATION  Q 


S3  &  $4  (U.S.) 
— ^  Institutions: 
(j  $10  &  $12  (U.S.) 

ONLY  THn.   Funds  TORONTO ,  ON  T  A  R IO 


Quest/95 


r 1  r 1 

If  you   would   like   to  subscribe  or  |         If  you   would   like   to  subscribe  or  j 

!  feminist  quarterly,   please  fill  out  the  !   i  feminist  quarterly,   please  fill  out  the  i 

i  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money  i   J  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money  i 

j  order  to:                                                         i   [order  to: 

J  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly                         J  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 

[P.O.  Box  8843                                                  |P.O.  Box  8843 

[Washington,  D.C.  20003                             [Washington,  D.C.  20003 

E  $9.00/year  for  individuals                         D  $9.00/year  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals                  □  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

□  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor!          □  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor  i 

□  $10.00/year    for    Canada    and!          □  $10.00/year     for    Canada    and! 
Mexico                                                             Mexico 

□  $25.00/year  for  institutions                       □  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

□  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur- ! .  j      D  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur- 1 
face                                                                     face 

E  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air    I          n  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air    ! 

□  $3.35/single  issues                                       □  $3.35/single  issues 

□  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal                 □  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 
i  Name                                                             j  Name 

!  Address                                                         [  Address 

Zip                                                                     Zip 

i 4   j ^ 

If  you   would   like   to   subscribe  or  '         If  you   would   like   to   subscribe  or  | 
imake    a    contribution    to    Quest:    a\   i  make    a    contribution    to    Quest:    a\ 
\  feminist  quarterly,   please  fill  out  the  |   j  feminist  quarterly,   please  fill  out  the  | 
j  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money  j   j  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money  ] 
[ order  to:                                                           j  order  to: 
|  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly                         J  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
j  P.O.  Box  8843                                                |  P.O.  Box  8843 
!  Washington,  D.C.  20003                              j  Washington,  D.C.  20003 

□  $9.00/year  for  individuals                         □  $9.00/year  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals                  □  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

□  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor  [         □  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor  j 

□  $10.00/year    for    Canada    and  J         D  $10.00/year     for    Canada    and  | 
Mexico                                                             Mexico 

□  $25.00/year  for  institutions             !  i      □  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

□  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur-  !  i      □  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  sur-  i 
face                                                                   face 

□  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air    i         □  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air    i 
D  $3.35/single  issues                                       □  $3.35/single  issues 

D  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal                 □  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 
[Name                                                            !  [Name 

!Address                                                       j  [Address 

!                                          Zip                     j  j                                          Zip                     j 

96/Quest 


Notes  For  Prospective  Contributors 

About  one  year  before  an  issue  comes  off  the  presses,  a  theme 
development  committee,  composed  of  some  Quest  staff  members  and 
other  interested  women  prepares  a  list  of  questions  and  ideas  which  we 
hope  that  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  The  list  is  available  to  anyone 
who  is  interested  in  submitting  manuscripts,  outlines  for  potential  ar- 
ticles, poetry,  graphics,  etc.  (Please  let  us  know  if  you  want  to  receive 
these  lists  routinely  or  only  for  one  theme  in  particular,  and  if  the  latter, 
indicate  which  theme.)  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out 
writers  and  artists  known  to  have  worked  on  issues  related  to  our 
themes. 

All  material  submitted  to  Quest  is  reviewed  by  a  theme  development 
committee  or  by  at  least  two  staff  members.  If  it  is  not  appropriate  for 
Quest  purposes,  the  manuscript  or  graphic  is  returned,  provided  it  was 
sent  with  a  stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  If  a  manuscript  is 
accepted  for  publication,  it  is  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor,  who  is 
responsible  for  working  with  the  author  through  any  processes  of 
rewriting  or  editing  required.  Editing  and  rewriting  decisions  include 
gathering  comments  and  suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and 
development  committee  members.  Our  goal  in  editing  is  clarity; 
whatever  the  author  is  saying,  we  work  to  make  it  as  clear  and  concise  as 
possible.  Authors  always  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review  and 
approval  before  publication. 

In  each  issue,  we  try  to  provide  a  balance  of  different  styles  of  writing, 
but  often  we  do  not  receive  enough  variety  in  the  manuscripts  submitted 
to  us.  It  is  important  to  exchange  our  stories,  our  growth,  our  changes, 
and  our  understanding.  But  often  such  exchanges  take  place  in  verbal 
dialogue  and  analysis  that  never  gets  on  paper.  While  writing  is  not  easy 
for  most  women,  our  challenge  is  to  find  ways  to  express  our 
experiences  and  our  analysis  so  that  they  aid  us  more  in  changing  socie- 
ty. We  encourage  you,  our  readers,  to  submit  a  variety  of  types  of  writing 

—  essays,  journalistic  approaches,  interviews,  tape's  of  discussions,  etc. 

—  so  that  all  of  us  can  learn  more  from  each  other  as  individuals  and  as  a 
movement. 


Articles  should  be  double  spaced  and  submitted  in  duplicate  (original 
plus  one  copy).  Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10 
typewritten  pages)  for  reviews,  responses,  and  short  articles,  to,  at  most, 
7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where  appropriate, 
bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  typed  at  the  end  of  the  article.  All 
manuscripts,  poems,  and  graphics  should  be  original,  unpublished 
material  and  must  be  accompanied  by  a  stamped,  self-addressed 
envelope.  Write  to  us  for  copy  deadlines. 


■y 


Future  Issues 


KALEIDOSCOPE  THREE 

Vol.  V,  No.  1 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  responses  to  our  first  four  years  of  publication 
and  for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics 
and  ideas  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous  articles. 

THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  REVOLUTION 

Vol.  V,  No.  2 

What  is  a  feminist  revolutionary?  How  do  we  make  choices  about  life, 
work,  and  politics?  Where  does  our  sustenance  for  revolutionary  work 
come  from?  How  do  we  relate  individual  values  to  revolutionary  values? 
Each  of  us  makes  choices  and  decisions  which  reflect  our  basic  values 
about  our  roles  as  individuals  in  making  a  feminist  revolution.  The  pur- 
pose of  this  issue  is  to  make  explicit  these  unspoken  underpinnings  of 
our  lives. 

STRUCTURES  FOR  LIVING 

Vol.  V,  No.  3 

The  family:  its  health,  possibilities  and  limitations  —  has  become  an 
issue  of  intense  political  dispute.  The  right  blames  feminism  for  the 
"decline"  of  the  family;  Marxists  blame  Capitalism.  Some  suggest  a 
"national  family  policy";  others  that  the  "helping  professions"  should 
leave  the  family  alone.  The  family  is  seen  as  a  haven  from  a  heartless 
world,  as  a  suffocating  neurosis-inducing  cage;  or  as  the  basis  for 
women's  oppression  and  the  root  of  patriarchy.  This  issue  of  Quest  will 
focus  on  the  family  and  the  disputes  surrounding  it. 

MOVEMENT  BUILDING     T/  ,   T/  XT     , 

Vol.  V,  No.  4 

How  deliberate  and  self -aware  are  you  —  are  all  of  us  —  in  building  a 
movement  for  change?  What  have  been  our  most  effective  movement- 
building  techniques,  and  why?  What  can  we  learn  from  other 
movements?  Quest  in  this  issue  seeks  to  explore  the  underlying 
philosophies,  the  strategies  and  the  mechanics  of  building  a  movement 
—  both  what  we  have  done  and  what  we  might  be  doing.  We  invite  ar- 
ticles from  women  inside  and  outside  the  feminist  movement.  Our 
search  for  ideas  is  not  confined  to  our  own  history. 


