QUEST     " 

a  feminist  quarterly 


Coalition  Politics 
During  the  First  Wave 


Z, 


A  South  African  Feminist  Speaks 
Solipsism  &  Somatophobia 
Building  a  Boycott 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua54wash 


QUEST 

a  feminist  quarterly 

Vol.  V,  No.  4 

Movement  Building 

Contents 

Introduction  3 

Can  the  Union  Make  Us  Strong 

by  Theresa  Rankin  13 

Copenhagen  &  Beyond/ Prospects  for  Global  Feminism 

by  Charlotte  Bunch  25 

Theories  of  Race  &  Gender/The  Erasure  of  Black  Women 

by  Elizabeth  V.  Spelman  36 

The  Women's  Movement  and  Apartheid  in  South  Africa 

by  Victoria  Snudge  63 

An  Anarchafeminist  Looks  at  Power  Relationships 

by  Carol  Ehrlich  76 

Word  Watch 

Review  by  Eileen  Boris  85 


©  Copyright  1982  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.  Reproduction 
without  permission  is  strictly  prohibited.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  is  a  tax 
exempt,  non-profit  organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a  feminist 
quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  DC  20003. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals;  $10/00/year  in  Canada  and 
Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  surface,  $14.50/year  overseas  air;  $25.00/year  to 
institutions,  $3.35  for  all  single  issues.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon 
request.  Foreign  bookstores  and  bookstores  in  New  York,  Chicago  and  Atlanta  should 
order  directly  form  Quest.  All  other  bookstores  may  order  directly  from  Carrier  Pigeon, 
75  Kneeland  St.,  Rm.  309,  Boston,  MA  02111. 
ISSN  0098-955X 


Editorial  Staff 

Joan  Twiggs 

Lynn  Gorchov,  Circulation 

Lisa  Hoogstra,  Back  Issues 

Marilyn  Lerch,  Copy  Coordinator 

Jackie  MacMillan,  Copy  Outreach 

Sara  Shepard,  Design 

Gerri  Traina,  Copy  Intake 


Associates  and  Friends 

Delores  Cole,  Financial  Coordinator 
Avise  Nissen,  Associate 
Mary  Edsall,  Associate 
Deb  Friedman,  Production 
Sue  Sandmeyer,  Production 


Artists 

Scarlet  Cheng,  Pp.  27,  28  and  32 
Jo  Delaplaine,  cover  photo 
Debbie  Salzer,  Pp.  15, 19  and  23 
Sara  Shepard,  cover 
Carol  Stannard,  Pp.  84  and  95 
Jean  Vallon,  Pp.  63,  67,  72  and  76 


Contributing  Editors 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Brenda  Eichelberger 

Alexa  Freeman 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Jayne  Loader,  Media  and  Culture 

Sidney  Oliver 

Arleen  Rogan 

Lucia  Valeska 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  political 
analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a 
process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the  women's  movement,  possibly 
including  such  concrete  forms  as  regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national 
organization,  or  a  political  party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been 
in  the  movement  several  years  and  have  reached  a  point  where  each  answer 
leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been  through  various  ideological  and 
activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that  our  overall  perspective  is  still 
not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle  brought  us?  Closer  to  the  end  of  the 
exploitation  and  violence  against  women?  Closer  to  self-determination  for  all 
women?  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists 
across  the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


In  the  hours  after  the  November  1980  elections  and 

the  victory  of  the  New  Right,  one  white,  male 

journalist  was  asked  to  comment  on  the  future 

direction  and  leadership  of  social  change  forces  in  this 

country.  "Well/'  he  said,  "there  are  the  women/'  His 

remark  reflected  an  understanding  of  the  disarray  and 

directionless  state  of  white,  male,  post-New  Deal 

liberalism  in  this  country.  And,  if  he  was  not  invoking 

radical,  potentially  revolutionary  feminism,  that  is 

beside  the  point.  We  can  and  we  must.  If  such  a 

response  is  to  have  meaning,  however,  it  must  be 

prefaced  by  reflection — on  where  we've  been  and 

where  to  go,  and  how  we  are  to  get  there. 

As  feminists  we  must  look  at  the  state  of  the 

autonomous  women's  liberation  movement:  What 

does  the  movement  look  like  today?  What  issues  are 

feminists  working  on?  What  effect  has  the 

mainstreaming  of  feminism  had  on  the  movement?  In 

what  ways  do  various  strands  of  feminism  define 

feminist  politics?  How  can  feminism  best  respond  to  a 

variety  of  oppressions? 

In  attempting  to  grapple  with  the  serious  threats  of  the 

New  Right,  we  must  have  as  clear  an  understanding  as 

possible  about  who  the  New  Right  is.  We  must  be 

prepared  to  respond  to  both  the  ideological  jargon  of 

the  Right  and  its  specific  legislative  proposals.  And  we 

must  be  able  to  discern,  without  dismissing,  the 

reasons  why  the  words  of  the  New  Right  strike  a  chord 

in  the  hearts  and  minds  of  many  people  in  this 

country. 

Finally,  we  must  build  a  response,  build  a  movement 

for  radical  social  change.  This  task,  which  is  in  process, 

also  requires  time  for  reflection,  and  for  critical 

reassessment.  We  must  be  prepared  to  ask  of  potential 

allies  where  they  stand  on  feminist  issues.  In  our  sense 

of  immediacy,  of  urgency,  feminists  cannot  forget  the 

origins  of  this  second  wave  of  feminism:  that  women 


lntroduction/3 


alone  began  defining  and  exposing  sexual  politics. 
Women's  issues— social  and  economic — are  on  the 
front  line  of  attack. 

In  posing  these  questions,  we,  the  editors  of  Quest,  are 
aware  that  we  have  neither  all  the  questions  nor  all  the 
answers.  Our  impressions  are  precisely  that — 
impressions  based  on  our  experiences,  primarily  in  the 
Washington,  D.C.  area.  Within  the  body  of  this  issue  are 
the  analyses  and  experiences  of  Quest's  authors.  They 
range  from  a  discussion  of  global  feminism  to  single- 
issue  coalition  building,  from  national  liberation  in 
South  Africa  to  the  importance  of  an  analysis  of  racism 
to  feminism.  These  are  all  important  aspects  of 
movement  building  and,  taken  as  a  whole,  represent 
both  the  general  and  the  particular,  analyses  of  where 
feminism  has  been  and  speculation  on  where  we  need 
to  go. 

In  the  spring  1981  Radical  America,  Barbara  Ehrenreich 
speaks  of  "two  faces  of  feminism/'1  One  face,  the 
public  or  popular  image  of  feminism,  is  that  of  the 
independent  woman.  Created  in  large  part  by  the 
media  and  by  business  to  manipulate  feminism  for 
greater  profits,  the  independent  woman  is,  not 
surprisingly,  white,  middle-class,  heterosexual,  holds  a 
middle-management  job,  is  married,  and  has  at  least 
one  child.  This  woman  is  "liberated,"  not  to  challenge 
society's  expectations  of  and  roles  of  women  (or  rather 
that  particular  group  of  women),  but  rather  to  attempt 
to  fulfill  an  expanded  societal  expectation  of  what 
women  should  do. 


For  the  most  part,  this  woman  is  a  myth;  most  women 
do  not  fit  this  image.  But  as  with  all  myths,  there  is  a 
grain  of  truth  in  it.  She  is  the  heir  of  the  founders  of 
the  second  wave  of  feminism — a  movement  begun  by 
white,  heterosexual,  middle-class  women — and  she  is 
the  result  not  of  "going  too  far,"  as  some  antifeminists 
would  claim,  but  of  not  going  far  enough. 

4/Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Vol.  V,  No.  4 


The  reforms  that  the  founding  feminists  fought  for 

have  created  conflicts  and  contradictions  not  so  much 

for  those  women  who  have  the  wherewithal  to  buy 

their  way  out  of  them  but  rather  for  those— poor 

women,  women  of  color,  working-class  women — who 

by  and  large  did  not  define  themselves  as  feminist  in 

the  first  place.  (The  reforms  do  not  go  far  enough  for 

lesbian  women  either,  but  as  a  group  lesbians  are 

more  likely  to  define  themselves  as  feminist.) 

Ehrenreich  lists  some  of  these  contradictions: 

reformed  child  custody  laws  that  make  it  easier  for 

women,  especially  lesbians,  to  lose  custody  of  their 

children;  divorce  laws  that  remove  from  men  some  of 

the  pressure  to  provide  for  their  first  families;  an 

expectation  that  increasing  numbers  of  women  will 

always  work  in  the  workplace  and  care  for  their 

families;  a  "relaxed"  sexual  environment  that  releases 

men — not  women — from  worry  and  obligations.  In 

short,  the  reforms  did  not  take  place  within  the 

context  of  a  concomitant  displacement  of  patriarchy, 

capitalism,  racism;  instead  we  have  displaced 

homemakers. 

All  of  which  is  not  to  discount  the  work  that  has  been 

done,  the  gains  that  have  been  made;  to  our 

knowledge  no  one  has  developed  a  definitive  theory  of 

world  systems  that  takes  into  account  all  oppressions 

and  that  has  an  unerring  crystal  ball  that  will  direct  us 

to  radical  social  change.  The  second  wave  feminists 

began  the  critical  task  of  exposing  sexual  politics;  our 

theory  and  practice  did  not,  and  have  not,  accounted 

for  the  realities  of  all  women.  But  then  the  second 

wave  isn't  over. 

If  the  "dress  for  success"  image  is  one  face  of 

feminism,  another  face— or  other  faces — can  be  found 

in  small  projects  and  organizations  throughout  the 

country.  These  organizations  take  many  forms — some 

are  publications,  some  are  women's  centers,  battered 

women's  shelters,  rape  crisis  centers  and  feminist 

health  centers.  Many  of  them  have  existed  for  many 


lntroduction/5 


years,  and  are,  in  fact,  institutions  of  feminism.  In 
Washington,  D.C.,  for  instance,  off  our  backs 
celebrated  its  tenth  anniversary  in  1980;  the  Women's 
Center  and  the  Rape  Crisis  Center  here  have  operated 
since  1972;  and  Quest  is  in  its  seventh  year  of 
existence.  Other  cities  can  cite  similar  examples  of 
long-standing  feminist  projects  and  organizations. 

All  of  us — those  who  originated  the  second  wave  and 
those  who  are  more  recent  feminists — can  take  pride 
both  in  our  "institutions"  and  in  the  new  organizations 
that  continue  to  be  established  around  the  country. 
But  if  feminism,  in  all  its  various  forms  and  ideological 
stances,  is  to  continue  to  grow  and  evolve,  we  must  ask 
ourselves  some  very  basic  questions.  For  example: 
Does  the  existence  of  feminist  projects  constitute  a 
feminist  movement!  Why  are  feminist  projects  largely 
white  and  middle-class?  Has  our  theory  kept  pace  with 
our  practice?  To  what  extent  do  our  activities  create 
political  change?  Have  our  organizations  and  projects, 
which  all  of  us  use  for  personal  support  as  well  as  for 
political  expression,  emphasized  the  former  at  the 
expense  of  the  latter?  In  creating  political  change,  how 
much  emphasis  should  we  place  on  electoral  politics? 
Finally,  how  do  we  create  a  feminism  that  speaks  to  the 
realities  of  all  women? 

It  is  this  last  question  that  informs  the  answers  to  the 
preceding  ones.  We  simply  cannot  continue  to  deny  or 
ignore  the  fact  that  feminism  as  a  movement  has  been 
and  is  predominantly  white  and  middle-class.  It  cannot 
remain  so  if  it  is  to  be  a  progressive  force  for  social 
change.  Fortunately,  there  are  some  encouraging  signs 
that  white  feminists  are  beginning  to  understand  that 
an  analysis  of  sexism  is  incomplete  without  an  analysis 
of  racism. 

For  all  of  its  problems,  the  1981  National  Women's 
Studies  Association  conference  was  organized  around 


6/Quest 


the  theme  "Women  Respond  to  Racism/'  On  an 

impressionistic  level,  our  perusal  of  feminist 

newsletters  and  publications  from  throughout  the 

country  indicates  more  attention  to  and  commentary 

on  racism  both  within  the  women's  movement  and 

outside  it.  In  Washington,  D.C.,  a  project,  "Black 

Women:  Why  Feminism?"  conceptualized  by  the  slain 

black  activist,  Yulanda  Ward,  has  provided  an 

important  and  well-attended  (by  black  and  white 

women)  forum  for  discussion  and  debate. 

That  white  feminists  have  begun  to  take  seriously  the 

issue  is  an  important  and  encouraging  sign.  We  have 

done  so— finally— through  the  prodding,  the  pressure 

from  women  of  color. 

Women  of  color  historically  have  been  strong  forces 

for  social  change.  They  continue  that  tradition  today, 

and,  we  believe,  hold  the  key  to  yet  another  "new 

wave"  of  feminism — one  that  embraces  more  women 

by  examining,  speaking  to,  analyzing  the  experiences 

and  realities  of  women  of  color.  This  Bridge  Called  My 

Back  2  which  we  suspect  will  become  a  textbook 

classic,  clearly  demonstrates  the  body  of  information 

and  theory  being  developed  by  women  of  color,  and 

the  practice  on  which  it  is  being  built. 

The  growing  understanding  among  white  feminists 

that  racism  exists  within  us  as  individuals  and  in  our 

organizations,  and  the  escalating  leadership  of  women 

of  color  have  the  potential  for  the  creation  of  a 

women's  movement  that  is  truly  revolutionary. 

It  is  difficult  to  sit  back  and  reflect  when  all  of  us  feel  a 

gut  level  urgency  to  "do  something"  quickly — an 

urgency  fed  by  the  social  and  economic  programs  of 

the  New  Right.  The  Human  Life  Amendment  and  the 

Family  Protection  Act,  two  examples  of  "social" 

legislation,  are,  put  simply,  grotesque.  To  borrow  the 


lntroduction/7 


poet  Pat  Parker's  refrain,  it  is  a  perversion  when  the 
existence  of  a  fertilized  egg  takes  precedence  over  the 
life  and  well-being  of  the  woman  in  whose  body  the 
egg  lies;  it  is  a  perversion  when  a  handful  of  legislators 
can  presume  to  dictate  the  roles  and  attitudes  of 
people  within  and  outside  the  institutions  of  marriage 
and  family;  it  is  a  perversion  when  a  public  official  can 
even  voice  support  of  capital  punishment  for  lesbians 
and  gay  men  as  has  Senator  Jeremiah  Denton. 

Perhaps  more  dangerous,  because  more  insidious,  is 
the  New  Right's  economic  program.  Safety  and  health 
regulations  for  workers  are  being  dismantled  under  the 
guise  of  capitalist  efficiency.  Piecework,  work  done  at 
home  primarily  by  women,  is  on  the  rise  and  the 
implications  of  this  are  enormous.  This  form  of  labor 
requires  no  concessions  from  industry:  no  unions,  no 
safety  regulations,  no  liveable  wages,  no  bargaining. 
Moreover,  piecework  can  provide  at  least  a  partial 
"solution"  to  the  contradictions  between  patriarchy's 
need  to  keep  women  at  home  and  capitalism's  need 
for  women  workers.  Transfer  payments  for  women, 
children,  the  aged,  the  handicapped  are  quickly 
becoming  a  memory,  while  Reagan's  "safety  nets"  are 
fastened  securely  beneath  the  weapons,  tobacco  and 
infant  formula  industries.  (The  United  States  would  not 
vote  for  even  a  voluntary  UN  code  regulating  the 
marketing  practices  of  infant  formula  producers.) 

Since  the  November  '80  elections,  a  number  of 
analyses  of  the  New  Right  have  been  published.  Some 
of  them  point  to  its  ideological  contradictions  and 
urge  radicals  to  exploit  those  contradictions.  Less 
optimistically^  all  of  these  commentators  point  to  the 
well-organized  web  of  organizations  and  coalitions 
that  comprise  the  New  Right  and  bemoan  the  lack  of 
such  organization  among  liberals  and  progressives.^ 

One  thing  at  least  is  clear.  New  Right  activism  is  an 


8/Quest 


attempt  to  return  to  days  that,  in  memory,  seem 
simpler  (to  some).  Nothing  typifies  this  so  concretely  as 
candidate  Reagan's  remark,  that  in  his  boyhood 
"we"  didn't  know  racism  existed.  It  is  an  attempt 
to  return  to  the  days  when  people  of  color, 
women,  the  poor,  peoples  of  the  Third  World  knew 
their  places— and  stayed  there.  It  is  an  attempt  to 
"rebuild  America"  precisely  the  way  it  was  built  in  the 
first  place— on  the  backs  of  blacks,  the  poor,  women, 
immigrants  and,  through  imperialism  and  neo- 
colonialism, peoples  of  Third  World  nations. 

A  return  to  the  past  is  impossible  and,  of  course, 

undesirable.  But  it  is  not  enough  for  feminists  and 

other  concerned  people  simply  to  wait  for  that  to 

become  apparent:  by  then  it  may  well  be  too  late  to 

fight  the  repression  taking  hold  of  this  country. 

Instead,  we  must  develop  programs  to  fight  back,  and, 

as  we  do,  we  must  ask  ourselves  questions  which  will 

help  shape  our  strategies.  Is  it  enough  for  feminists  and 

others  to  propound  a  program  aimed  at  trying  to 

"save"  liberal  reforms?  If  not,  how  can  we 

communicate  a  vision  based  on  radical  change  while 

working  to  minimize  the  damage  caused  by  the 

absence  of  such  reforms?  More  generally,  how  can 

we — feminists,  black  activists,  socialists, 

environmentalists,  labor  organizers  and  others — best 

work  together  to  create  social  change? 

Even  before  the  November  '80  elections,  the  phrase 

coalition-building  was  in  the  air.  (Indeed,  this  issue  of 

Quest,  conceptualized  some  time  before  the  elections, 

is  in  part  concerned  with  working  in  coalitions.)  Since 

the  election  all  of  us  have  felt  a  greater  necessity  to 

stand  together,  to  make  common  cause.  The  May  3, 

1981  march  on  the  Pentagon  is  a  strong  example  of 

making  common  cause,  if  not  of  coalition-building. 

Within  the  pages  of  this  issue,  Theresa  Rankin  writes 


lntroduction/9 


of  her  experience  building  a  coalition  in  support  of  the 
J.  P.  Stevens  boycott,  and  considers  the  advantages  and 
disadvantages  of  single-issue  coalitions.  She  also  speaks 
of  the  special  problems  feminists  face  when  working  in 
non-feminist  organizations.  Rankin's  thoughts  and 
experience  can  help  provide  guidance  for  those  of  us 
who  choose  to  work  in  similar  situations.  Similarly,  in 
her  review  of  Ellen  Dubois'  Feminism  and  Suffrage  and 
Meredith  Tax's  The  Rising  of  the  Women,  Eileen  Boris 
suggests  the  importance  of  a  historical  analysis  of 
coalition  building  so  that  we  can  better  understand  the 
conditions  under  which  coalitions  succeed  or  fail. 

In  considering  whether  to  enter  into  a  coalition,  we 
must  ask,  first  of  all,  who  "we"  are.  Who  are  the 
progressive  individuals  and  organizations  concerned 
with  the  political  direction  of  this  country?  What  issues 
are  we  working  on?  What  theories  about  social  change 
and  oppression  do  we  hold?  Where  do  we  agree  and 
disagree?  Should  we  strive  to  come  together  organiza- 
tionally or  should  we  work  in  our  various  autonomous 
groups  and  structures?  Is  it  best  to  work  on  the 
grassroots  level  or  should  we  focus  our  attention 
nationally  toward  the  government?  Within  our 
autonomous  movements,  should  we  attempt  to  create 
national  organizations  or  parties — a  feminist  party  for 
instance? 

In  thinking  about  these  and  other  questions,  feminists 
must  remember  that  coalition-building  is,  at  least,  a 
two-way  street. 

Feminists  should  expect  that  our  issues  and  demands 
figure  centrally  in  programs  and  strategies.  When 
"progressive'!  groups  speak  of  the  Reagan  economic 
program  as  placing  the  burden  on  the  poor  without 
saying  that  the  poor  in  this  country  are  women, 
especially  women  of  color,  their  statements  are 
incomplete.  When,  as  Ellen  Willis,  Barbara  Ehrenreich 
and  Tacie  Dejanikus  point  out,4sleft  organizations  are 
resistant  to  taking  a  clear,  unequivocable  stand  in  favor 


10/Quest 


of  abortion,  then  those  organizations  are  being 

antifeminist. 

As  we  stated  earlier,  a  feminism  that  fails  to  take  into 

account  oppression  of  women  because  of  race  and 

class  is  incomplete.  A  progressivism  that  fails  to 

understand  the  political  nature  of  personal  issues 

(abortion,  the  family,  gay  rights)  is  limited.  The  New 

Right's  war  on  women  shows  their  clear  understanding 

that  sexual  politics  is  at  the  center  of  political  struggle 

in  this  country.  Their  solution  is  to  advocate 

repression.  Those  of  us  who  advocate  liberation  must 

do  so  as  strongly  and  as  cogently  as  our  political 

opponents  have  urged  the  opposite.  It  is  a  matter  of 

going  far  enough.  It  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death. 


JET 


Notes 

^Barbara  Ehrenreich,  "The  Women's  Movements:  Feminist  and 
Antifeminist,"  Radical  America,  15:1&2  (Spring  1981),  pp.  93-101. 

2  Cherrie  Moraga  and  Gloria  Anzalua,  eds.,  This  Bridge  Called  My  Back: 
Writings  by  Radical  Women  of  Color  (Watertown,  MA:  Persephone  Press, 
1981).  Order  from  Persephone  Press,  PO  Box  7222,  Watertown,  MA  02172. 

3For  example,  see  Radical  America,  15:1&2  (Spring,  1981);  Socialist 
Review,  11:1  (Jan-Feb  1981)  and  11:2  (March-April  1981);  "Holding  Our 
Own  Against  The  Conservative  Tide,"  Ms.,  IX:12  (June  1981);  Mother 
Jones,  Vl:11  (Feb-March  1981). 

4Ehrenreich,  pp.  93-101;  Ellen  Willis,  "Abortion:  Which  Side  Are  You 
On?"  Radical  America,  15:1&2  (Spring  1981),  pp.  89-91;  Tacie  Dejanikus, 
"Abortion  and  Coalition  Politics:  Whose  Survival?"  Off  Our  Backs,  Xl:4 
(April  1981). 


Introduction/11 


The  publication  of  "Movement  Building"  was 
made  possible  in  part  by  grants  from  51st  State 
NOW  and  the  Gay  Education  Fund. 

The  Quest  Staff  also  thanks  all  those  who 
contributed  to  our  October  2, 1981  benefit. 
Without  the  contributions  of  these  individuals 
and  organizations,  this  issue  could  not  have 
been  published. 


If  you  would  like  to  subscribe  or  make  a  contribution  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  please  fill  out  the  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or  money 
order  to: 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
P.O.  Box  8843,  Dept.  A 
Washington,  DC  20003 

□  $9.00/year  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

D  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor 

□  $10.00/year  for  Canada  and  Mexico 
D  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

D  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  surface 

□  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air 

□  $3.35/single  issues 

□  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 


Name. 


Address. 


Zip. 


12/Quest 


Can  the  Union 
Make  Us  Strong? 

by  Theresa  Rankin 

In  April,  1980,  Sadie  Rankin  Ellis,  a  member  of  the  Amalgamated 
Clothing  Workers  and  a  seamstress  at  the  Grief  Coat  Factory  for  more 
than  thirty-one  years,  died  at  the  age  of  85.  I'm  her  twenty-seven-year- 
old  granddaughter,  a  college-educated  feminist,  who  was  paid  by  the 
same  union  (now  the  Amalgamated  Clothing  and  Textile  Workers)  to 
build  a  broadly  based  coalition  of  people  who  would  participate  in  the 
Washington  area  boycott  of  J. P.  Stevens  products.1  Analyzing  my 
organizing  experience  for  other  feminists  has  not  resulted  in  a  clear 
blue-print  for  "women  workingWithin  traditional  institutions  trying  to 
transform  their  structures  and  priorities  from  within/'2  But  I  have  come 
up  with  some  ideas  about  how  to  mesh  politics,  personal  background 
and  the  realities  of  mainstream  work  in  order  to  reach  a  set  of  goals. 
These  goals  include  ending  the  exploitation  of  working-class  women 
and  men  in  this  country,  uniting  diverse  progressive  groups  to  create 
social  change  and  fighting  the  sexist  and  racist  practices  in  major 
institutions  in  this  country. 

For  me,  working  on  the  J.  P.  Stevens  boycott  provided  a  chance  to 
synthesize  my  conservative  southern  background  and  my  adult  politics 
as  a  feminist,  trade  unionist  and  progressive.  My  family  came  from  the 
Shenendoah  Valley  of  Virginia;  my  grandparents  owned  small  farms. 
Both  the  women  and  men  eventually  moved  into  jobs  in  the  clothing 
and  textile  industries  to  supplement  their  farming  incomes.  Their 
children  left  the  farm  aspiring  to  the  middle-class  suburban  life  so 
integral  to  the  dreams  of  many  rising  lower  middle-class  whites  in  the 
1940's  and  50's. 

I  grew  up  in  a  small  city  in  Virginia's  Piedmont,  the  "rolling  hills" 
area  of  the  state  between  the  mountains  and  the  flat  tidewater  land 
where  tobacco  farms,  cotton  mills  and  other  low-paying  industries 

Can  the  Union  Make  us  Strong/13 


dominate  the  economy.  Danville,  the  "Last  Capitol  of  the 
Confederacy/'  is  the  home  of  Dan  River  Mills  and  a  bastion  of 
conservative  politics.  My  idealism,  ambition  and  love  for  books  gave 
me  "notions/'  according  to  my  mother.  My  curiosity  about  different 
cultures,  lifestyles  and  attitudes  landed  me,  with  a  partial  scholarship 
and  a  strong  southwestern  Virginia  accent,  at  Swarthmore  College,  a 
small  private  Ivy  League  school  in  the  north.  There  I  joyously 
discovered  feminism  and  ran  headlong  into  the  intricacies  of  relating 
to  people  of  different  class  backgrounds  in  an  atmosphere  of  high- 
powered  academic  achievement.  During  and  after  my  four  years  at 
Swarthmore,  one  of  my  primary  personal  struggles  was  trying  to 
combine  the  power  of  feminism  as  a  directing  force  in  my  life  with  the 
influences  of  my  background. 

After  graduation,  I  entered  the  Washington,  D.C.,  women's 
community  eager  to  use  my  personal  and  political  energy  to  build  the 
women's  movement.  For  almost  two  years  I  was  a  collective  member 
of  First  Things  First,  Books  for  Women,  a  mail  order  and  store  front 
business  that  sold  books  for,  by  and  about  women.  After  I  left  the 
bookstore  I  supported  myself  with  odd  jobs  while  working  as  a 
volunteer  for  the  National  Organization  for  Women's  Labor  Task 
Force.  In  February  of  1978  the  Amalgamated  Clothing  and  Textile 
Workers  (ACTWU)  hired  me  for  six  months  as  a  part-time  local 
organizer  of  the  J. P.  Stevens  boycott.  This  initial  six-month  stint  was 
extended  for  another  two  years,  full-time,  until  the  union  and  J. P. 
Stevens  reached  a  settlement  in  October,  1980. 

Working  within  a  national  political  institution,  ACTWU,  on  a 
single  issue  coalition  was  a  radical  departure  from  membership  in  a 
women's  collective.  The  goals  of  First  Things  First  were  to  provide 
resources  that  could  not  be  found  in  the  "straight"  press  to  women  of 
all  classes,  races,  ages  and  cultures  while  operating  in  a  collective 
decision-making  framework.  The  goal  of  the  J. P.  Stevens  boycott  was 
to  assist  the  organizing  of  a  specific  group  of  workers  in  the  south  by 
building  as  broadly  based  a  coalition  as  possible. 

Working  as  a  collective  member  of  First  Things  First  taught  me 
new  and  better  forms  of  interpersonal  work  relations.  Great  care  was 
taken  to  instruct  each  new  member.  Frequent  meetings  were  called  to 
evaluate  the  business  and  our  work.  Members  consciously  tried  to 
balance  the  necessity  for  specialization  with  the  need  for  an  overall 
knowledge  of  the  business.  While  a  member  of  the  collective,  I  was 
encouraged  to  expand  my  political  analysis  and  integrate  it  into  my 
work. 

14/Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Vol.  V,  No.  4 


Not  only  were  the  size  and  scope  of  the  activities  at  ACTWU 
different  from  those  at  First  Things  First,  but  a  "no  bones"  hierarchical 
chain  of  command  replaced  collective  process.  This  is  not  surprising. 
Unions,  like  other  institutions  in  this  country,  are  organized  from  the 
top  down  with  little  power  emanating  from  the  grassroots.  They  view 
this  as  the  best  structure  to  ensure  their  survival  in  a  business- 
dominated  economy.  Unions  require  their  employees  to  accept  the 
hierarchy  and  to  observe  its  rules.  More  insidiously,  this  top-down, 
centralized  framework  imposes  a  particular  ideology  which,  for  me, 
contradicted  the  lessons  I  had  learned  at  First  Things  First.  As  the 
boycott  staff  person  for  the  Washington  metropolitan  area,  suddenly  I 


The  Union/15 


was  the  "leader"  and  all  those  who  assisted  were  "volunteers" 
following  my  lead  and  the  union's.  Within  the  union  everything  went 
to  the  director's  office,  and  I  was  isolated  by  distance  and  by  a  "chain 
of  command"  from  the  national  boycott  staff  people  located  at  the 
central  office  in  New  York.  No  matter  how  concerned  or  willing  they 
were  to  share  their  skills  or  work  on  my  particular  campaigns,  their 
time  was  often  severely  limited  by  the  requirements  and  agenda  they 
were  responsible  for  nationally.  Like  me  they  were  responsible  for  a 
product — a  successful  boycott — and  the  pressure  to  succeed  left  little 
room  within  the  organization  for  the  kind  of  self-conscious  struggle 
and  criticism  which  has  been  so  vital  to  the  growth  of  feminists. 

The  gender  composition  of  the  ACTWU  staff  was  also  a  major 
change  for  me.  I  left  a  totally  female  work  situation  for  one  run  and 
primarily  staffed  by  men.  Of  twenty-odd  boycott  staffers  around  the 
country,  six  or  seven  were  women.  On  the  whole,  women  occupied 
the  lowest  and  least  secure  job  categories.  There  were,  I  felt,  the  usual 
pressures  to  dress  and  behave  in  a  traditional  feminine  manner. 

Most  important  and  most  difficult  was  my  inability  as  a  woman  to 
break  into  the  male  order  of  doing  things.  Among  male  staffers,  male 
union  leadership  and  even  union  men  and  their  male  adversaries  in 
management,  there  exists  a  bond  of  trust  and  social  camaraderie  that  is 
based  on  familiarity  and  shared  understanding  of  the  rules  of  the 
game.  Language,  humor,  small  talk,  hobbies — all  were  areas  of  shared 
experience  and  easy  communication  from  which  I  was  barred,  not  by 
any  conscious  or  considered  expression  of  the  men,  but  simply 
because  of  my  sex. 

In  spite  of  the  drawbacks,  I  was  eager  to  work  with  ACTWU 
because  it  provided  resources  for  organizing  and  outreach  and 
because  it  affected  women.  The  limitations  of  First  Things  First 
reflected  general  trends  in  alternative  businesses.  The  status  of  First 
Things  First  as  a  marginal  small  business  created  economic  hardships 
that  eventually  led  to  its  bankruptcy  in  1977.  I  gradually  became 
dissatisfied  with  several  specific  conditions.  First  was  the  amount  of 
energy  the  collective  members  expended  merely  to  stay  afloat  and  the 
personal  strain  that  that  economic  uncertainty  placed  on  each 
member.  For  those  working-class  women  without  supplemental 
income,  for  those  with  children  or  other  dependents,  for  those 
without  the  security  of  a  college  education  and  professional  skills,  the 
total  commitment  and  lack  of  adequate  financial  security  were  too 
taxing  over  the  long  term.  The  financial  insecurity  of  a  small  business 
like  a  bookstore  points  to  a  basic  dilemma  of  all  small  businesses  in  our 

16/Quest 


economy— capital.  In  an  article  about  our  decision  to  close  First  Things 
First,  we  laid  out  that  economic  determinant: 

As  small  businesses  we  are  forced  to  either  exploit  ourselves  as 
workers  or  to  charge  relatively  higher  prices  than  big  businesses 
or  both  .  ...  If  you  own  or  control  the  presses,  the  paper 
company,  the  bindery,  the  book  distribution  system  and  the 
bookstore  you  can  afford  to  make  less  on  any  particular  stage  of 
the  process.  Small  businesses  (and  all  the  feminist  businesses  we 
know  of  are  really  small,  relatively  speaking)  can  barely  pay  their 
workers.  We  are  dependent  on  other  business  for  most  of  our 
goods  ....  Once  we  have  realistically  analyzed  the  nature  of  our 
economy  it  seems  abundantly  clear  that  feminist  business  cannot 
begin  to  threaten  it  nor  can  we  create  anything  more  than 
marginal  business  on  the  fringe  of  the  economy.3 

A  second  troubling  aspect  of  my  work  at  First  Things  First  was  our 
inability,  due  to  absorption  in  our  ongoing  financial  crisis,  to  reach  out 
to  poor,  working  class  and  Third  World  women.  With  our  small  staff 
and  small  revenues  we  were  forced  to  spend  time  and  money  on  those 
avenues  that  had  been  most  revenue  producing.  Outreach  through 
the  advertising  of  a  wide  selection  of  books  at  reasonable  prices  was 
essential  to  widening  our  clientele,  but  we  had  neither  the  cash  flow 
or  the  energy,  after  struggling  to  pay  major  creditors  such  as  Random 
House,  to  do  an  adequate  job.  At  one  point  our  bookstore  was  located 
in  a  primarily  black  and  Latino  nieghborhood.  Yet  we  could  not  reach 
out  to  the  women  close  at  hand  because  our  business  depended,  for 
the  most  part,  on  white,  middle-class  women.  They  were  our  main 
mail  order  clients,  and  they  attended  the  academic  conferences 
around  the  country  which  were  essential  to  our  economic  survival. 

ACTWU,  on  the  other  hand,  is  deeply  involved  in  the  struggles  of 
working-class  women.  And  my  personal  view  of  feminism  insists  that  it 
is  these  women  who  are  the  most  important  part  of  the  struggle  for  the 
liberation  of  all  women.  Furthermore,  women  textile  and  clothing 
workers  have  a  long  history  of  combining  a  strong  identification  with 
their  family,  culture  and  class  with  pride  in  their  work,  and  a  desire  for 
respect.  As  a  feminist  and  a  southerner,  I  felt  personally  connected 
with  this  struggle  as  it  was  being  played  out  in  the  mills  at  J. P.  Stevens. 

Although  J. P.  Stevens  did  not  "own"  my  hometown,  to  the  west  in 
Virginia's  mountains,  and  to  the  south  in  North  and  South  Carolina's 
Piedmont,  this  mammoth  textile  company  held  sway  over  thousands  of 
southern  workers.  Close  to  40%  of  the  workers  were  women.  Twenty- 

The  Union/17 


two  percent  were  black  or  other  minorities.  After  an  initial  trip  to  the 
Roanoke  Rapids,  N.C.,  plants  as  a  member  of  the  NOW  Labor  Task 
Force  to  talk  with  women  workers  of  different  ages  and  races,  I  was 
convinced  that  the  support  of  feminists  around  the  country  would 
help  these  proud  people  in  their  bitter  fight  to  force  the  company  to 
recognize  their  right  to  belong  to  a  union.  I  was  further  convinced  that 
specific  political  goals  such  as  substantially  improving  the  lives  of 
hundreds  of  southern  working  women  and  challenging  the  arch- 
conservative  forces  that  rule  the  south  would  only  be  accomplished 
through  the  strength  of  an  institution  like  ACTWU,  bringing  to  bear  all 
of  its  staff  and  financial  resources. 

My  job  as  a  boycott  organizer  was  to  build  a  broad-based  coalition 
of  women's,  religious,  political,  civil  rights  and  labor  groups  and 
individuals.  My  first  task  was  to  educate  those  groups  about  specific 
abuses  perpetrated  by  J. P.  Stevens  against  its  workers.  Even  my  natural 
allies,  labor  unions,  required  a  lot  of  energy  to  reach,  local  by  local,  to 
establish  a  network  of  supporters  that  could  be  mobilized.  Within  the 
labor  movement  there  is  a  wide  range  of  political  awareness,  widely 
divergent  methods  of  educating  membership,  and  widely  divergent 
views  as  to  what  is  a  priority  labor  issue.  After  gaining  the  support  of 
individuals  and  organizations,  my  next  major  task  was  to  direct  these 
groups  in  a  successful  boycott  of  J. P.  Stevens  products  sold  in  the  area. 

The  most  heartening  result  of  my  two  and  a  half  years  building  the 
J. P.  Stevens  boycott  was  the  firm  realization  that  active,  progressive 
coalitions  representing  a  diversity  of  people  and  organizations  can  be 
built.  Today,  the  intensification  of  right  wing  attacks  and  the 
perception  by  different  progressive  groups  that,  alone,  they  cannot 
accomplish  their  goals,  establish  the  conditions  for  coalitions.  The 
single  issue  coalition  is  the  easiest  to  build  because  of  its  clarity  of 
purpose  and  specific  agenda.  But  the  single  issue  coalition  also 
presents  special  problems.  I  found  the  major  ones  to  be  the  form  of 
outreach,  the  time  framework,  the  allocation  of  energy,  the  handling 
of  potentially  divisive  issues  within  the  coalition,  and  the  intrinsic 
political  limitation  of  single  issues. 

Coalitions  can  be  built  either  from  the  top  down  or  the  bottom 
up.  For  the  J. P.  Stevens  boycott,  we  got  leaders  of  organizations  to 
come  together  and  announce  a  common  effort  which,  in  turn,  drew 
other  leaders  into  our  struggle.  My  initial  work  consisted  of  asking 
organizations  to  endorse  the  boycott  officially  and  compiling  a  list  of 
metropolitan  leaders  whose  names  would  be  put  on  our  local  boycott 
stationery.  The  union  emphasized  this  top-down  approach  as  the  first 

18/Quest 


step  in  building  a  consumer  boycott.  Organizing  from  the  top  down 
provides  a  list  of  leadership  support  and  access  to  organizations  but 
does  not  automatically  create  mass  participation. 

The  bottom-up  approach  unites  individuals  who  then  build  a  base 
of  awareness  within  their  organizations,  which  results  finally  in 
organizational  endorsement.  The  advantage  of  this  approach  is  that  a 


The  Union/19 


priority  is  placed  on  the  membership  of  an  organization.  Attending 
dozens  of  meetings  of  unions,  churches  or  activist  groups  will  involve 
more  people  who  can  pledge  more  energy  to  a  particular  issue  rather 
than  compiling  lists  of  leaders. 

Regardless  of  the  form  or  combination  of  forms  chosen  to 
organize  a  coalition,  the  process  takes  much  more  time  than  many 
activists  are  willing  to  commit.  Besides  research  on  what  groups  exist 
and  what  media  to  use  to  publicize  the  specific  issues,  the  organizer 
must  allow  for  other  organizations'  meeting  dates,  publication 
schedules  and  busy  agendas.  I  spent  close  to  a  year  doing  outreach 
and  gaining  support  before  pulling  supporters  together  for  an  action. 

As  the  single  organizer  in  my  area,  I  was  using  both  methods  of 
organizing  for  the  support  coalition,  and  allocation  of  energies 
became  a  major  headache.  Education  and  outreach  gave  me  the 
opportunity  to  link  the  Stevens  boycott  to  broader  issues  such  as  the 
role  of  women  in  the  workforce  and  the  flight  of  industry  to  the  Sun 
Belt.  But  also  important  was  the  maintenance  of  the  leadership 
network  which  produced  letters  to  retailers,  meetings  with  retail 
executives  and  appearances  before  the  media  and  at  support  actions. 
The  critically  important  outreach  to  new  constituencies  would  often 
take  second  place  to  that  of  working  with  the  leadership  network  and 
organizing  already  solid  supporters  for  specific  boycott  actions.  Based 
on  my  experience,  I  believe  that  educational  outreach  and  networking 
should  go  on  concurrently.  This  would  require  the  development  of  a  core 
of  volunteers  who  would  take  on  part  of  the  educational  outreach. 

Once  a  coalition  is  organized,  it  is  important  to  remember  that 
what  you  have  worked  on  represents  an  agreement  on  a  single  issue  or 
principle,  and  that  a  wide  range  of  political  diversity  exists  within  the 
coalition.  Once  praised  a  local  Catholic  church's  tremendous  number 
of  phone  calls  to  local  retailers  protesting  the  stores'  purchases  of  J. P. 
Stevens  products,  and  the  individual  who  had  organized  the  phone 
bank  commented  that  he  had  just  used  the  prolife  telephone  tree  to 
get  the  job  done!  Working  within  an  institution  on  a  single  issue,  I 
could  not,  except  as  an  individual,  take  on  more  controversial  issues 
such  as  abortion,  gay  rights,  or  nuclear  power. 

Finally,  the  limits  of  any  single  issue  coalition  are  clear.  Successful 
single-issue  efforts  do  not  reach  the  roots  of  our  society's  problems. 
Thus,  there  is  always  a  tension  between  accomplishing  a  concrete, 
limited  goal  and  wanting  to  go  beyond  that  and  offer  a  more 
comprehensive  critique  of  American  society. 

My  job  as  a  boycott  organizer  was  politically  satisfying  in  a 

20/Quest 


number  of  ways.  It  provided  me  with  the  resources  to  do  education 
and  outreach,  and  it  was  in  these  times  of  speaking  to  Sunday  school 
classes,  school  classes  or  Meg  Christian  concerts,  that  I  felt  my  greatest 
personal  satisfaction  in  pulling  people  from  such  diverse  organizations 
and  social  backgrounds  together  on  a  single  issue.  Through  building 
the  coalition,  creating  events  to  promote  our  boycott,  and  continually 
enlisting  support,  I  gained  a  tremendous  amount  of  knowledge  about 
the  city  and  the  different  organizations  that  exist  in  it.  Areas  that  I  had 
never  touched  as  an  active  feminist  slowly  opened  to  reveal  large 
numbers  of  committed  active  women  who  shared  their  skills,  thus 
helping  the  boycott  tremendously.  I  also  learned  a  great  deal  from 
certain  male  colleagues  who  would  share  the  knowledge  of  the  system 
that  they  had  spent  years  acquiring.  In  any  type  of  alliance-building 
such  information  is  essential,  particularly  because  most  established 
organizations  contain  many  levels  of  political  awareness,  and  knowing 
those  levels  enables  one  to  work  more  successfully  on  any  number  of 
issues.  When  women  and  men  in  the  District  of  Columbia  were  facing 
drastic  cuts  in  their  workers'  compensation,  the  network  of  people 
who  supported  j.P.  Stevens  workers  was  in  place  to  work  on  an 
important  local  issue.  Once  you  have  established  trust  with  individuals 
in  diverse  organizations,  issues  that  are  more  controversial,  such  as 
anti-Klan  or  pro-choice  events,  can  be  introduced. 

The  three  key  challenges  facing  me  as  a  feminist  and  progressive 
working  within  ACTWU  were  the  limitations  of  a  single-issue 
campaign  within  an  essentially  reformist  organization,  isolation  as  an 
individual  from  like-minded  people  and  groups,  and  maintenance  of  a 
perspective  that  enabled  me  to  survive  within  the  union  without 
obliterating  my  political  differences  with  the  union.  The  problems  that 
I  faced  confront  many  activists,  female  and  male,  working  within  the 
labor  movement  today.  Despite  a  history  that  radically  confronted 
American  industrial  enterprise  and  its  governmental  protections,  the 
labor  movement  in  the  1980's  generally  frowns  on  radicalism  within  its 
ranks.  My  initial  hiring  illustrates  this  practice.  When  I  first  got  the  job, 
other  groups  had  already  started  a  local  boycott.  The  union  was  not 
comfortable  with  certain  individuals'  affiliaton  with  the  Alliance 
Against  Racism  and  Political  Oppression.  In  part  this  was  because  the 
union  felt  it  should  lead  the  boycott  and  in  part  because  radicals  were 
doing  the  boycott  building.  My  job  was  to  establish  a  different  type  of 
coalition  wherein  radicals,  whether  communist,  socialist  or 
lesbian/gay,  were  not  discouraged  from  participating  as  individuals, 
but  their  organizational  affiliations  were  not  front  and  center. 

The  Union/21 


After  feeling  totally  split  between  the  individuals  who  had 
initiated  boycott  action  and  the  union  that  I  wanted  to  work  for,  I 
realized  some  of  the  political  complexity  of  coalition  building  in  the 
80's.  ACTWU  wanted  a  coalition  broadly  based  among  accepted 
institutions,  believing  this  to  be  the  most  direct  route  to  pressuring 
J. P.  Stevens.  Most,  although  not  all,  organizers  were  most  comfortable 
dealing  with  traditional  arrangements  of  hierarchy  and  therefore 
agreed  with  the  top-down  form  of  organizing.  Radical  groups 
challenged  those  hierarchies  but  did  not  have  the  political  clout  to 
affect  retailers  and  manufacturers.  For  pragmatic  as  well  as  political 
reasons,  major  emphasis  was  not  put  on  enlisting  the  support  of 
radicals.  An  organizer  with  some  politics  was  thus  caught  in  a  crossfire. 
To  extricate  myself  from  this  particular  dilemma,  I  stressed  the  union's 
own  position  that  by  definition  a  consumer  boycott  included  everyone 
and  continued  to  include  the  initial  boycotters  in  the  plans  and  further 
boycott  actions. 

To  battle  the  isolation  and  sexism  so  commonly  faced  by  feminists 
in  superstructural  institutions,  I  suggest  that  feminists  seek  out  other 
feminists  and  begin  to  form  communities  of  support  on  the  job.  I 
sometimes  made  the  mistake  of  trusting  women  who  had  none  of  the 
same  political  or  personal  goals  I  had.  My  sister  feminists  helped  in 
understanding  the  day-to-day  contradictions  we  faced.  The  Coalition 
of  Labor  Union  Women  (CLUW),  which  included  union  women  who 
were  diverse  in  politics  but  held  similar  goals,  was  very  supportive. 
Finally,  time  and  time  again  my  own  community  of  progressive 
feminist  friends  renewed  my  energy  by  supporting  and  criticizing  my 
work  constructively. 

Within  national  political  institutions  like  unions,  simple  survival 
and  learning  the  ropes  of  the  power  system  is  the  first  step  for 
feminists.  Next,  that  information  and  experience  must  be  connected  as 
often  as  possible  with  an  analysis  of  how  the  institution  is  or  is  not 
furthering  the  cause  of  all  women's  equality.  A  feminist  must  separate 
herself  from  the  institution  to  make  that  analysis,  and  that  entails  a 
fairly  constant  strain.  It  takes  practice  and  time  to  figure  out  what 
issues  to  speak  out  on  and  what  to  let  go,  yet  it  is  essential  to  speak  out 
upon  occasion.  One  of  the  most  deadly  effects  of  my  work  in  coalition 
building  was  the  tendency  to  self-edit  comments  and  appearance  so  as 
to  "please"  all  those  main-line  organizations  that  I  worked  with.  Small 
details  are  as  important— continuing  to  bicycle  to  work,  not  wearing 
make-up — as  are  confrontations — calling  union  management  on  a 
sexist  assignment  of  tasks,  i.e.,  assuming  that  as  a  woman  I  have 

22/Quest 


accomplished  clerical  skills,  or  criticizing  fellow  staffers  for  sexist 
remarks  and  practices. 

Given  the  limitations  and  strains  that  I've  described  in  my  own 
work  with  unions  and  in  coalition  building,  I  in  no  way  predict  a 
smooth  course  for  other  progressive  feminists  working  on  similar 
goals.  My  experience  working  with  unions  and  building  coalitions 
does  satisfy,  to  a  great  extent,  my  desire  to  connect  my  background 
with  my  feminist  politics.  For  me  the  women's  movement  must  be  in 
touch  with  the  realities  of  working  and  lower-middle-class  women's 
lives  in  order  to  accomplish  its  goal  of  the  eradication  of  sexism.  I  am 
completely  opposed  to  a  women's  movement  that  primarily  works  on 
issues  affecting  only  a  privileged  minority  who  escape  the  secretarial 
pool,  the  worst-paying  industrial  jobs,  or  the  service  ghetto.  As  the 


The  Union/23 


strongest  form  of  organizing  workers  so  far,  unions  must  be  pushed  to 
address  the  concerns  of  working  women — organizing  the  unorganized 
and  empowering  those  it  already  represents.  From  within  the 
institution,  committed  feminists  must  pressure  the  institution  to  fulfill 
its  responsibility.  Outside  unions,  in  coalitions,  feminists  can  further 
push  for  their  goals  while  supporting  issues  such  as  the  J. P.  Stevens 
boycott.  Both  types  of  work  make  an  essential  statement  about  the 
make-up  of  our  movement. 


Notes 

'  The  J. P.  Stevens  boycott  was  a  national  boycott  of  that  giant  textile  company's  domestic 
linens  and  carpets — approximately  one  third  of  Steven's  products.  It  was  launched  by 
the  Amalgamated  Clothing  and  Textile  Workers  Union  as  a  remedy  for  Stevens'  flagrant 
abuses  of  workers'  rights. 

2  Charlotte  Bunch,  Ms.,  July,  1980,  p.  48. 

3  First  Things  First  Collective,  "Letter  to  Olivia,"  Off  Our  Backs,  August,  1976. 

Theresa  Rankin  lives  in  Washington,  D.C.  and  works  with  the  union 
movement  as  a  member  of  the  Coalition  of  Labor  Union  Women 
(CLUW),  and  as  a  consultant  to  D.C.'s  Central  Labor  Council.  She 
wishes  to  thank  all  the  friends  who  gave  her  support  in  writing  this 
article,  particularly  Anne  Laurent. 


24/Quest 


Copenhagen 
&  Beyond 

Prospects  for  Global  Feminism 


by  Charlotte  Bunch 


The  following  article  on  global  feminism  is  set  in  the  framework  of 
the  UN  World  Conference  on  Women  and  the  Non-Governmental 
Organizations'  (NGO)  mid-Decade  Forum,  both  of  which  took  place  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  during  the  last  two  weeks  of  July,  1980. 

The  purpose  of  the  UN  mid-Decade  Conference  was  to  assess 
progress  in  achieving  the  ten-year  World  Plan  of  Action  adopted  in 
Mexico  City  in  1975,  and  to  establish  goals  and  priorities  for  the  sec- 
ond half  of  the  UN  Decade  for  Women.  The  NGO  Forum  served  as  an 
arena  for  the  8000  women  from  127  countries  who  attended  to  meet 
one  another,  share  experiences  and  ideas  and  argue  and  discuss  femi- 
nism, racism,  lesbianism,  imperialism,  development  and  hundreds  of 
other  issues. 

The  following  introductory  passages  are  part  of  a  longer  report 
written  by  Charlotte  Bunch,  who  attended  the  UN  Conference  and 
participated  in  the  NGO  Forum.  They  are  presented  here  to  introduce 
her  "Reflections  on  Global  Feminism/' 


CONFERENCE  REPORT 

The  2,000  delegates  to  the  UN  Conference  were  government- 
appointed  representatives,  and  its  proceedings  represented  only  that 
amount  of  feminist  perspective  or  rhetoric  acceptable  to  the  145  pa- 
triarchal governments  who  participated.  The  conference  therefore  re- 
flected the  political  tensions  of  competing  state  powers,  and  govern- 
ment priorities  consistently  prevailed  over  feminist  perspectives.  Every 
controversial  vote  divided  along  the  traditional  political  voting  lines  of 

Copenhagen  &  Beyond/Prospects  for  Global  Feminism/25 


the  UN  General  Assembly.  Thus,  while  more  of  the  delegates  were  fe- 
male than  at  the  first  UN  women's  conference  held  in  Mexico  City  in 
1975,  they  generally  voted  as  their  governments  dictated,  demonstrat- 
ing that  when  women  enter  politics  beholden  to  patriarchal  powers, 
they  do  not  often  act  contrary  to  those  interests. 

The  Programme  of  Action  for  the  second  half  of  the  UN  Decade 
for  Women  contains  many  important  proposals  for  alleviating  women's 
oppression:  it  calls  for  greater  involvement  of  women  in  all  aspects  of 
development  planning,  for  changes  in  the  international  economic 
order  particularly  as  it  affects  women  in  poverty,  for  special  attention 
to  the  needs  of  migrant  and  refugee  women,  for  an  end  to  the  exploita- 
tion of  the  prostitution  of  others  and  to  the  traffic  in  persons,  for  a 
commitment  to  achieving  higher  standards  of  female  nutrition  and  of 
water  sanitation,  for  the  establishment  of  refuges  for  battered  women, 
etc.  Feminists  should  be  able  to  use  parts  of  the  Programme  of  Action 
to  pressure  for  governmental  and  international  agency  action  in  a 
variety  of  areas. 

If  the  resolutions  from  both  the  Mexico  City  and  Copenhagen 
conferences  were  put  into  effect,  a  good  start  toward  eliminating 
women's  oppression  would  be  made.  However,  the  political  will  to 
implement  these  plans  does  not  yet  exist.  As  the  UN's  own  reports  as- 
sessing progress  made  since  1975  indicate,  few  governments  have 
moved  in  more  than  token  ways  toward  implementation  of  the  Mexico 
City  Plan,  and,  in  many  areas,  women's  status  has  deteriorated.  Gov- 
ernments' purposes  in  passing  more  resolutions  appear  therefore  to  be 
more  rhetorical  than  substantial. 

Still,  overall,  there  was  a  seriousness  about  Copenhagen  and  the 
way  governments  sought  to  use  and  control  the  issue  of  women  that 
indicated  that  the  potential  power  of  women  as  a  constituency  is  seen 
as  important.  If  Copenhagen  can  be  taken  as  a  measure,  feminism  has 
barely  begun  to  change  patriarchy's  structures,  but  it  has  increased  the 
world's  consciousness  of  women  as  a  potential  power  block — a  con- 
sciousness that  can  be  used  against  feminism  as  well  as  for  it. 

Unlike  the  UN  Conference,  the  NGO  Forum  represented  no  gov- 
ernments and  no  organized  power  bloc.  Moreover,  the  majority  of  the 
women  at  the  Forum  had  not  come  to  Copenhagen  with  the  expecta- 
tion of  influencing  the  UN  Conference  or  necessarily  talking  to  the 
press.  They  had  come,  often  at  great  expense,  to  meet  women  from 
other  countries,  to  exchange  stories  and  strategies,  publications  and 
products  and  to  make  connections  for  future  work.  And  they  did.  The 
intensity  of  the  Forum  sessions  and  the  determination  of  small  knots  of 

26/Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Vol.  V,  No.  4 


women  meeting  in  every  available  corner  testified  to  the  reality  of  a 
movement  of  women  globally.  It  was  not  unity  around  a  set  of  issues, 
but  it  was  solidarity  and  respect  for  diversity,  as  women  sought  to  de- 
fine our  problems  and  possible  solutions.  The  strength  and  the  limita- 
tions of  the  Forum  lay  in  this  diversity  and  decentralization. 

The  format  of  the  Forum  did  not  demand  that  conflicts  be  re- 
solved, and  some  differences  among  women  were  never  openly  aired, 
but  many  of  the  issues  were  discussed,  especially  in  the  second  week. 
Some  caucuses  convened  around  particular  concerns  at  home,  such  as 
the  one  convened  by  women  from  the  Pacific  to  protest  nuclear  test- 
ing in  their  region.  Other  caucuses  gathered  around  issues,  such  as 
racism  in  the  women's  movement — the  topic  of  meetings  initiated  by 
Third  World  women. 

One  important  point  of  identity  (as  well  as  source  of  conflict)  was 
the  term  "feminist."  Most  of  the  Forum  activities  did  not  use  the  word, 
but  a  significant  number  of  workshops  drew  their  response  in  part  be- 
cause of  their  open  identification  as  feminist.  Comments  about  the 
word  flew  around  the  halls  of  the  conference,  but  the  debate  was 
brought  into  the  open  by  a  quote  in  the  Forum  '80  newspaper  that 
read:  "To  talk  feminism  to  a  woman  who  has  no  water,  no  food,  and 
no  home  is  to  talk  nonsense."  A  number  of  sessions  debated  and  re- 
futed this  view  of  feminism,  and,  finally,  a  group  drew  up  a  response 
stating,  in  part,  that  "feminism  is  a  political  perspective  on  all  issues  of 
concern  to  human  life,"  and  calling  for  a  meeting  to  discuss  'feminism 
as  a  political  perspective  that  reaches  beyond  patriarchal  political  div- 
isions and  national  boundaries."  The  ensuing  "What  is  Feminism?" 
discussion  held  on  the  final  day  drew  over  300  women  from  many 
countries  and  addressed  not  only  the  difficulties  of  defining  feminism 
across  regional  and  cultural  lines,  but  also  the  long-term  tasks  of  creat- 
ing feminist  analysis,  programs,  and  power  to  bring  change. 

REFLECTIONS  ON  GLOBAL  FEMINISM 
FROM  A  NORTH  AMERICAN 

I  have  chosen  to  talk  of  global  feminism,  not  international  femi- 
nism, because  I  see  feminism  as  a  movement  of  people  working  for 
change  across  and  despite  national  boundaries,  not  of  representatives 
of  nation-states  or  national  governments.  As  a  people  seeking  change, 
we  must  move  beyond  the  concept  of  nation-state,  which  is  another 
expression  of  patriarchy  whereby  groups  battle  for  domination  over 
each  other  on  the  basis  of  geographical  territory.  Instead,  we  must  be 

Global  Feminism/27 


global,  recognizing  that  the  oppression  of  women  in  one  part  of  the 
world  is  often  affected  by  what  happens  in  another,  and  that  no 
woman  is  free  until  the  conditions  of  oppression  of  women  are 
eliminated  everywhere. 

When  talking  of  feminism,  we  also  need  to  be  clear  what  we  mean 
by  the  term,  which,  as  the  Forum  in  Copenhagen  demonstrated,  is 
often  misundersood.  While  I  do  not  want  to  see  a  narrow  "correct 
line"  on  feminism  emerge,  it  is  important  for  women  to  develop  some 
general  understandings  of  the  concept  so  that  it  is  not  defined  by  the 
media  and  other  sectors  of  the  establishment.  To  date,  Western  mass 
media  have  dominated  in  controlling  the  images  of  feminism  and  have 
tended  to  portray  feminism  either  as  the  prerogative  of  a  few  token 


28/Quest 


women  rising  to  the  top  of  corporate  structures  or  as  the  province  of  a 
group  of  crazies  who  simply  can't  live  a  "normal"  life.  These  distorted 
stereotypes  are  meant  to  keep  women  both  in  industrialized  countries 
and  in  the  developing  world  from  identifying  with  a  movement  which 
in  fact  asks  very  basic,  root  or  radical,  questions  about  existing  struc- 
tures of  society,  and  particularly  about  the  injustice  of  all  forms  of 
domination,  whether  based  on  sex,  sexual  preference,  race,  class,  age, 
religion  or  nationality. 

This  problem  was  discussed  extensively  at  an  international  work- 
shop held  in  Bangkok  on  "Feminist  Ideology  and  Structures  in  the  First 
Half  of  the  Decade  for  Women,"  sponsored  by  the  UN  Asian  and  Pacif- 
ic Centre  for  Women  and  Development  in  June,  1979.  In  that  work- 
Global  Feminism/29 


shop,  we  chose  to  affirm  the  term  "feminist"  and  to  define  it  for  our- 
selves, rather  than  to  allow  the  media  to  frighten  us  away  from  it  or  to 
divide  us  through  stereotypes  and  name-calling.  The  workshop  then 
defined  feminism  in  terms  of  two  long-term  goals: 

1.)  The  freedom  from  oppression  for  women  involves  not 
only  equity,  but  also  the  right  of  women  to  freedom  of 
choice,  and  the  power  to  control  our  own  lives  within  and 
outside  of  the  home.  Having  control  over  our  lives  and  our 
bodies  is  essential  to  ensure  a  sense  of  dignity  and 
autonomy  for  every  woman. 

2.)  The  second  goal  of  feminism  is  the  removal  of  all  forms 
of  inequity  and  oppression  through  the  creation  of  a  more 
just  social  and  economic  order,  nationally  and  international- 
ly. This  means  the  involvement  of  women  in  national  libera- 
tion struggles,  in  plans  for  national  development,  and  in  lo- 
cal and  global  struggles  for  change. 

On  the  basis  of  our  definition,  it  is  clear  that  feminism  is  and  must 
be  a  transformational  politics  that  addresses  every  aspect  of  life.  It  is 
not  simply  a  laundry  list  of  so-called  women's  issues  such  as  childcare 
and  equal  pay.  While  these  issues  are  important,  feminism  is  not  a  new 
ghetto  where  women  are  confined  to  concern  ourselves  about  only  a 
select  list  of  topics  separated  from  the  overall  social  and  economic 
context  of  our  lives.  Similarly,  feminism  is  not  just  "Add  Women  and 
Stir"  into  existing  institutions,  ideologies,  or  political  parties.  Yes,  fem- 
inists want  more  power  for  women,  but  we  desire  more  than  simply 
"equality"  within  a  system  of  injustice:  we  seek  a  change  in  existing 
institutions  and  a  new  approach  to  power  in  our  lives.  Thus,  for  in- 
stance, the  problem  with  the  UN  official  conference  in  Copenhagen 
was  not  that  it  was  "politicized,"  but  that  it  failed  to  consider  issues 
from  a  feminist  political  perspective  or  even  in  terms  of  how  they  were 
specifically  viewed  by  or  affected  women. 

Developing  feminist  political  perspectives  on  issues  such  as  the 
New  International  Economic  Order,  the  nuclear  arms  race,  or  the  in- 
ternational slave  traffic  in  women  is  still  work  in  progress.  We  have 
much  to  do  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  potential  of  feminism  for  pro- 
viding new  ways  of  viewing  the  world  that  can  help  build  a  just  future. 
In  approaching  this  task,  feminists  can  draw  on  the  insights  of  our 
movements,  but  we  are  primarily  building  from  the  base  of  experience 
and  analysis  begun  by  women  in  motion  politically  in  many  countries. 

30/Quest 


This  experience  is  diverse  and  rich.  In  building  a  global  politics  we 
must  link  and  affirm  the  struggles  and  insights  gained  from  feminist 
demands  on  a  variety  of  fronts:  from  woman's  fight  to  control  her 
body  through  reproductive  freedom  to  her  demands  for  control 
through  adequate  standards  of  nutrition  and  sanitation  to  her  right  to 
define  and  embrace  her  own  sexuality  to  her  demand  for  an  end  to 
violence  against  her  body  and  her  mind.  We  must  show  that  violence 
to  and  degradation  of  the  body  are  connected  to  alienation  and  ex- 
ploitation at  work;  we  must  demonstrate  that  a  world  committed  to 
domination  at  its  intimate  core  in  the  home  more  readily  accepts  ever- 
escalating  levels  of  domination  and  imperialism  not  only  between 
peoples  but  throughout  all  its  structures.  Thus,  through  examining  and 
struggling  to  end  the  oppression  of  women,  feminism  is  providing  new 
insights  into  various  forms  of  domination,  new  visions  for  how  socie- 
ties might  exist  without  injustice  at  their  core  and  new  energy  for 
working  to  bring  these  visions  into  reality. 

In  the  formation  of  a  transformational  feminist  politics  that  is  glo- 
bal in  perspective,  the  particular  issues  and  forms  of  struggle  for 
women  in  different  situations  will  vary.  Nevertheless,  we  must  strive  to 
understand  and  expand  the  commonality  and  solidarity  of  that  strug- 
gle. Doing  this  requires  that  we  recognize  the  social  forces  that  divide 
women  from  each  other — forces  such  as  race,  class,  sexual  orientation, 
colonialism,  poverty,  religion,  nationality— and  work  to  end  the  forms 
of  oppression  that  are  based  on  these  factors.  Yet  fighting  on  these 
fronts  should  go  hand  in  hand  with  challenging  oppression  on  the  ba- 
sis of  sex — no  before  or  after,  but  as  a  single  struggle  with  many  faces. 

One  problem  that  feminists  confront  is  how  to  value  cultural  di- 
versity without  allowing  it  to  be  used  to  justify  traditions  that  are  op- 
pressive to  women.  Cultural  imperialism  from  the  dominant  world 
powers  often  worsens  women's  status  and  certainly  offers  little  of  ben- 
efit to  women  in  developing  countries;  moreover,  the  experience  of 
women  in  the  Western  world  illustrates  the  inadequacy  of  the  Western 
mode  of  "development"  as  a  humane  model  for  others.  At  the  same 
time,  efforts  by  some  males  to  justify  the  continuation  or  adoption  of 
practices  oppressive  to  women  by  labelling  them  "resistance  to  West- 
ern influence"  is  also  onerous  to  feminists.  Most  "cultures"  as  we 
know  them  today  are  patriarchal.  Hope  for  the  future  therefore  re- 
quires that  women  create  new  models,  allowing  for  diversity  and  draw- 
ing from  the  best  of  the  past,  but  refusing  to  accept  any  form  of  domi- 
nation in  the  name  of  either  tradition  or  modernization. 

To  make  global  feminist  consciousness  a  powerful  force  in  the 

Global  Feminism/31 


world  demands  that  we  make  the  local,  global  and  the  global,  local. 
Such  a  movement  is  not  based  on  international  travel  and  conferences, 
although  these  may  be  useful,  but  must  be  centered  on  a  sense  of 
connectedness  among  women  active  at  the  grass-roots  in  various  re- 
gions. For  women  in  industrialized  countries,  this  connectedness  must 
be  based  in  the  authenticity  of  our  struggles  at  home,  in  our  need  to 
learn  from  others,  and  in  our  efforts  to  understand  the  global  implica- 
tions of  our  actions,  not  in  liberal  guilt,  condescending  charity,  or  the 
false  imposition  of  our  models  on  others.  Thus,  for  example,  when  we 
fight  to  have  a  birth  control  device  banned  in  the  U.S.  because  it  is  un- 
safe, we  must  simultaneously  demand  that  it  be  destroyed  rather  than 
dumped  on  women  in  the  Third  World. 

Too  often  international  contact  takes  place  only  between  the  ex- 
perts of  government  or  of  the  university  and  not  among  the  activists 
involved  in  creating  and  maintaining  a  political  struggle.  For  instance,  I 
have  found  that  most  women  in  developing  countries  only  get  to  meet 
U.S.  women  who  are  considered  experts  on  their  regions,  and  rarely 
have  contact  with  local  feminists  with  whom  they  might  exchange 
ideas  and  experiences  on  organizing  projects  or  protests.  This  lack  of 


32/Quest 


contact  is  unfortunate  since  feminism  in  the  U.S.  is  primarily  a  decen- 
tralized, indigenous  people's  struggle  and  has  much  to  learn  from 
women  elsewhere  as  well  as  to  offer  from  its  own  endeavors.  It  is  this 
diverse  local  base  of  feminism  that  needs  to  develop  a  greater  global 
awareness  and  be  connected  to  women  in  struggle  around  the  world  if 
the  feminist  perspective  is  to  advance. 

If  any  lesson  was  clear  in  Copenhagen,  it  was  that  a  global 
feminist  movement  will  only  come  through  people  connecting  to 
people,  not  from  governments.  The  Forum  gave  us  a  hint  of  how 
powerful  such  a  movement  could  be  as  well  as  a  taste  of  the  conflicts 
and  creativity  inherent  in  such  a  possibility.  The  challenge  is  great,  but 
so  are  the  stakes.  The  crisis  of  survival  on  our  planet  demands  that  we 
take  the  risk  of  trying  to  develop  a  global  feminism  that  can  add  to  the 
forces  for  sanity  and  justice  at  work  in  the  world. 


Charlotte  Bunch,  a  past  editor  with  Quest,  now  does  speaking  and 
consulting  on  issues  of  international  feminist  theory  and  practice  with 
her  own  firm,  Interfem  Consultants. 


Global  Feminism/33 


WE'RE  TOOTINC 


Quest  is  proud  to  announce  the  publication  of  Building 
Feminist  Theory,  an  anthology  of  essays  selected  from  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly.  Extracted  from  the  first  three  volumes  of 
Quest,  the  twenty-seven  essays,  accompanied  by  a 
bibliography  and  a  resources  list,  are  divided  into  four 
sections:  Power  and  Practice,  The  Politics  of  Everyday  Life, 
Feminist  Perspectives  on  Class,  and  Organizations  and 
Strategies.  Topics  covered  by  the  essays  include  power, 
separatism,  working  life,  family  life,  institutions,  professions, 
class,  race,  organizations,  activism,  economics,  and  Marxism. 
Building  Feminist  Theory  is  published  by  Longman  Press,  and 
may  be  purchased  directly  from  them  (19  W.  44th  Street,  Suite 
1012,  New  York,  New  York,  10036),  or  at  your  favorite  feminist 
book  store. 

The  early  reviews  have  been  exciting.  In  Off  Our  Backs, 
Carol  Anne  Douglas  says,  "As  a  Quest  reader  from  its 
inception,  I  have  found  that  I  keep  going  back  to  some  of  its 
articles.  ...  I  enjoy  Quest's  reasonable,  calm,  often  carefully 
researched  articles.  .  .  .  My  biggest  criticism  of  Quest  seems  to 
be:  'more,  please  do  more/"  According  to  Catherine 
Stimpson,  Quest  gives  its  readers  "vision  and  strategy,  reason 


34/Quest 


XJR  HORN! 


and  morality,  tough  analysis  and  necessary  hope/'  Gloria 
Steinem  refers  to  the  "depth  and  breadth  of  insight  and 
analysis/'  while  Barbara  Deming  speaks  of  the  "rigorous 
inquiries/'  which  are  "more  than  reformism/' 

We  are,  of  course,  exceptionally  pleased  with  the 
anthology.  At  a  time  when  outside  political  events  seem  to 
relegate  feminist  issues  to  the  sidelines,  and  when  Quest's  own 
economic  future  seems  bleaker  and  bleaker,  this  anthology 
reminds  us  of  the  importance  of  what  we  are  doing.  Both 
Gloria  Steinem's  Foreword  and  Charlotte  Bunch's  Introduction 
to  the  book  acknowledge  the  central  role  Quest  has  played  as 
a  rostrum  for  the  voices  of  contemporary  feminist  theory. 

A  toast  to  us  and  to  our  subscribers  and  supporters,  and 
many  hopes  that  a  second  anthology  will  be  forthcoming  from 
volumes  4,  5,  and  6! 

P.  S.  Should  you  wish  a  fuller  or  more  authentic  picture  of  the 
scope  of  Quest's  coverage  of  feminist  issues,  why  not  order  the 
actual  issues  containing  the  essays  and  those  that  follow?  Our 
current  back  issue  bonanza  makes  it  affordable.  See 
page  48  of  this  issue  for  ordering  information. 


Quest/35 


Theories  of  Race  &  Gender 

The  Erasure  of 
Black  Women 


by  Elizabeth  V.  Spelman 

As  has  often  been  pointed  out,  what  have  been  called  the  first  and 
second  waves  of  the  women's  movement  followed  closely  on  the  heels 
of  women's  involvement  in  the  19th  century  abolitionist  movement 
and  the  20th  century  civil  rights  movement,  respectively.  In  both 
centuries,  challenges  to  aspects  of  American  home-grown  racism 
served  as  an  impetus  to,  and  model  for,  the  feminist  attack  on  sexist 
institutions,  practices  and  ideology.  But  this  is  not  to  say,  it  cannot  be 
to  say,  that  all  anti-racists  were  or  are  anti-sexists,  or  that  all  anti-sexists 
were  or  are  anti-racists.  Indeed,  many  abolitionists  of  the  19th  century, 
and  civil  rights  workers  of  the  20th,  did  not  take  sexism  seriously;  and 
we  continue  to  learn  about  the  sad,  bitter  and  confusing  history  of 
women,  who  in  fighting  hard  for  various  presumably  feminist  ends  did 
not  take  racism  seriously.1 

Recent  feminist  theory  has  not  totally  ignored  white  racism,  though 
white  feminists  have  paid  much  less  attention  to  it  than  have  black 
feminists.  Nor  have  white  feminists  explicitly  enunciated  and  espoused 
positions  of  white  superiority.  Yet  much  of  feminist  theory  has 
reflected  and  contributed  to  what  Adrienne  Rich  has  called  "white 
solipsism": 

to  think,  imagine,  and  speak  as  if  whiteness  described  the 
world.2 

not  the  consciously  held  belief  that  one  race  is  inherently 
superior  to  all  others,  but  a  tunnel-vision  which  simply  does 
not  see  nonwhite  experience  or  existence  as  precious  or 
significant,  unless  in  spasmodic,  impotent  guilt-reflexes, 
which  have  little  or  no  long-term,  continuing  momentum  or 
political  usefulness.3 

36/Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Vol.  V,  No.  4 


In  this  essay,  I  shall  focus  on  what  I  take  to  be  instances  and 
sustaining  sources  of  such  solipsism  in  recent  theoretical  works  by,  or 
of  interest  to,  feminists— in  particular,  certain  ways  of  comparing 
sexism  and  racism,  and  some  well-ingrained  habits  of  thought  about 
the  source  of  women's  oppression  and  the  possibility  of  our  liberation. 

I  do  all  this  in  the  hope  that  exposing  some  of  the  symptoms  of 
white  solipsism — especially  in  places  where  we  might  least  expect  to 
find  them— might  help  to  eliminate  tunnel-vision  and  to  widen  the 
descriptive  and  explanatory  scope  of  feminist  theory.  Perhaps  we 
might  hasten  the  day  when  it  will  no  longer  be  necessary  for  anyone  to 
have  to  say,  as  Audre  Lorde  has,  "How  difficult  and  time  consuming  it 
is  to  have  to  reinvent  the  pencil  every  time  you  want  to  send  a 
message."4 

I  shall  not  explicitly  be  examining  class  and  classism,  though  at  a 
number  of  points  I  suggest  ways  in  which  considerations  of  class  and 
classism  affect  the  topic  at  hand.  Many  of  the  kinds  of  questions  I  raise 
about  comparisons  between  sexism  and  racism  could  also  be  raised 
about  comparisons  between  sexism  and  classism  or  racism  and 
classism.  This  essay  is  in  large  part  a  response  to  a  specific  part  of 
feminist  activity  and  feminist  theorizing  which,  as  already  noted,  has  a 
long  history.  My  comments  about  racism  have  to  do  with  the  racism 
directed  against  black  people  in  the  United  States.  I  do  not  claim  that 
all  the  same  comments  apply  to  the  racism  experienced  by  other 
people  of  color. 


Sexism  vs.  Racism 

The  very  fact  that  interest  in  feminism  has  followed  on  anti-racist 
activity,  and  the  fact  that,  nevertheless,  feminist  and  anti-racist  camps 
have  not  been  coextensive,  seems  to  add  support  to  the  well- 
entrenched  habit  of  speaking  comparatively  about  sexism  and  racism, 
sexism  or  racism.  It  is  perhaps  inevitable  that  such  comparisons 
include,  and  often  culminate  in,  questions  about  which  form  of 
oppression  is  more  "fundamental."  Whether  or  not  one  believes  that 
this  way  of  thinking  about  sexism  and  racism  will  bear  any  strategical 
or  theoretical  fruit,  such  comparisons  have  come  to  inform  analyses  of 
the  nature  of  sexism  and  the  nature  of  racism.  To  begin,  I  will  examine 
some  recent  prominent  claims  to  the  effect  that  sexism  is  more 
fundamental  than  racism.  I  do  this  not  because  of  any  strongly  held 
belief  that  sexism  is  or  is  not  more  fundamental  than  racism,  but  rather 

Theories  of  Race  &  Gender/The  Erasure  of  Black  Women/37 


because,  if  the  views  discussed  below  are  any  guide,  we  are  still  far 
from  thinking  clearly  about  the  matter.  For,  as  I  shall  show,  the  claim 
that  sexism  is  more  fundamental  than  racism  is  ambiguous.  In  many 
instances  the  evidence  offered  in  support  of  the  claim  turns  out  to 
refute  the  claim;  and  this  way  of  comparing  sexism  and  racism  often  is 
done  in  a  way  that  presupposes  the  non-existence  of  black  women, 
insofar  as  neither  the  description  of  sexism  nor  that  of  racism  seems  to 
apply  to  them.  This  is  a  bitter  irony  indeed,  since  black  women  are  the 
victims  of  both  sexism  and  racism. 

I  trust  that  it  will  be  apparent  to  anyone  who  knows  how  insidious 
sexism  and  racism  are  why  reviewing  such  claims  is  more  than  an 
exercise  in  the  fine  art  of  nitpicking. 

As  Margaret  Simons  has  recently  pointed  out,5  many  of  the  major 
white  feminist  theorists  have  held  that  sexism  is  more  fundamental 
than  racism  (sometimes  this  claim  is  restricted  to  the  United  States  and 
sometimes  it  is  not).  Similar  views  can  be  found  in  two  recent 
comparative  studies  of  sexism  and  racism  in  the  philosophical 
literature  by  Richard  Wasserstrom  and  Laurence  Thomas.6  Before 
turning  to  the  evidence  that  has  been  given  in  behalf  of  that  claim,  we 
need  to  ask  what  it  means  to  say  that  sexism  is  more  fundamental  than 
racism.  It  has  meant  or  might  mean  several  different  though  related 
things:7 


•  It  is  harder  to  eradicate  sexism  than  it  is  to  eradicate  racism. 

•  There  might  be  sexism  without  racism  but  not  racism 
without  sexism:  any  social  and  political  changes  which 
eradicate  sexism  will  have  eradicated  racism,  but  social  and 
political  changes  which  eradicate  racism  will  not  have 
eradicated  sexism. 

•  Sexism  is  the  first  form  of  oppression  learned  by  children. 

•  Sexism  is  historically  prior  to  racism. 

•  Sexism  is  the  cause  of  racism. 

•  Sexism  is  used  to  justify  racism. 

•  Sexism  is  the  model  for  racism. 


38/Quest 


In  the  process  of  comparing  racism  and  sexism,  Richard 
Wasserstrom8  describes  ways  in  which  women  and  blacks  have  been 
stereotypically  conceived  of  as  less  fully  developed  than  white  men. 
"Men  and  women  are  taught  to  see  men  as  independent,  capable,  and 
powerful;  men  and  women  are  taught  to  see  women  as  dependent, 
limited  in  abilities,  and  passive.  .  .  ."9  But  who  is  taught  to  see  black 
men  as  "independent,  capable,  and  powerful,"  and  by  whom  are  they 
taught?  Are  black  men  taught  that?  Black  women?  White  men?  White 
women?  Similarly,  who  is  taught  to  see  black  women  as  "dependent, 
limited  in  abilities,  and  passive"?  If  this  stereotype  is  so  prevalent,  why 
then  have  black  women  had  to  defend  themselves  against  the  images 
of  matriarch  and  whore? 

Wasserstrom  continues: 

As  is  true  for  race,  it  is  also  a  significant  social  fact  that  to  be 
a  female  is  to  be  an  entity  or  creature  viewed  as  different 
from  the  standard,  fully  developed  person  who  is  male  as 
well  as  white.  But  to  be  female,  as  opposed  to  being  black, 
is  not  to  be  conceived  of  as  simply  a  creature  of  less  worth. 
That  is  one  important  thing  that  differentiates  sexism  from 
racism:  the  ideology  of  sex,  as  opposed  to  the  ideology  of 
race,  is  a  good  deal  more  complex  and  confusing.  Women 
are  both  put  on  a  pedestal  and  deemed  not  fully  developed 
persons.10  (emphasis  mine) 

In  this  brief  for  the  view  that  sexism  is  a  "deeper  phenomenon"  than 
racism,  Wasserstrom  leaves  no  room  for  the  black  woman.  For  a  black 
woman  cannot  be  "female,  as  opposed  to  being  black";  she  is  female 
and  black.  Since  Wasserstrom's  argument  proceeds  from  the 
assumption  that  one  is  either  female  or  black,  it  cannot  be  an 
argument  that  applies  to  black  women.  Moreover,  we  cannot  generate 
a  composite  image  of  the  black  women  from  the  above,  since  the 
description  of  women  as  being  put  on  a  pedestal,  or  being  dependent, 
never  generally  applied  to  black  women  in  the  United  States  and  was 
never  meant  to  apply  to  them. 

Wasserstrom's  argument  about  the  priority  of  sexism  over  racism 
has  an  odd  result,  which  stems  from  the  erasure  of  black  women  in  his 
analysis.  He  wishes  to  claim  that  in  this  society  sex  is  a  more 
fundamental  fact  about  people  than  race.  Yet  his  description  of 
woman  does  not  apply  to  the  black  woman,  which  implies  that  being 
black  is  a  more  fundamental  fact  about  her  than  being  a  woman.  I  am 


Race  &  Gender/39 


not  saying  that  Wasserstrom  actually  believes  this  is  true,  but  that 
paradoxically  the  terms  of  his  theory  force  him  into  that  position. 

A  similar  erasure  of  the  black  woman,  through  failure  to  note  how 
sexist  stereotypes  are  influenced  by  racist  ones,  is  found  in  Laurence 
Thomas'  recent  comparison  of  sexism  and  racism.11  Like  Wasserstrom, 
Thomas  believes  that  sexism  is  more  deeply  ingrained  in  the  culture, 
because  racist  attitudes  are  easier  to  give  up  than  sexist  ones.  He  gives 
two  reasons  for  that  belief:  "sexism,  unlike  racism,  readily  lends  itself 
to  a  morally  unobjectionable  description";  "the  positive  self-concept 
of  men  has  been  more  centrally  tied  to  their  being  sexists  than  has 
been  the  positive  self-concept  of  whites  to  their  being  racists."12 

Thomas  argues  that  it  is  not  morally  objectionable  that  "a  natural 
outcome  of  a  sexist  conception  of  women"  is  the  role  of  men  as 
benefactors  of  women — part  of  men's  role  vis-a-vis  women  is  to 
"protect  women  and  to  provide  them  with  the  comforts  of  life."13  What 
is  significant  here  is  that,  at  best,  Thomas'  claim  about  the  man's  role  as 
benefactor  of  woman  only  applies  to  men  and  women  of  the  same 
"race"  (and  probably  of  the  same  class).  Yet  Thomas  cannot  claim  that 
it  is  the  role  of  the  white  man  to  be  the  benefactor  of  the  black 
woman  or  the  role  of  the  black  man  to  be  the  benefactor  of  the  white 
woman.  It  is  of  course  difficult  to  account  for  just  how  claims  such  as 

"the  role  of  women  is  to ,  the  role  of  men  is  to "  are 

established,  but  the  history  of  race  relations  in  the  United  States  surely 
makes  ludicrous  the  idea  that  the  role  of  white  men  is  to  be  the 
benefactors  of  black  women — to  "protect"  them  and  to  "provide 
them  with  the  comforts  of  life"!  It  neither  describes  what  white  men 
have  done,  nor  what  they  have  been  told  they  ought  to  have  done, 
with  respect  to  black  women. 

Thomas'  description  of  sexism  in  relations  between  women  and 
men  leaves  out  the  reality  of  racism  in  relations  between  blacks  and 
whites.  If  he  wishes  to  insist  that  his  analysis  was  only  meant  to  apply  to 
same-"race"  sexual  relations,  then  he  cannot  continue  to  speak 
unqualifiedly  about  relations  between  men  and  women.  My  point  is 
not  that  black  men  cannot  be  sexist,  to  white  or  to  black  women,  for 
indeed  they  can,  just  as  white  women  can  be  racist,  to  black  men  or  to 
black  women.  My  point,  rather,  is  that  a  theory  of  sexism  that 
describes  men's  and  women's  roles  can  itself  reflect  the  racist  society 
in  which  it  develops,  insofar  as  it  is  based  on  an  erasure  of  the  realities 
of  white  racism. 

Thomas  also  holds  that  "the  positive  self-concept  of  men  has  been 
more  centrally  tied  to  their  being  sexists  than  has  been  the  positive 


40/Quest 


self-concept  of  whites  to  their  being  racists/'  In  behalf  of  this,  Thomas 
claims  that,  while  for  men,  being  benefactors  of  women  is  essential  to 
their  self-esteem  as  "real"  men14,  for  whites  it  is  not  necessary  to  own 
slaves  or  hate  blacks  in  order  to  be  "really"  white.15  Once  again,  we 
have  to  see  what  happens  to  Thomas'  claim  when  we  put  "black"  or 
"white"  in  front  of  "men"  or  "women"  in  his  formula.  "For  white 
men,  being  benefactors  of  black  women  is  essential  to  their  self- 
esteem  as  'real'  men."  That  is  false.  Indeed,  in  a  racist  society,  white 
men's  self-esteem  requires  the  opposite  position  and  attitude  vis-a-vis 
black  women. 

Reflection  on  this  leads  to  doubts  about  the  other  part  of  Thomas' 
claim — the  claim  that  whites  don't  have  to  be  racists  in  order  to  be 
"really"  white.  Does  he  mean  to  say  that  in  our  racist  society  a  white 
man  feels  no  threat  to  his  self-esteem  if  a  black  man  gets  the  job  for 
which  they  both  are  candidates?  That  a  white  man  feels  no  threat  to 
his  self-esteem  if  a  black  man  marries  the  white  woman  the  white  man 
is  hoping  to  marry?  That  a  white  man  feels  no  threat  to  his  self-esteem 
if  he  lives  in  a  neighborhood  with  blacks?  Certainly  not  all  white  men's 
self-esteem  is  so  threatened.  But  this  is  a  racist  society,  and  part  of 
what  this  means  is  that,  generally,  the  self-esteem  of  white  people  is 
deeply  influenced  by  their  difference  from  and  supposed  superiority  to 
black  people.  White  people  may  not  think  of  themselves  as  racists, 
because  they  do  not  own  slaves  or  hate  blacks,  but  that  does  not  mean 
that  much  of  what  props  up  white  people's  sense  of  self-esteem  is  not 
based  on  the  racism  which  unfairly  distributes  benefits  and  burdens  to 
whites  and  blacks. 

For  example,  think  for  a  moment  about  a  case  of  self-esteem 
which  seems  on  the  surface  most  unlikely  to  be  supported  by  racism: 
the  self-esteem  which  might  be  thought  to  attend  sincere  and  serious 
philosophical  reflection  on  the  problems  of  racism.  How  could  such 
self-esteem  be  said  to  be  based  on  racism,  especially  if  the  activity  of 
philosophizing  is  trying  to  eliminate  racism?  As  the  editors  of  the 
Philosophical  Forum  in  an  issue  on  "Philosophy  and  the  Black 
Experience"  pointed  out,  "Black  people  have  to  a  disproportionate 
extent  supplied  the  labor  which  has  made  possible  the  cultivation  of 
philosophical  inquiry."16  A  disproportionate  amount  of  the  labor  that 
makes  it  possible  for  some  people  to  have  philosophy  as  a  profession 
has  been  done  by  blacks  under  conditions  which  can  only  be 
described  as  racist.  If  the  connection  between  the  possibility  of  such 
philosophizing  and  racism  is  not  very  visible,  that  invisibility  itself  is  a 
product  of  racism.  Any  feminist  would  recognize  a  similar  point  about 

Race  &  Gender/41 


sexism.  One  product  of  sexism  is  that  it  is  only  in  footnotes  and 
prefaces  to  books  that  we  see  a  visible  connection  made  between  a 
man's  warm  satisfaction  in  having  finished  an  article  or  book,  and  a 
woman's  having  made  possible  the  psychic  space  for  him  to  have  done 
so.17 

At  several  points  early  in  his  essay  Thomas  says  that  he  is  going  to 
consider  the  "way  in  which  sexism  and  racism  each  conceives  of  its 
object:  woman  and  blacks,  respectively."18  But  there  are  many 
difficulties  in  talking  about  sexism  and  racism  in  this  way,  some  of 
which  we  have  noted,  and  others  to  which  we  now  turn. 


Additive  Analyses 

First  of  all,  sexism  and  racism  do  not  have  different  "objects"  in 
the  case  of  black  women.  Moreover,  it  is  highly  misleading  to  say, 
without  further  explanation,  that  black  women  experience  sexism  and 
racism.  For  to  say  merely  that  suggests  that  black  women  experience 
one  form  of  oppression,  as  blacks — the  same  thing  black  men 
experience — and  that  they  experience  another  form  of  oppression,  as 
women — the  same  thing  white  women  experience.  But  this  way  of 
describing  and  analyzing  black  women's  experience  seems  to  me  to  be 
inadequate.  For  while  it  is  true  that  images  and  institutions  that  are 
described  as  sexist  affect  both  black  and  white  women,  they  are 
affected  in  different  ways,  depending  upon  the  extent  to  which  they 
are  affected  by  other  forms  of  oppression. 

For  example,  as  noted  earlier,  it  will  not  do  to  say  that  women  are 
oppressed  by  the  image  of  the  "feminine"  woman  as  fair,  delicate,  and 
in  need  of  support  and  protection  by  men.  While  all  women  are 
oppressed  by  the  use  of  that  image,  we  are  not  oppressed  in  the  same 
ways.  As  Linda  Brent  puts  it  so  succinctly,  "That  which  commands 
admiration  in  the  white  woman  only  hastens  the  degradation  of  the 
female  slave."19  More  specifically,  as  Angela  Davis  reminds  us,  "the 
alleged  benefits  of  the  ideology  of  femininity  did  not  accrue"  to  the 
black  female  slave — she  was  expected  to  toil  in  the  fields  for  just  as 
long  and  hard  as  the  black  male  was.20 

Reflection  on  the  experience  of  black  women  also  shows  that  it  is 
not  as  if  one  form  of  oppression  is  merely  piled  upon  another.  As 
Barbara  Smith  has  remarked,  the  affect  of  multiple  oppression  "is  not 
merely  arithmatic."21  Such  an  "additive"  analysis  informs,  for  example, 
Gerda  Lerner's  remark  about  the  nature  of  the  oppression  of  black 


42/Quest 


women  under  slavery:  "Their  work  and  duties  were  the  same  as  that  of 
the  men,  while  childbearing  and  rearing  fell  upon  them  as  an  added 
burden."22  But,  as  Angela  Davis  has  pointed  out,  the 
mother/housewife  role  (even  the  words  seem  inappropriate)  doesn't 
have  the  same  meaning  for  women  who  experience  racism  as  it  does 
for  those  who  are  not  so  oppressed: 

.  .  .  .In  the  infinite  anguish  of  ministering  to  the  needs  of  the 
men  and  children  around  her  (who  were  not  necessarily 
members  of  her  immediate  family),  she  was  performing  the 
only  labor  of  the  slave  community  which  could  not  be 
directly  and  immediately  claimed  by  the  oppressor .... 
Even  as  she  was  suffering  from  her  unique  oppression  as 
female,  she  was  thrust  by  the  force  of  circumstances  into  the 
center  of  the  slave  community.23 

The  meaning  and  the  oppressive  nature  of  the  "housewife"  role 
has  to  be  understood  in  relation  to  the  roles  against  which  it  is 
contrasted.  The  work  of  mate/mother/nurturer  has  a  different 
meaning  depending  on  whether  it  is  contrasted  to  work  which  has 
high  social  value  and  ensures  economic  independence,  or  to  labor 
which  is  forced,  degrading  and  unpaid.  All  of  these  factors  are  left  out 
in  a  simple  additive  analysis.  How  one  form  of  oppression  (e.g.,  sexism) 
is  experienced,  is  influenced  by  and  influences  how  another  form  (i.e., 
racism)  is  experienced.  So  it  would  be  quite  misleading  to  say  simply 
that  black  women  and  white  women  both  are  oppressed  as  women, 
and  that  a  black  woman's  oppression  as  a  black  is  thus  separable  from 
her  oppression  as  a  woman  because  she  shares  the  latter  but  not  the 
former  with  the  white  woman.  An  additive  analysis  treats  the 
oppression  of  a  black  woman  in  a  sexist  and  racist  society  as  if  it  were  a 
further  burden  than  her  oppression  in  a  sexist  but  non-racist  society, 
when,  in  fact,  it  is  a  different  burden.  As  the  article  by  Davis,  among 
others,  shows,  to  ignore  the  difference  is  to  deny  or  obscure  the 
particular  reality  of  the  black  woman's  experience. 

If  sexism  and  racism  must  be  seen  as  interlocking,  and  not  as  piled 
upon  each  other,  serious  problems  arise  for  the  claim  that  one  of  them 
is  more  fundamental  than  the  other.  As  we  saw,  one  meaning  of  the 
claim  that  sexism  is  more  fundamental  than  racism  is  that  sexism  causes 
racism:  racism  would  not  exist  if  sexism  did  not,  while  sexism  could 
and  would  continue  to  exist  even  in  the  absence  of  racism.  In  this 
connection,  racism  is  sometimes  seen  as  something  which  is  both 


Race  &  Gender/43 


derivative  from  sexism  and  in  the  service  of  it:  racism  keeps  women 
from  uniting  in  alliance  against  sexism.  This  view  has  been  articulated 
by  Mary  Daly  in  Beyond  God  the  Father.  According  to  Daly,  sexism  is 
"root  and  paradigm"  of  other  forms  of  oppression  such  as  racism. 
Racism  is  a  "deformity  within  patriarchy.  .  .It  is  most  unlikely  that 
racism  will  be  eradicated  as  long  as  sexism  prevails."24 

Daly's  theory  relies  on  an  additive  analysis,  and  we  can  see  again 
why  such  an  analysis  fails  to  describe  adequately  black  women's 
experience.  Daly's  analysis  makes  it  look  simply  as  if  both  black  and 
white  women  experience  sexism,  while  black  women  also  experience 
racism.  Black  women  should  realize,  Daly  says,  that  they  must  see  what 
they  have  in  common  with  white  women — shared  sexist  oppression — 
and  see  that  black  and  white  women  are  "pawns  in  the  racial  struggle, 
which  is  basically  not  the  struggle  that  will  set  them  free  as  women."25 
The  additive  analysis  obscures  the  differences  between  black  and 
white  women's  struggles.  Insofar  as  she  is  oppressed  by  racism  in  a 
sexist  context  and  sexism  in  a  racist  context,  the  black  woman's 
struggle  cannot  be  compartmentalized  into  two  struggles — one  as  a 
black  and  one  as  a  woman.  But  that  way  of  speaking  about  her  struggle 
is  required  by  a  theory  which  insists  not  only  that  sexism  and  racism 
are  distinct  but  that  one  might  be  eradicated  before  the  other.  Daly 
rightly  points  out  that  the  black  woman's  struggle  can  easily  be,  and 
has  usually  been,  subordinated  to  the  black  man's  struggle  in  anti- 
racist  organizations.  But  she  does  not  point  out  that  the  black  woman's 
struggle  can  easily  be,  and  usually  has  been,  subordinated  to  the  white 
woman's  struggle  in  anti-sexist  organizations. 

Daly's  line  of  thought  also  promotes  the  idea  that,  were  it  not  for 
racism,  there  would  be  no  important  differences  between  black  and 
white  women.  Since  sexism  is  the  fundamental  form  of  oppression, 
and  racism  works  in  its  service,  the  only  significant  differences 
between  black  and  white  women  are  differences  which  men  have 
created  and  which  are  the  source  of  antagonism  between  women. 
What  is  really  crucial  about  us  is  our  sex;  racial  distinctions  are  one  of 
the  many  products  of  sexism,  of  patriarchy's  attempt  to  keep  women 
from  uniting.  It  is  through  our  shared  sexual  identity  that  we  are 
oppressed  together;  it  is  through  our  shared  sexual  identity  that  we 
shall  be  liberated  together. 

A  serious  problem  in  thinking  or  speaking  this  way,  however,  is 
that  it  seems  to  deny  or  ignore  the  positive  aspects  of  "racial" 
identities.  It  ignores  the  fact  that  being  black  is  a  source  of  pride,  as 
well  as  an  occasion  for  being  oppressed.  It  suggests  that  once  racism  is 


44/Quest 


eliminated  (!),  black  women  no  longer  need  be  concerned  about  or 
interested  in  their  blackness— as  if  the  only  reason  for  paying  attention 
to  one's  blackness  is  that  it  is  the  source  of  pain  and  sorrow  and  agony. 
But  that  is  racism  pure  and  simple,  if  it  assumes  that  there  is  nothing 
positive  about  having  a  black  history  and  identity.  Recall  the  lines  of 
Nikki  Giovanni: 

and  I  really  hope  no  white  person  ever  has  cause 
to  write  about  me 

because  they  never  understand  Black  love  is 
Black  wealth  and  they'll 

probably  talk  about  my  hard  childhood 
and  never  understand  that 

all  the  while  I  was  quite  happy.26 

Or  recall  the  chagrin  of  the  central  character  in  Paule  Marshall's  story, 
"Reena,"  when  she  discovered  that  her  white  boyfriend  could  only 
see  her  blackness  in  terms  of  her  suffering  and  not  as  something 
compatible  with  taking  joy  and  pleasure  in  life.27 1  think  it  is  helpful 
too  in  this  connection  to  remember  the  opening  lines  of  Pat  Parker's 
"For  the  white  person  who  wants  to  know  how  to  be  my  friend": 


The  first  thing  you  do  is  to  forget  that  i'm  Black. 
Second,  you  must  never  forget  that  i'm  Black.28 


The  general  point  is  that  if  race  is  discussed  in  feminist  theory  only 
in  terms  of  its  being  an  invention  of  white  men  and  the  occasion  for 
oppression,  then  feminist  theory  is  proceeding  as  if  blackness  for  black 
women  has  only  been  the  source  of  pain,  and  that  once  we  get  rid  of 
racism  and  sexism  black  women  will  no  longer  have  to  be  concerned 
with  being  black.  Perhaps  it  does  not  occur  to  those  of  us  feminists 
who  are  white  that  celebrating  being  white  has  anything  to  do  with 
our  celebrating  being  women.  But  that  may  be  so  because  celebrating 
being  white  is  already  taken  care  of  by  the  predominantly  white 
culture  in  which  we  live  in  North  America. 

Certainly  feminist  theory  and  activity  on  the  whole  have 
recognized  that,  while  it  is  tricky,  it  is  possible  to  celebrate  being  a 
woman  without  at  the  same  time  conceiving  of  woman  in  terms  of  the 
sexist  imagery  and  lore  of  the  centuries.  (That  celebrating  womanhood 
is  a  tricky  business  we  know  from  the  insidiousness  of  the  "two- 
sphere"  ideology  of  the  19th  century,  or  the  "total  woman"  [or,  in 


Race  &  Gender/45 


Daly's  wonderful  phrase,  the  "totaled  woman"]  scandal  of  the  20th 
century:  as  if  by  celebrating  what  men  tell  us  we  are,  the  burden 
magically  disappears  because  we  embrace  it.)  Feminist  theory  and 
activity  manifest  white  solipsism,  however,  whenever  and  wherever  it 
forgets  that,  just  as  it  is  possible  and  desirable  to  identify  oneself  as  a 
woman  and  yet  think  of  and  describe  oneself  in  ways  that  are  not 
sexist,  so  it  is  possible  and  desirable  to  identify  oneself  as  a  black 
woman  and  yet  think  of  oneself  in  ways  that  are  not  racist. 

In  sum,  according  to  an  additive  analysis  of  sexism  and  racism,  all 
women  are  oppressed;  some  women  are  further  oppressed  by  racism. 
Such  an  analysis  only  distorts  black  women's  experiences  of 
oppression  by  failing  to  note  important  differences  between  the 
contexts  in  which  black  and  white  women  experience  sexism.  The 
additive  analysis  also  suggests  that  a  woman's  "racial"  identity  can  be 
"subtracted"  from  her  combined  sexual  and  "racial"  identity:  "we  are 
all  women."  But  this  does  not  leave  room  for  the  fact  that  different 
women  look  to  different  forms  of  liberation  just  because  they  are 
white  or  black  women,  rich  or  poor  women,  Catholic  or  Jewish 
women,  etc.  And  if  it  is  racist  to  describe  women's  oppression  in  terms 
that  only  apply  to  white  women,  it  is  also  racist  to  describe  women's 
liberation  in  terms  that  only  apply  to  white  women — a  temptation  to 
which  white  feminists  are  prone  if  we  do  not  recognize  the  positive 
aspects  of  black  culture. 

Millett  and  Firestone 

As  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  another  problem  has  plagued 
claims  about  sexism  being  more  fundamental  than  racism — in  some 
instances  the  evidence  offered  in  support  of  these  claims  turns  out  to 
refute  them.  I  shall  look  at  these  claims  as  they  appear  in  two 
important  feminist  milestones:  Kate  Millett's  Sexual  Politics  and 
Shulamith  Firestone's  The  Dialectic  of  Sex. 

In  Sexual  Politics,  Kate  Millett  seems  to  hold  that  sexism  is  more 
fundamental  than  racism  in  three  senses:  sexism  is  "sturdier"  than 
racism  and  so  presumably  is  harder  to  eradicate;  sexism  has  a  more 
"pervasive  ideology"  than  racism,  and  so  perhaps  those  who  are  not 
racists  may  nevertheless  embrace  sexist  beliefs;  sexism  provides  our 
culture's  "most  fundamental  concept  of  power."29  One  argument 
Millett  offers  is  that  some  observers  take  one  of  the  worst  aspects  of 
racism  to  be  that  black  men  do  not  dominate  black  women.  Such 
observers  think  that  when  racism  is  eradicated  black  men  will  have 


46/Quest 


assumed  their  proper  position  of  domination  over  black  women.  The 
vision  such  observers  have  of  a  non-racist  society  is,  then,  not  a  vision 
of  a  non-sexist  society. 

As  Margaret  Simons30  has  pointed  out,  Millett  ignores  the  fact  that 
black  women  and  other  women  of  color  do  not  usually  describe  their 
own  lives  as  ones  in  which  they  experience  sexism  as  more 
fundamental  than  racism.  I  would  like  to  add  to  Simons'  remarks  by 
noting  that  there  is  something  very  peculiar  about  the  evidence  Millett 
offers  in  behalf  of  her  view  that  sexism  is  more  endemic  than  racism. 
On  the  one  hand,  Millett  offers  as  a  description  of  sexism  that 
everywhere  men  have  power  over  women;  on  the  other  hand,  she 
notes  with  interest  that  what  is  described  as  an  effect  of  racism  is  that 
black  men  do  not  have  such  power  over  black  women.  She  correctly 
describes  as  sexist  the  hope  that  black  men  could  assume  their 
"proper  authority"  over  black  women.  But  surely  her  claim  about  the 
pervasiveness  of  sexism  is  belied  by  her  reference  to  the  lack  of 
authority  of  black  males.  The  evidence  she  offers  in  behalf  of  her  claim 
about  the  pervasiveness  of  sexism  is  that  "the  military,  industry, 
technology,  universities,  science,  political  office,  and  finance — in 
short,  every  avenue  of  power  within  the  society,  including  the 
coercive  force  of  the  police,  is  entirely  in  male  hands/'31  But  that  is 
white  male  supremacy.  Since  when  did  black  males  have  such 
institutionally  based  power,  in  what  Millett  calls  "our  culture"?32 

Once  again,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Millett  correctly  describes  as 
sexist  the  hope  that  racial  equity  will  be  established  when  black  males 
have  authority  over  black  females.  But  it  also  is  correct  to  describe  as 
racist  the  hope — not  uncommonly  found  in  our  feminist  heritage — 
that  sexual  equity  will  be  established  when  women  can  be  presidents 
or  heads  of  business.  That  is  no  guarantee  that  they  will  not  be  running 
racist  countries  and  corporations. 

Many  white  women  define  liberation  as  the  access  to 
those  thrones  traditionally  occupied  by  white  men — 
positions  in  the  kingdoms  which  support  racism.33 

So  anti-racist  visions  of  liberation  aren't  necessarily  anti-sexist;  but 
neither  are  anti-sexist  visions  of  liberation  necessarily  anti-racist.  Of 
course,  one  might  insist  that  any  truly  anti-sexist  vision  also  is  an  anti- 
racist  vision,  for  it  would  have  to  be  one  which  required  the 
elimination  of  all  forms  of  oppression  against  all  women,  white  or 
black.  But,  similarly,  it  could  be  said  that  any  truly  anti-racist  vision 

Race  &  Gender/47 


Special  Offer 


FIRST  YEAR 

1-1   Processes  of  Change  (a 

feminist  classic,  $5.00) 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "The  Reform 

Tool  Kit" 
Nancy  Hartsock,  "Two  Perspectives 

on  Power" 
Rita  Mae  Brown,  "The  Good  Fairy" 
1-2   Money,  Fame  &  Power 

($3,00) 
Vicki  Gabriner,  "ERA,  The  Year  of 

the  Rabble" 
Coletta  Reid,  "Taking  Care  of 

Business" 
Alice  Quinn,  "Insanity  and  Control: 

A  Class  Trap" 
1-3   The  Selfhood  of  Women 

($3.00) 
Rita  Mae  Brown,  "It's  All  Dixie 

Cups  to  Me" 
Karen  Kollias,  "Class  Realities: 

Create  a  New  Power  Base" 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Self  Definition 

and  Political  Survival" 
1-4   Women  and  Spirituality  (a 

feminist  classic,  $5.00) 
Mary  Daly,  "The  Qualitative  Leap 

Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion" 
Peggy  Cleveland  and  Sally 

Gearhart,  "On  the  Prevalence 

of  Stilps" 
Dorothy  Riddle,  "New  Visions  of 

Spiritual  Power" 

SECOND  YEAR 

2-1   Future  Visions  and 

Fantasies  ($3.00) 
Janice  Raymond,  "The  Illusion  of 

Androgyny" 
"Reflections  on  Science  Fiction:  An 

Interview  with  Joanna  Russ" 
Cynthia  Washington,  "Concrete 

Playgrounds  on  my  Mind" 


Buy  two  I 

Select  any  two  issues  a 


2-2   Theories  of  Revolution  (a 

feminist  classic,  $5.00) 
Lucia  Valeska,  "The  Future  of 

Female  Separatism" 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Not  for  Lesbians 

Only" 
Nancy  Hartsock,  "Fundamental 

Feminism" 
2-3   Organizations  &  Strategies 

($3.00) 
Karen  Kollias,  "Feminism  in 

Action" 
Sandra  Flowers,  "Use  and  Misuse 

of  Coalitions" 
Jean  Elshtain,  "Alternatives  to 

Individualism" 
2-4   Leadership  ($3.00) 
Bertha  Harris,  "The  Lesbian:  The 

Workmaker,  the  Leader" 
Bat- Ami  Bar  On,  "Notes  On  A 

Feminist  Economic" 
Lorraine  Masterson,  "Feminist 

Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water" 

THIRD  YEAR 

3-1   Kaleidoscope  ($3.00) 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Beyond  Either/ 

Or:  Feminist  Options" 
Peg  Averill,  "Alphabet  Soup: 

Women  and  Mixed 

Movements" 
June  Arnold,  "Feminist  Presses 

and  Feminist  Politics" 
3-2   Communication  and  Control 

($3.00) 
Deb  Friedman  &  Lois  Yankowski 

"Snuffing  Sexual  Violence" 
Chris  Murphey,  "The  Shadow  Box" 
Sheri  Maeda  and  Jill  Shapiro,  "Put 

Another  Nickel  In" 
3-3   Work,  Work,  Work  ($3.00) 
Nancy  Hartsock,  "Staying  Alive" 
Dierdre  Silverman,  "Sexual 


48/Quest 


zk  issues  and  get  one  free! 

listed  price  and  get  a  third,  $3.00  issue  at  no  extra  charge. 


Harassment:  Working  Women's 

Dilemma" 
Marilyn  Frye,  "Who  Wants  a  Piece 

of  the  Pie?" 
3-4   Race,  Class  &  Culture  ($3.00) 
Brenda  Eichelberger,  "Voices  on 

Black  Feminism" 
Michelle  Russell,  "An  Open  Letter 

to  the  Academy" 
Mary  McKenney,  "Class  Attitudes 

and  Professionalism" 


FOURTH  YEAR 

4  1    Kaleidoscope  II  ($3.00) 

Barbara  Deming,  "Remembering 

Who  We  Are- 
Red  Apple  Collective,  "Women's 

Unions  and  Socialist 

Feminism" 
Jackie  MacMillan,  "Prostitution  as 

Sexual  Politics" 


4-2   International  Feminism  ($3.00) 
Stephanie  Urdang,  "Women  in  the 

Guinea-Bisseau  Revolution" 
Elizabeth  Reid,  "Women,  Economic 

Development,  and  the  UN" 
Anja  Meulenbelt,  "On  the  Political 

Economy  of  Domestic  Labor" 
4-3   Body  Politic  ($3.00) 
Polly  Joan,  on  breast  feeding  and 

infant  formula; 
Lorraine  Rothman  and  Laura 

Punnett,  on  the  politics  of 

menstrual  extraction; 
Ellen  Hall,  "Who  Gets  Sick  & 

Why?" 
4-4   Women  in  Their 

Communities  ($3.00) 
JEB,  Photo  Essay 
Dorothy  Allison,  "Weaving  the  Web 

of  Community" 
Jo  Delaplaine,  "Women  in  the 

Latin  Community" 


Send  order  to:     Quest;  a  feminist  quarterly 
PO  Box  8843 
Washington,  DC,  20003 

I  have  enclosed  $ for  the  following  2  issues: 

Vol. No. @  $ 

Vol. No. @  $ 

Please  send  Vol. No. ,  at  no  extra  charge.  ($3.00  issue, 

only) 


Name 


Address 


State/City  Zip 

(Please  allow  six  to  eight  weeks  for  delivery) 


Quest /49 


would  have  to  be  anti-sexist,  for  it  would  have  to  be  one  which 
required  the  elimination  of  all  forms  of  oppression  against  all  blacks 
and  other  people  of  color,  women  or  men. 

In  arguing  for  the  position  in  The  Dialectic  of  Sex  that  racism  is 
"extended  sexism/'  Shulamith  Firestone  provides  another  variation  on 
the  view  that  sexism  is  more  fundamental  than  racism. 

Racism  is  sexism  extended  .  ...  Let  us  look  at  race 
relations  in  America,  a  macrocosm  of  the  hierarchical 
relations  within  the  nuclear  family:  the  white  man  is  father, 
the  white  woman  wife-and-mother,  her  status  dependent 
on  his;  the  blacks,  like  children,  are  his  property,  their 
physical  differentiation  branding  them  the  subservient  class, 
in  the  same  way  that  children  form  so  easily  distinguishable 
a  servile  class  via-a-vis  adults.  The  power  hierarchy  creates 
the  psychology  of  racism,  just  as,  in  the  nuclear  family,  it 
creates  the  psychology  of  sexism.34 

Through  her  use  of  the  comparison  it  is  clear  that  Firestone  sees  sexism 
as  the  model  for  racism:  as  the  cause  of  racism,  so  that  racism  cannot 
disappear  unless  sexism  does,  and  as  the  historical  precursor  of  racism. 
Moreover,  with  this  model  she  sees  the  goal  of  the  black  man  (male 
child)  as  usurping  the  power  of  the  white  man  (father),  which  means 
that  the  restoration  of  the  authority  of  the  black  man  will  involve  his 
domination  of  women.35  Hence  sexism  is  more  fundamental  than 
racism,  in  the  sense  that  the  eradication  of  racism  is  portrayed  as 
compatible  with  her  continuation  of  sexism. 

Here,  as  in  the  case  of  Millett,  the  evidence  Firestone  offers  in 
behalf  of  her  claims  about  the  primacy  of  sexism  to  racism  actually 
undermines  her  claim.  First  of  all,  she  points  out,  and  her  analogy  to 
the  family  requires,  that  the  black  man  is  not  really  "the  real  man."36 
However  much  the  black  man  tries  to  act  like  the  white  man,  and 
however  much  his  treatment  of  black  women  resembles  the  white 
man's  treatment  of  white  women  and  black  women,  he  isn't  really  The 
Man.  Now  if  this  is  so,  it  seems  odd  to  claim  that  sexism  is  more 
fundamental  than  racism,  since  acording  to  Firestone's  own  account 
the  black  man's  identity  as  a  man  is  obscured  or  erased  by  his  identity 
as  a  black.  Thus,  according  to  her  own  account  (whether  or  not  we 
agree  with  it),  the  racial  identity  of  being  an  inferior  assigned  him  by 
racists  is  more  fundamental  than  the  sexual  identify  of  being  a  superior 
assigned  him  by  sexists. 


50/Quest 


Firestone  also  claims  that  "the  Ail-American  Family  is  predicated 
on  the  existence  of  the  black  ghetto  whorehouse.  The  rape  of  the 
black  community  in  America  makes  possible  the  existence  of  the 
family  structure  of  the  larger  white  community/'37  But  to  say  in  these 
ways  that  racism  makes  sexism  possible  is  to  say  that  in  the  absence  of 
racism,  sexism  could  not  exist — surely  just  the  opposite  of  the  claim 
that  sexism  is  more  fundamental  than  racism,  the  claim  Firestone 
wishes  to  establish. 

Racism  and  Somatophobia 

I  have  described  ways  of  thinking  about  women's  oppression  and 
liberation  which  ignore  or  minimize  the  role  of  race — or  artificially 
separate  it  from  the  role  of  sex — both  as  an  element  in  oppression  and 
as  an  element  in  liberation.  In  this  section,  I  will  explore  one  other  way 
of  perceiving  women's  oppression  and  liberation  that  I  believe 
contributes  to  the  white  solipsism  of  feminist  theory. 

As  I  have  argued  in  detail  elsewhere,38  feminist  theorists  as 
politically  diverse  as  Simone  de  Beauvoir,  Betty  Friedan  and  Shulamith 
Firestone  have  described  the  conditions  of  women's  liberation  in 
terms  which  suggest  that  the  identification  of  woman  with  her  body 
has  been  the  source  of  our  oppression,  and  that,  hence,  the  source  of 
our  liberation  lies  in  sundering  that  connection.  For  example,  de 
Beauvoir  introduces  The  Second  Sex  with  the  comment  that  woman 
has  been  regarded  as  "womb";39  woman  is  thought  of  as  planted 
firmly  in  the  world  of  "immanence,"  that  is,  the  physical  world  of 
nature,  her  life  defined  by  the  dictates  of  her  "biologic  fate."40  In 
contrast,  men  live  in  the  world  of  "transcendence,"  actively  using  their 
minds  to  create  "values,  mores,  religions,"41  the  world  of  culture  as 
opposed  to  the  world  of^iature.  Among  Friedan's  central  messages  is 
that  women  should  be  allowed  and  encouraged  to  be  "culturally"  as 
well  as  "biologically"  creative,  because  the  former  activities,  which  are 
"mental,"  are  of  "highest  value  to  society"  in  comparison  to  child- 
bearing  and  rearing— "mastering  the  secrets  of  atoms,  or  the  stars, 
composing  symphonies,  pioneering  a  new  concept  in  government  or 
society."42 

This  view  about  the  source  of  woman's  oppression  and  liberation 
comes  out  especially  clearly  in  Firestone's  work.  According  to  her,  the 
biological  difference  between  women  and  men  is  at  the  root  of 
women's  oppression.  It  is  woman's  body — in  particular,  our  body's 


Race  &  Gender/51 


capacity  to  bear  children — that  makes,  or  makes  possible,  the 
oppression  of  women  by  men.  Hence  we  must  disassociate  ourselves 
from  our  bodies — most  radically — by  making  it  possible,  or  even 
necessary,  to  conceive  and  bear  children  outside  the  womb,  and  by 
otherwise  generally  disassociating  our  lives  from  the  thankless  tasks 
associated  with  the  body.43 

In  predicating  women's  liberation  on  such  disassociation  from  our 
bodies,  Firestone  oddly  enough  joins  the  chorus  of  male  voices  that 
has  told  us  over  the  centuries  about  the  disappointments  entailed  in 
being  embodied  creatures.  What  might  be  called  somatophobia  (fear 
of  and  disdain  for  the  body)  is  part  of  a  centuries-long  tradition  in 
Western  culture.  As  de  Beauvoir  so  thoroughly  described  it  in  The 
Second  Sex,  the  responsibility  for  being  embodied  creatures  has  been 
assigned  to  women:  we  have  been  associated,  indeed  virtually 
identified,  with  the  bodily;  men  (or  some  men)  have  been  associated 
and  virtually  identified  with  the  mental.  Women  have  been  portrayed 
as  embodying  the  human  characteristic  of  being  embodied  in  a  way 
men  have  not.  It  is  as  if  women  essentially,  men  only  accidentally,  have 
bodies.  It  seems  to  me  that  Firestone's  (and  Friedan's  and  de 
Beauvoir's)  prescription  for  women's  liberation  does  not  challenge  the 
negative  attitude  towards  the  body;  it  only  hopes  to  end  the 
association  between  the  body,  so  negatively  characterized,  and 
women. 

I  bring  up  the  presence  of  somatophobia  in  the  work  of  Firestone 
and  others  because  I  think  it  is  a  force  that  contributes  to  white 
solipsism  in  feminist  thought,  in  at  least  three  related  ways. 

First,  insofar  as  feminists  do  not  examine  somatophobia,  but 
actually  accept  it  and  embrace  it  in  prescriptions  for  women's 
liberation,  we  will  not  be  examining  what  often  has  been  an  important 
element  in  racist  thinking.  For  the  superiority  of  men  to  women  is  not 
the  only  hierarchical  relationship  that  has  been  linked  to  the 
superiority  of  the  mind  to  the  body.  Certain  kinds,  or  "races,"  of 
people  have  been  held  to  be  more  body-like  than  others,  and  this  has 
been  meant  as  more  animal-like  and  less  god-like. 

For  example,  in  The  White  Man's  Burden,  Winthrop  Jordan 
describes  ways  in  which  white  Englishmen  portrayed  black  Africans  as 
beastly,  dirty,  highly  sexed  beings.44  Lillian  Smith  tells  us  in  Killers  of 
the  Dream  how  closely  run  together  were  her  lessons  about  the  evil  of 
the  body  and  the  evil  of  blacks.45 

Derogatory  stereotypes  of  blacks  versus  whites  (as  well  as  of 
manual  workers  versus  intellectuals)  have  been  very  similar  to  the 


52/Quest 


derogatory  stereotypes  of  women  versus  men.  Indeed,  the  grounds  on 
which  Plato  ridiculed  women  were  so  similar  to  those  on  which  he 
ridiculed  slaves,  beasts  and  children  that  he  typically  ridiculed  them  in 
one  breath.  He  also  thought  it  sufficient  ridicule  of  one  such  group  to 
accuse  it  of  being  like  another  (women  are  like  slaves,  slaves  are  like 
children,  etc.).46  Aristotle's  defense  of  his  claim  about  the  inferiority  of 
women  to  men  in  the  Politics  is  almost  the  same  as  his  defense  of  the 
view  that  some  people  are  meant  to  be  slaves.47  (Aristotle  did  not 
identify  what  he  called  the  natural  class  of  slaves  by  skin  color,  but  he 
says  that  identifying  that  class  would  be  much  easier  if  there  were 
readily  available  physical  characteristics  by  which  one  could  do  that.) 
Neither  in  women  nor  in  slaves  does  the  rational  element  work  the 
way  it  ought  to.  Hence  women  and  slaves  are,  though  in 
different  ways,  to  attend  to  the  physical  needs  of  the 
men/masters/intellectuals. 

So  we  need  to  examine  and  understand  somatophobia  and  look 
for  it  in  our  own  thinking,  for  the  idea  that  the  work  of  the  body  and 
for  the  body  has  no  part  in  real  human  dignity  has  been  part  of  racist 
as  well  as  sexist  ideology.  That  is,  oppressive  stereotypes  of  "inferior 
races"  and  of  women  have  typically  involved  images  of  their  lives  as 
determined  by  basic  bodily  functions  (sex,  reproduction,  appetite, 
secretions  and  excretions)  and  as  given  over  to  attending  to  the  bodily 
functions  of  others  (feeding,  washing,  cleaning,  doing  the  "dirty 
work").  Superior  groups,  we  have  been  told  from  Plato  on  down,  have 
better  things  to  do  with  their  lives.  As  Hannah  Arendt  has  pointed  out, 
the  position  of  women  and  slaves  has  been  directly  tied  to  the  notion 
that  their  lives  are  to  be  devoted  to  taking  care  of  bodily  functions.48  It 
certainly  does  not  follow  from  the  presence  of  somatophobia  in  a 
person's  writings  that  she  or  he  is  a  racist  or  a  sexist.  But  somatophobia 
historically  has  been  symptomatic  of  sexist  and  racist  (as  well  as  classist) 
attitudes. 

Human  groups  know  that  the  work  of  the  body  and  for  the  body 
is  necessary  for  human  existence,  and  they  make  provisions  for  that 
fact.  And  so  even  when  a  group  views  its  liberation  in  terms  of  being 
free  of  association  with,  or  responsibility  for,  bodily  tasks,  explicitly  or 
implicitly,  its  own  liberation  may  be  predicated  on  the  oppression  of 
other  groups — those  assigned  to  do  the  body  work.  For  example,  if 
feminists  decide  that  women  are  not  going  to  be  relegated  to  doing 
such  work,  who  do  we  think  is  going  to  do  it?  Have  we  attended  to  the 
role  that  racism  (and  classism)  historically  has  played  in  settling  that 
question? 


Race  &  Gender/53 


Finally,  If  one  thinks — as  de  Beauvoir,  Friedan  and  Firestone  do — 
that  the  liberation  of  women  requires  abstracting  the  notion  of  woman 
from  the  notion  of  woman's  body,  then  one  perhaps  also  will  think 
that  the  liberation  of  blacks  requires  abstracting  the  notion  of  a  black 
person  from  the  notion  of  a  black  body.  Since  the  body  is  thought  to 
be  the  culprit  (or  anyway  certain  aspects  of  the  body  are  thought  to  be 
the  culprits),  the  solution  may  seem  to  be:  keep  the  person  and  leave 
the  occasion  for  oppression  behind.  Keep  the  woman,  somehow,  but 
leave  behind  her  woman's  body;  keep  the  black  person  but  leave  the 
blackness  behind.  Since  some  feminists  have  been  tempted  to  do  the 
first  when  thinking  about  women's  liberation,  some  may  be  tempted 
to  do  the  second  when  thinking  about  black  liberation.  Once  the 
move  is  attempted  to  think  about  oneself  not  in  terms  of  having  a 
body,  then  one  not  only  will  not  think  in  terms  of  characteristics  such 
as  womb,  breast,  etc.,  but  also  not  in  terms  of  skin,  hair,  etc.  We  would 
expect  to  find  that  any  feminist  theory  based  in  part  on  a  disembodied 
view  of  human  identity  would  regard  blackness  (or  any  other  physical 
characteristic  which  one  might  use  as  a  post  for  centering  one's 
identity)  as  of  temporary  and  negative  importance. 

Once  the  concept  of  woman  is  divorced  from  the  concept  of 
woman's  body,  conceptual  room  is  made  for  the  idea  of  a  woman  who 
is  no  particular  historical  woman — she  has  no  color,  no  accent,  no 
particular  characteristics  that  require  having  a  body.  She  is  somehow 
all  and  only  woman;  that  is  her  only  identifying  feature.  And  so  it  will 
seem  inappropriate  or  beside  the  point  to  think  of  women  in  terms  of 
any  physical  characteristics,  especially  if  it  has  been  in  the  name  of 
such  characteristics  that  oppression  has  been  rationalized. 

None  of  this  is  to  say  that  the  historical  and  cultural  identity  of 
being  black  or  white  is  the  same  thing  as,  or  is  reducible  to,  the 
physical  feature  of  having  black  or  white  skin.  Historical  and  cultural 
identity  is  not  constituted  by  having  a  body  with  particular  identifying 
features,  but  it  is  impossible  without  such  features  and  the  significance 
attached  to  them. 

Rich  on  Embodiment 

There  is,  I  think,  some  concrete  evidence  that  my  suggestions 
about  links  among  somatophobia,  feminist  theory  and  racism  point  to 
real  connections.  Adrienne  Rich  is  perhaps  the  only  well-known  white 
feminist  to  have  noted  "white  solipsism"  in  feminist  theorizing  and 
activity.  I  think  it  is  no  coincidence  that  she  also  noticed  and  attended 

54/Quest 


to  the  strong  strain  of  somatophobia  in  feminist  theory.  Of  Woman 
Born49  updates  the  connection  between  somatophobia  and 
misogyny/gynephobia  which  Simone  de  Beauvoir  described  at  such 
length  in  The  Second  Sex.  But,  unlike  de  Beauvoir  (and  Firestone), 
Rich  refuses  to  throw  out  the  baby  with  the  bathwater:  she  sees  that 
the  historical  negative  connection  between  woman  and  body  (in 
particular,  between  woman  and  womb)  can  be  broken  in  more  than 
one  way.  Both  de  Beauvoir  and  Firestone  wanted  to  break  it  by 
insisting  that  women  need  be  no  more  connected — in  thought  or 
deed — with  the  body  than  men  have  been.  De  Beauvoir  and  Firestone 
more  or  less  are  in  agreement,  with  the  patriarchal  cultural  history 
they  otherwise  question,  that  embodiment  is  a  drag.  Rich,  however, 
insists  that  the  negative  connection  between  woman  and  body  be 
broken  along  other  lines.  She  asks  us  to  think  about  whether  what  she 
calls  "flesh-loathing"  is  the  only  attitude  it  is  possible  to  have  toward 
our  bodies.  Just  as  she  explicitly  distinguishes  between  motherhood  as 
experience  and  motherhood  as  institution,  so  she  implicitly  asks  us  to 
distinguish  between  embodiment  as  experience  and  embodiment  as 
institution.  Flesh-loathing  is  part  of  the  well-entrenched  beliefs,  habits 
and  practices  epitomized  in  the  treatment  of  pregnancy  as  a  disease. 
But  we  need  not  experience  our  flesh,  our  body,  as  loathsome. 

As  noted  at  the  beginning  of  this  essay,  Rich  has  remarked  upon 
what  she  describes  as  "white  solipsism,"  and  she  does  not  pretend  that 
white  feminists  have  been  free  from  it.  And  as  we  have  seen  earlier, 
one  of  the  main  forms  of  such  solipsism  in  feminist  theorizing  has 
been  the  ignoring  or  distorting  of  the  ways  in  which  black  women's 
experiences  of  oppression  are  different  from  white  women's.  I  think  it 
is  not  a  psychological  or  historical  accident  that  having  reflected  so 
thoroughly  on  flesh-loathing,  Rich  focused  on  the  failure  of  white 
women  to  see  black  women's  experiences  as  different  from  their  own. 
For  looking  at  embodiment  is  one  way  (though  not  the  only  one)  of 
coming  to  note  and  understand  the  particularity  of  experience. 
Without  bodies  we  could  not  have  personal  histories,  for  without  them 
we  would  not  live  at  a  particular  time  nor  in  a  particular  place. 
Moreover,  without  them  we  could  not  be  identified  as  woman  or  man, 
black  or  white.  This  is  not  to  say  that  reference  to  publicly  observable 
bodily  characteristics  settles  the  question  of  whether  someone  is 
woman  or  man,  black  or  white;  nor  is  it  to  say  that  being  woman  or 
man,  black  or  white,  just  means  having  certain  bodily  characteristics. 
But  different  meanings  are  attached  to  having  those  characteristics,  in 
different  places  and  at  different  times  and  by  different  people,  and 
those  differences  make  a  huge  difference  in  the  kinds  of  lives  we  lead 

Race  &  Gender/55 


or  experiences  we  have.  Women's  oppression  has  been  linked  to  the 
meanings  assigned  to  having  a  woman's  body  by  male  oppressors. 
Blacks'  oppression  has  been  linked  to  the  meanings  assigned  to  having 
a  black  body  by  white  oppressors.  We  cannot  hope  to  understand  the 
meaning  of  a  person's  experiences,  including  her  experiences  of 
oppression,  without  first  thinking  of  her  as  embodied,  and  second 
thinking  about  the  particular  meanings  assigned  to  that  embodiment. 
If,  because  of  somatophobia,  we  think  and  write  as  if  we  are  not 
embodied,  or  as  if  we  would  be  better  off  if  we  were  not  embodied, 
we  are  likely  to  ignore  the  ways  in  which  different  forms  of 
embodiment  are  correlated  with  different  kinds  of  experience. 

That  is  why  it  does  not  appear  to  be  merely  an  accident  that 
having  paid  such  close  attention  to  the  meaning  of  embodiment,  Rich 
asks  us  to  reflect  on  the  culturally  assigned  differences  between  having 
a  black  or  white  body,  as  well  as  on  the  differences  between  having 
the  body  of  a  woman  or  a  man.  Other  feminists  have  reflected  on  the 
meaning  of  embodiment  and  recognized  the  connection  between 
flesh-loathing  and  woman-hatred,  but  they  have  only  considered  it  far 
enough  to  try  to  divorce  the  concept  of  woman  from  the  concept  of 
the  flesh.  In  effect,  they  have  insisted  that  having  different  bodies  does 
not  or  need  not  mean  men  and  women  are  any  different  as  humans; 
and  having  said  that,  they  imply  that  having  different  colored  bodies 
does  not  mean  black  and  white  women  are  any  different.  Such 
statements  are  fine  if  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  differences  between 
woman  and  man,  black  and  white,  should  not  be  used  against  black 
and  white  women  and  black  men.  But  such  statements  support  "male 
solipsism"  and  "white  solipsism"  insofar  as  they  obscure  the  historical 
differences  between  the  experiences  of  women  and  men,  and  those 
between  blacks  and  whites.  Not  paying  attention  to  embodiment  and 
to  the  cultural  meanings  assigned  to  different  forms  of  it  is  to 
encourage  sex-blindness  and  color-blindness.  Such  blindnesses  are 
vicious  when  they  are  used  to  support  the  idea  that  all  experience  is 
male  experience  or  that  all  experience  is  white  experience.  Rich  does 
not  run  away  from  the  fact  that  women  have  bodies,  nor  does  she  wish 
that  women's  bodies  were  not  so  different  from  men's.  That  healthy 
regard  for  the  ground  of  our  differences  from  men  is  logically 
connected — though  of  course  does  not  ensure — to  a  healthy  regard 
for  the  ground  of  the  differences  between  black  women  and  white 
women. 


56/Quest 


"Colorblindness" .  .  .  implies  that  I  would  look  at  a 
black  woman  and  see  her  as  white,  thus  engaging  in  white 
solipsism  to  the  utter  erasure  of  her  particular  reality.50 

This  denies  the  particularity  of  the  black  woman  and  rules  out  the 
possibility  both  that  her  history  has  been  different  and  that  her  future 
might  be  different  in  any  significant  way  from  the  white  woman's. 

Conclusion 

In  this  essay  I  have  been  discussing  the  ways  in  which  some 
aspects  of  feminist  theory  exhibit  what  Adrienne  Rich  has  called 
"white  solipsism/'  In  particular,  I  have  been  examining  ways  in  which 
some  prominent  claims  about  the  relation  between  sexism  and  racism 
ignore  the  realities  of  racism.  I  have  also  suggested  that  there  are  ways 
of  thinking  about  women's  oppression  and  about  women's  liberation 
that  reflect  and  encourage  white  solipsism,  but  that  thinking 
differently  about  women  and  about  sexism  might  lead  to  thinking 
differently  about  blackness  and  about  racism.  I  will  now  summarize 
these  suggestions: 

First,  we  have  to  continue  to  re-examine  the  traditions  (and  in  this 
paper  I  have  focused  in  particular  on  conceptual  traditions)  which 
reinforce  sexism  and  racism.  Though  feminist  theory  has  recognized 
the  connection  between  somatophobia  and  misogyny/gynephobia,  it 
has  tended  to  challenge  the  misogyny  without  challenging  the 
somatophobia,  and  without  fully  appreciating  the  connection  between 
somatophobia  and  racism. 

Second,  we  have  to  keep  a  cautious  eye  on  discussions  of  racism 
versus  sexism.  They  keep  us  from  seeing  ways  in  which  what  sexism 
means  and  how  it  works  is  modulated  by  racism,  and  ways  in  which 
what  racism  means  and  how  it  works  is  modulated  by  sexism.  Most 
importantly,  discussions  of  sexism  versus  racism  tend  to  proceed  as  if 
black  women  did  not  exist.  None  of  this  is  to  say  that  sexism  and 
racism  are  indistinguishable.  Some  political  and  social  changes  may 
point  to  the  conclusion  that  some  aspects  of  racism  will  disappear 
sooner  than  some  aspects  of  sexism  (see,  for  example,  the  statistics 
Diane  Lewis  cites  in  "A  Response  to  Inequality:  Black  Women,  Racism, 
and  Sexism"51).  Other  changes  may  point  to  the  conclusion  that  some 
aspects  of  sexism  will  disappear  sooner  than  some  aspects  of  racism 


Race  &  Gender/57 


(e.g.,  scepticism  about  the  possible  effects  of  passage  of  the  ERA  on 
the  lives  of  black  women  in  the  ghetto).  And  there  undoubtedly 
already  is  disagreement  about  when  certain  changes  should  be  seen  as 
making  any  dent  in  sexism  or  racism  at  all.  But  as  long  as  black  women 
and  other  women  of  color  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  economic  heap, 
(which  clearly  we  cannot  fully  understand  in  the  absence  of  a  class 
analysis),  and  as  long  as  our  descriptions  of  sexism  and  racism 
themselves  reveal  racist  and  sexist  perspectives,  it  seems  both 
empirically  and  conceptually  premature  to  make  grand  claims  about 
whether  sexism  or  racism  is  "more  fundamental."  For  many  reasons, 
then,  it  seems  wise  to  proceed  very  cautiously  in  this  inquiry. 

Third,  it  is  crucial  to  sustain  a  lively  regard  for  the  variety  of 
women's  experiences.  On  the  one  hand,  what  unifies  women  and 
justifies  us  in  talking  about  the  oppression  of  women  is  the 
overwhelming  worldwide  historical  evidence  of  the  subordination  of 
women  to  men.  On  the  other,  while  it  is  possible  for  us  to  speak  about 
women  in  a  general  way,  it  also  is  inevitable  that  any  statement  we 
make  about  women  in  some  particular  place  at  some  particular  time  is 
bound  to  suffer  from  ethnocentrism  if  we  try  to  claim  for  it  more 
generality  than  it  has.  So,  for  example,  to  say  that  the  image  of  woman 
as  frail  and  dependent  is  oppressive  is  certainly  true.  But  it  is 
oppressive  to  white  women  in  the  United  States  in  quite  a  different 
way  than  it  is  oppressive  to  black  women,  for  the  sexism  black  women 
experience  is  in  the  context  of  their  experience  of  racism.  The  causes 
and  consequences  of  Pecola's  longing  to  have  blue  eyes,  in  Toni 
Morrison's  The  Bluest  Eye,52  are  surely  quite  different  from  the  causes 
and  consequences  of  a  white  girl  with  brown  eyes  having  a  similar 
desire.  More  to  the  point,  the  consequences  of  not  having  blue  eyes 
are  quite  different  for  the  two.  The  family  may  be  the  locus  of 
oppression  for  white  middle-class  women,  but  to  claim 
that  it  is  the  locus  of  oppression  for  all  women  is  to  ignore  the  fact  that 
for  blacks  in  America  the  family  has  been  a  source  of  resistance  against 
white  oppression.53 

In  short,  the  claim  that  all  women  are  oppressed  is  fully 
compatible  with,  and  needs  to  be  explicated  in  terms  of,  the  many 
varieties  of  oppression  different  populations  of  women  have  been 
subject  to.  After  all,  why  should  oppressors  settle  for  uniform  kinds  of 
oppression,  when  to  oppress  their  victims  in  many  different  ways — 
consciously  or  unconsciously — makes  it  more  likely  that  the  oppressed 
groups  will  not  see  other  forms  of  oppression,  and  hence  not  perceive 
it  in  their  interest  to  work  together  with  those  other  groups  against  a 

58/Quest 


common  system  of  oppression? 

Finally,  it  is  crucial  not  to  see  blackness  only  as  the  occasion  for 
oppression — any  more  than  one  sees  being  a  woman  only  as  the 
occasion  for  oppression.  No  one  ought  to  expect  the  forms  of  our 
liberation  to  be  any  less  various  than  the  forms  of  our  oppression.  We 
need  to  be  at  least  generous  in  imagining  what  women's  liberation  will 
be  like  as  our  oppressors  are  and  have  been  in  devising  what  women's 
oppression  has  been. 


Notes 


1  See  Eleanor  Flexner,  Century  of  Struggle  (New  York:  Atheneum,  1972),  especially 
Chapter  XIII,  on  the  inhospitality  of  white  women's  organizations  to  black  women,  as 
well  as  Aileen  S.  Kraditor's  The  Ideas  of  the  Woman  Suffrage  Movement  1890-1920 
(Garden  City,  N.Y.:  Doubleday,  1971),  and  Ellen  Carol  DuBois,  Feminism  and  Suffrage 
(Ithaca:  Cornell  University  Press,  1978);  Sara  Evans,  Personal  Politics  (New  York:  Vintage, 
1979),  on  sexism  in  the  civil  rights  movement;  Dorothy  Sterling,  Black  Foremothers  (Old 
Westbury,  N.Y.:  Feminist  Press,  1979),  p.  147,  on  Alice  Paul's  refusal  to  grant  Mary  Church 
Terrell's  request  that  Paul  endorse  enforcement  of  the  19th  Amendment  for  all  women. 

2  Adrienne  Rich,  "Disloyal  to  Civilization:  Feminism,  Racism,  Gynephobia,"  On  Lies, 
Secrets  and  Silence  (New  York:  Norton,  1979),  pp.  299  and  passim.  In  the  philosophical 
literature,  solipsism  is  the  view  according  to  which  it  is  only  one's  self  which  is 
knowable,  and/or  it  is  only  one's  self  which  constitutes  the  world.  Strictly  speaking,  of 
course,  Rich's  use  of  the  phrase  "white  solipsism"  is  at  odds  with  the  idea  of  there  being 
only  the  self,  insofar  as  it  implies  that  there  are  other  white  people;  but  she  is  drawing 
from  the  idea  of  there  being  only  one  perspective  on  the  world — not  that  of  one  person, 
but  of  one  "race."  (For  further  comment  on  the  concept  of  race,  see  references  in  note 
28  below). 

3  Rich,  p.  306. 

4  Audre  Lorde,  "Man  Child:  A  Black  Lesbian  Feminist's  Response,"  Conditions  4  (1979), 
p.  35. 

5  Margaret  A.  Simons,  "Racism  and  Feminism:  A  Schism  in  the  Sisterhood,"  Feminist 
Studies  5:  2  (Summer  1979),  pp.  384-401. 

6  Richard  A.  Wasserstrom,  "Racism  and  Sexism,"  Philosophy  and  Women,  ed.  Sharon 
Bishop  and  Marjorie  Weinzweig  (Belmont,  Calif.:  Wadsworth,  1979),  pp.  5-20.  Reprinted 
from  "Racism,  Sexism  and  Preferential  Treatment:  An  Approach  to  the  Topics,"  UCLA 
Law  Rev/ew(February  1977),  pp.  581-615.  Laurence  Thomas,  "Sexism  and  Racism:  Some 
Conceptual  Differences,"  Ethics  90  (January  1980),  pp.  239-250. 


Race  &  Gender/59 


7  A  somewhat  similar  list  appears  in  the  editors'  introduction  to  Part  II  of  Feminist 
Frameworks,  ed.  Alison  M.  Jaggar  and  Paula  Rothenberg  Struhl  (New  York:  McGraw-HII, 
1978),  pp.  83-84. 

8  Wasserstrom,  pp.  5-20. 
^  Wasserstrom,  p.  8. 

10  Wasserstrom,  p.  8. 

11  Thomas,  pp.  239-250. 

12  I  shall  here  leave  aside  the  questions  of  whether  Thomas  succeeds  in  offering  a 
description  of  anything  which  is  both  a  description  of  sexism  and  also  a  description  of 
something  which  is  not  morally  objectionable  (see  B.C.  Postow's  reply  to  Thomas, 
"Thomas  on  Sexism,"  Fthics  90  (January  1980),  pp.  251-256.  I  shall  also  leave  aside  the 
question  of  to  whom  such  a  description  is  or  is  not  morally  objectionable,  as  well  as  the 
question  of  the  criteria  according  to  which  its  moral  objectionableness  is  measured. 

13  Thomas,  pp.  239-250. 

14  Thomas,  p.  247. 

15  Thomas  says  that  "one  very  important  reason"  for  this  lack  of  analogy  is  that  racial 
identity,  unlike  sexual  identity,  is  "more  or  less  settled  by  biological  considerations" 
(p. 248).  If  Thomas  means  by  this  that  there  are  such  things  as  "races,"  and  that  the 
question  of  what  race  one  belongs  to  is  settled  by  biology,  one  must  point  out  in  reply 
that  it  is  far  from  clear  that  this  is  so.  See  Ashley  Montagu,  "The  Concept  of  Race," 
American  Anthropologist,  64:  5  (Part  I),  1962,  reprinted  in  Anthropology:  Contemporary 
Perspectives,  ed.  David  E.  Hunter  and  Philip  Whitten  (Boston:  Little,  Brown  and  Co., 
1975),  pp.  83-95;  Frank  B.  Livingstone,  "On  the  Nonexistence  of  Human  Races,"  The 
Concept  of  Race,  ed.  Ashley  Montagu  (New  York:  Collier,  1964)  and  reprinted  in  Hunter 
and  Whitten.  The  existence  of  racism  does  not  require  that  there  are  races;  it  requires 
the  belief  that  there  are  races. 

16  Philosophical  Forum,  9:  2-3  (Winter/Spring  1977-78),  p.  113. 

17  See  Carol  Christ  and  Judith  Plaskow  Goldenberg,  "For  the  Advancement  of  My 
Career:  A  Form  Critical  Study  in  the  Art  of  Acknowledgement,"  Bulletin  of  the  Council 
for  Religious  Studies  (June  1972),  for  a  marvelous  study  of  the  literary  form  of  the 
"acknowledgment  to  the  wife."  See  also  the  gruesomely  delightful  "Collecting  Scholar's 
Wives,"  by  Marilyn  Hoder-Salmon,  Feminist  Studies  4:3,  pp.  107-114. 

18  Thomas,  pp.  242-243. 

''  Linda  Brent,  "The  Trials  of  Girlhood,"  Root  of  Bitterness,  ed.  Nancy  F.  Cott  (New 
York:  Dutton,  1972),  p.  201. 

20  Angela  Y.  Davis,  "Reflections  on  the  Black  Woman's  Role  in  the  Community  of 
Slaves,"  The  Black  Scholar  (December  1971),  p.  7. 


60/Quest 


21  Barbara  Smith,  "Notes  For  Yet  Another  Paper  on  Black  Feminism,  or  Will  the  Real 
Enemy  Please  Stand  Up,"  Conditions  5,  pp.  123-132.  See  also,  "The  Combahee  River 
Collective  Statement,"  Capitalist  Patriarchy  and  the  Case  for  Socialist  Feminism,  ed. 
Zillah  Eisenstein  (New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press,  1979)  pp.  362-372. 

22Gerda  Lerner,  ed.  Black  Woman  in  White  America  (New  York:  Vintage,  1973),  p.  15. 

23  Davis,  p.  7. 

24  Mary  Daly,  Beyond  God  the  Father  (Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1975),  pp.  56-57. 

25  Daly,  pp.  56-57,  emphasis  added. 

2°  Nikki  Giovanni,  "Nikki  Rosa,"  The  Black  Woman,  ed.  Toni  Cade  (New  York:  New 
American  Library,  1980),  p.  16. 

27  Paule  Marshall,  "Reena,"  Cade,  p.  28. 

28  Pat  Parker,  Womanslaughter  (Oakland:  Diana  Press,  1978),  p.  13. 

29  Kate  Millett,  Sexual  Politics  (New  York:  Ballantine,  1969),  pp.  33-34. 

30  Simons,  pp.  384-401.  Also  see  Elly  Bulkin,  "Racism  and  Writing:  Some  Implications  for 
White  Lesbian  Critics,"  Sinister  Wisdom  13  (Spring  1980),  pp.  3-22. 

31  Millett,  pp.  33-34. 

32  Millett,  pp.  33-34. 

33  Elizabeth  F.  Hood,  "Black  Women,  White  Women:  Separate  Paths  to  Liberation,"  The 
Black  Scholar  (April  1978)  p.  47. 

34Shulamith  Firestone,  The  Dialectic  of  Sex  (New  York:  Bantam,  1970),  p.  108. 

35  Firestone,  pp.  117-118. 

36  Firestone,  p.  115.  Emphasis  in  the  original. 

37  Firestone,  p.  116. 

JO  E.V.  Spelman,  "Woman  as  Body:  Ancient  and  Contemporary  Views,"  forthcoming  in 
Feminist  Studies. 

39Simone  de  Beauvoir,  7"he  Second  Sex  (New  York:  Knopf,  1952),  p.  xiii. 

40  de  Beauvoir,  p.  57. 

41  de  Beauvoir,  p.  119. 

42  Betty  Friedan,  The  Feminine  Mystique  (New  York:  Norton,  1963),  pp.  247-277. 

43  Firestone,  Chapter  10. 


Race  &  Gender/61 


44  Winthrop  P.  Jordan,  The  White  Man's  Burden  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press, 
1974),  Chapter  1. 

45  Lillian  Smith,  Killers  of  the  Dream  (New  York:  Norton,  1978),  pp.  83-98. 

4^  Plato,  Republic  431  b-c,  557c;  Theaetetus  171e;  and  passim,  in  Collected  Dialogues  of 
Plato,  eds.  Edith  Hamilton  and  Huntington  Cairns  (New  York:  Pantheon,  1963). 

47  Aristotle,  Politics,  Book  I,  Basic  Works  of  Aristotle,  ed.  Richard  McKeon  (New  York: 
Random  House,  1941). 

48  Hannah  Arendt,  The  Human  Condition  (Garden  City,  N.Y.:  Doubleday,  1959),  p.  64. 

49  Adrienne  Rich,  Of  Woman  Born  (New  York:  Norton,  1976). 

50  Rich,  "Disloyal  to  Civilization,"  p.  300. 

51  Signs,  3:2  (1977),  pp.  339-361. 

52Toni  Morrison,  The  Bluest  Eye  (New  York:  Pocketbooks,  1972). 

53  See  for  example,  Carol  Stack,  All  Our  Kin  (New  York:  Harper  and  Row,  1974). 

Acknowledgement 

Many  thanks  to  Barbara  Johnson,  Martha  Ackelsberg,  Jean  Grossholtz, 
Marcia  Yudkin,  Linda  Nicolson,  Richard  Schmitt,  Lisa  Hoogstra,  and 
Jackie  MacMillan  for  helpful  criticisms  and  suggestions. 


Elizabeth  V.  (Vicky)  Spelman  has  lived  and  worked  in  Western 
Massachusetts  since  1973.  She  is  currently  teaching  in  the  philosophy 
department  at  Carleton  College  in  Northfield  Minnesota  (1981-82). 
Beginning  in  the  fall  of  1982  she  will  be  teaching  at  Smith  College  in 
Northampton,  Massachusetts.  She  welcomes  correspondence  in 
response  to  her  article. 


62/Quest 


The 

Women's  Movement 
and  Apartheid 
in  South  Africa 

by  Victoria  Snudge 

Infamous  world-over  for  its  racist  apartheid  policy,  South  Africa 
presents  a  complex  political  framework  for  activists,  including 
feminists,  to  work  in.  Although  this  framework  goes  far  beyond  the 
level  of  race,  an  understanding  of  apartheid  and  its  effects  is  necessary 
to  any  understanding  of  the  problems  encountered  by  feminists  in 
South  Africa. 

Under  apartheid,  schools  are  separated,  with  black  schools 
receiving  a  far  lower  government  subsidy  than  white  schools. 
Apartheid  means  separation  into  "Group  Areas/'  and  black  people 
being  evicted  from  homes  they  have  been  in  for  generations,  and 
moved  to  areas  as  far  as  40  km  from  their  workplaces,  while  their 
previous  homes  are  "gentrified"  and  taken  over  by  whites.  It  means 
control  and  regimentation  of  the  major  labor  force  in  the  country — 
blacks — through  influx  control  of  migrant  workers  into  the  central 
industrial  areas  and  resettlement  of  their  families  in  places  foreign  to 
them  and  unable  to  sustain  them.  In  fact,  in  South  Africa,  blacks 
experience  oppression  as  much  as  workers  as  they  do  on  the  basis  of 
their  color. 

The  separate  schooling  system  was  deliberately  designed  to 
educate  white  children  for  their  future  leadership  positions  in  the 
country,  while  black  children  were,  and  still  are,  trained  to  do  the 
menial,  low-paid  manual  work.  While  black  people  make  up  more 
than  three  quarters  of  the  workforce,  they  get  only  a  quarter  of  the 
income.  Most  black  African  workers  in  the  urban  areas  are  there 
"temporarily,"  even  if  they  were  born  and  educated  there.  (However, 
realising  the  impossibility  of  the  old  dream  of  shipping  all  the  blacks 
back  to  the  homelands  in  order  to  leave  the  rest  of  South  Africa  white, 

The  Women's  Movement  and  Apartheid  in  South  Africa/63 


64/Quest 


the  government  has  acknowledged  the  "problem"  of  the  urban 
blacks.)  The  black  reserves,  or  "homelands/7  several  of  which  have 
opted  for  "independence"  (Transkei,  Lebowe,  Bophutatswana),  serve 
as  reservoirs  of  cheap  labor.  Strict  influx  regulations  attempt  to  ensure 
that  black  men  spend  periods  of  time  working  in  white-controlled 
industries  before  returning  to  the  reserves,  while  black  women  are  to 
be  kept  there,  as  they  have  no  role  to  play  in  labor. 

The  realities  of  the  situation — the  poor  quality  of  the  land  in  the 
reserves,  with  not  enough  to  provide  subsistence,  the  limited 
opportunity  for  employment  in  these  areas,  the  breakdown  in  the 
traditional  lifestyle  brought  about  by  the  loss  of  lands  through 
colonization,  the  migration  of  the  men,  the  growth  of  the  towns— have 
meant  that  there  is  a  large  body  of  black  people  permanently  settled  in 
the  white  urban  areas,  many  of  them  "illegally."  All  black  people  are 
required  to  carry  passes,  which  restrict  their  movement  through  the 
country  and  determine  how  and  where  they  may  live  and  be 
employed.  Until  recently,  black  workers  could  not  move  above 
unskilled  labor  status  because  of  job  reservation,  a  system  that  kept  the 
better-paid,  more  responsible  and  authoritative  jobs  for  white 
workers.  With  the  growing  need  for  more  skilled  workers,  the 
government  has  been  forced  to  open  up  areas  to  blacks. 

On  a  personal  level,  most  Africans  are  separated  from  their 
families.  Wives  may  not  visit  their  husbands  in  the  cities  without 
permission,  and  domestic  workers,  mostly  female,  may  not  have  their 
children,  husbands,  boyfriends  or  friends  staying  with  them  in  the  little 
rooms  they  have  at  the  end  of  their  employers'  backyards.  Black 
African  women  suffer  further  from  misinterpretation  by  colonialists  of 
traditional  tribal  law,  so  that,  by  law,  they  are  placed  under  male 
guardianship  all  their  lives,  and  may  not  leave  their  homes  or  seek 
employment  without  the  consent  of  their  guardians.  They  have  limited 
rights  to  own  property,  cannot  sign  contracts  or  institute  legal 
proceedings  without  the  assistance  of  their  guardians  and  cannot 
automatically  inherit  their  husbands'  estates  unless  a  will  is  made 
specifying  this. 

How  does  the  government  attempt  to  deal  with  the  more  patently 
unfair  manifestations  of  this  system?  The  prime  minister  P.  W.  Botha  is 
making  motions  designed  to  appease  Western  criticism  of  his 
government's  policies  (such  as  allowing  restaurants  and  hotels  to  admit 
blacks  and  whites  at  their  own  discretion),  yet  the  underlying  structure 
that  denies  blacks  political,  economic  and  social  rights  remains  intact. 
For  the  mass  of  black  South  Africans,  permission  to  enter  white 


South  Africa/65 


amenities  is  meaningless.  Besides  the  fact  that  their  very  low  incomes 
preclude  them  from  doing  so,  the  real  issues  go  far  beyond  such 
cosmetic  changes,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  arena  of  gender  politics: 
demands  for  more  women  in  top  government,  equal  pay  for  equal 
work  and  anti-sex  discrimination  laws  would  make  little  difference  to 
the  lives  of  most  women  in  the  country  if  these  demands  were  to  be 
met  without  overall  change. 

The  resistance  to  apartheid  in  South  Africa  has  been  strong,  and 
women  have  been  a  powerful  force  from  the  beginning.  The  main 
nationalist  movement — the  mostly  black,  banned,  left-leaning  African 
National  Congress  (ANC,  founded  1912)— includes  an  ANC  Women's 
League,  with  thousands  of  members.  Together  with  the  Federation  of 
South  African  Women  (FSAW,  mostly  black,  i.e.,  black  African, 
colored,  and  Indian,  but  with  some  white  members),  the  ANC  was  a 
strident  force  in  various  campaigns,  such  as  the  one  to  protest  against 
passes  that  took  up  most  of  this  century.  Included  in  the  demands  of 
these  organizations  were  demands  for  the  rights  of  women. 

The  FSAW,  which  was  initiated  in  the  early  1950s,  had  as  one  of  its 
aims  the  provision  of  an  organization  that  would  express  the  needs 
and  aspirations  of  housewives,  wage  earners,  peasants  and  professional 
women  of  South  Africa.  A  manifesto  from  the  1950s  declared:  "The 
level  of  civilization  which  any  society  has  reached  can  be  measured  by 
the  degree  of  freedom  that  its  members  enjoy.  The  status  of  women  is 
a  test  of  civilization.  Measured  by  that  standard,  South  Africa  must  be 
considered  low  in  the  scale  of  civilized  nations/'  While  stressing  that 
they  did  not  form  a  society  separate  from  men,  and  would  stand 
"shoulder  to  shoulder"  with  them  in  the  struggle  for  liberation,  the 
women  of  FSAW  were  also  determined  to  "teach  the  men  that  they 
cannot  hope  to  liberate  themselves  from  the  evils  of  discrimination 
and  prejudices  as  long  as  they  fail  to  extend  to  women  complete  and 
unqualified  equality  in  law  and  practice."  To  this  purpose,  they  aimed 
to  build  and  strengthen  the  women's  sections  in  the  liberation 
movements,  and  the  organization  of  women  in  trade  unions.  Included 
among  the  demands  for  the  right  to  vote,  to  have  equal  opportunities 
for  employment  with  equal  pay,  and  for  equal  rights  with  men  in 
relation  to  property,  marriage  and  children,  were  the  demands  for 
"the  protection  of  mother  and  child  through  maternity  homes,  welfare 
clinics,  creches  and  nursery  schools."  And,  not  calling  for  a  return  to 
the  original  traditional  laws,  the  FSAW  instead  called  for  a  change  in 
the  laws  of  marriage,  as  "women  are  treated  as  minors  by  these 
marriage  and  property  laws  because  of  ancient  and  revered  traditions 
and  customs  which  ...  no  doubt  served  purposes  of  great  value  in 


66/Quest 


bygone  times.  The  conditions  for  their  value  have  gone  with  the 
destruction  of  tribal  and  kinship  society/'1 

Supported  by  all  the  then  legal  liberation  movements,  the  FSAW 
drew  on  women  from  all  levels  of  society,  and  from  all  race  groups.  It 
organized  a  massive  march  on  the  government  buildings  in  Pretoria 
to  protest  the  pass  laws,  which,  earlier  applicable  to  men  only,  were 
being  extended  to  apply  to  women  as  well.  August  9,  the  day  when,  in 
1956,  20,000  women  gathered  to  protest  these  laws,  has  now  become 
National  Women's  Day  in  South  Africa.  However,  with  the  banning  of 
the  liberation  movements  which  provided  much  of  the  membership  of 
the  FSAW,  and  the  banning  of  leaders  such  as  Lilian  Ngoyi  and  Helen 
Joseph  in  the  early  1960s,  the  FSAW  became  defunct.  No  other  such 
organization  has  arisen  within  South  Africa  in  its  place. 

Currently,  the  major  liberation  movements  operate  either 
underground  or  outside  the  country.  Some  liberation  activism  has 
resulted  in  public  demonstrations.  The  past  few  years,  and  these  last 
two  years  in  particular,  have  seen  increasing  agitation  within  the  labor 
force:  strikes,  sometimes  successful,  sometimes  not  (most  frequently 
due  to  state/government  intervention);  boycotts  of  black  schools  by 
the  students  (Americans  saw  the  1976  Soweto  uprisings  on  TV); 
boycotts  of  busses  because  of  high  fares  that  can  sometimes  take  up 
half  of  a  family's  income.  All  have  had  strong  community  support  and 
involvement,  with  some  white  sympathy  and  involvement.  Women 


South  Africa/67 


have  been  fairly  prominent  among  the  strikers  and  boycotters,  and 
clearly,  their  primary  concern  is  their  oppression  as  workers  and 
blacks.  There  is  no  feminist  organization  as  such  in  these  communities, 
although  there  are  women's  groups  that  organize  around  these  issues 
such  as  I  have  mentioned.  However,  many  of  the  women  are  aware  of 
their  oppression  as  women.  Black  African  women  are  regarded  as 
superfluous  appendages  with  respect  to  the  labor  force,  to  be  put  out 
of  the  way  in  the  homelands  where  they  fight  a  continual  battle  with 
poverty  and  starvation.  Black  women  are  exposed  to  a  high  degree  of 
rape  in  the  urban  areas — Cape  Town  has  a  higher  rape  rate  than  New 
York  City,  the  result  of  overcrowded,  depressed  living  conditions,  and 
one  of  the  manifestations  of  a  structurally  and  physically  violent 
society.  They  suffer  under  the  conflict  of  birth  control:  on  the  one 
hand  birth  control  can  be  viewed  as  an  attempt  by  white  government 
and  business  to  control  a  growing  and  dissatisfied  majority  and  labor 
force  (so  much  so  that  some  Cape  Town  women  in  factories  have 
reported  that  job  losses  are  threatened  unless  they  allow  themselves  to 
have  injections  of  Depo  Provera)2  and  on  the  other  hand  it  is  used  by 
women  to  make  their  lives  easier  with  fewer  children  to  clothe  and 
feed. 

Women's  organizations  in  South  Africa  are  both  feminist  and 
nonfeminist;  I  shall  discuss  first  the  nonfeminist  ones,  and  then  the 
feminist. 

One  nonfeminist  organization  that  was  started  as  a  result  of  the 
jolt  white  South  Africa  experienced  after  the  widespread  1976 
uprisings  is  the  multiracial  Women  for  Peace.  One  of  the  prime 
movers  of  Women  for  Peace  was  Brigit  Oppenheimer,  wife  of  one  of 
the  wealthiest  men  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  the  owner  of  the  gold 
and  diamond  mines  where  the  black  mineworkers  live  twelve  to  a 
room  in  single  hostels  and  get  paid  low  wages.  The  organization  is 
multiracial,  but  most  of  the  white  women  involved  are  upper  middle- 
class,  and  the  organization  carries  the  stigma  of  being  very 
paternalistic.  Members  insist  the  organization  is  nonpartisan, 
nonpolitical  (which  I  believe  is  impossible  in  the  South  African 
situation)  and  aimed  at  bringing  about  peace  between  races  rather 
than  at  contributing  to  bringing  about  real  structural  change.  Their 
activities  revolve  around  meetings,  teaching  black  women  to  read  and 
sew  and  arranging  entertainments. 

Another  group  of  largely  white,  middle-class  women — also  not  a 
feminist  group,  but  one  that  is  very  political  in  its  activities — is  the 
Black  Sash.  It  takes  its  name  from  the  sash  its  members  wore  during  its 
protest  activities  in  the  1950s  and  1960s:  the  visible,  public  wearing  of 

68/Quest 


the  sash  was  itself  a  symbol  both  of  protest  against  anti-black  legislative 
activities  and  of  solidarity  within  the  black  community.  The  Black  Sash 
now  concentrates  its  energies  on  dealing  with  the  hundreds  of  black 
people  who  come  to  their  offices  in  the  main  centers  every  day  for 
advice  and  information  regarding  their  legal  position.  The  women  who 
work  in  Black  Sash  are  considered  to  be  authorities  on  the  laws 
governing  blacks,  and  have  a  bulk  of  information  at  their  fingertips. 
They  are  frequently  able  to  help  people  get  jobs,  stay  in  an  area,  keep 
houses  they  might  otherwise  have  lost — all  by  finding  loopholes  in  the 
law.  Sometimes  their  work  has  led  to  the  initiation  of  court  cases  that 
have  resulted  in  judgments  that  have  set  positive  precedents  for  the 
situation  of  black  people.  Their  work  is  thorough  and  extensive,  and, 
while  they  are  a  "liberal"  organization  (in  South  Africa,  leftists  regard 
liberals  with  a  great  deal  of  suspicion,  as  they  are  essentially  reformist), 
I  believe  their  work  is  respected  by  all. 

Feminist  organizations  that  have  sprung  up  have  consisted  mostly 
of  white,  middle-class,  English-speaking  women.  Some,  such  as  the 
university  women's  movements  and  the  rape  crisis  centers,  both 
largely  white,  have  been  repeatedly  criticized  by  the  white,  male- 
dominated  left  as  being  bourgeois  and  for  importing  British  and 
American  ideas  that  are  unsuited  to  the  particular  South  African 
situation.  These  criticisms  have  their  validity.  To  decry  the  nuclear 
family  when  most  South  Africans  live  in  extended  families  which  have 
been  broken  up  and  separated  by  forced  removals  and  restrictions  of 
their  mobility  and  rights  to  live  in  a  certain  area  does  seem  to  be  rather 
off-target,  as  does  a  call  for  a  special  police  task  force  on  sexual 
assaults  when  the  bulk  of  the  population  regard  the  police  with 
abhorrence.  But  feminists  have  argued  that  the  leftist  movements 
operating  legally  in  the  country  continue  to  be  male-dominated, 
paying  lip-service,  if  anything  at  all,  to  the  specific  oppression  of 
women. 

The  strongest  organized  groups  of  feminists  in  the  country  are  the 
rape  crisis  centers.  Many  women  active  in  the  women's  movements  on 
the  white  campuses  (and,  official  rhetoric  notwithstanding,  South 
African  universities  are  segregated)  have  got  involved  in  the  centers  as 
a  means  of  continuing  their  political  acitivity.  Up  until  now,  there  has 
not  been  enough  money  for  office  space  for  the  organizations  or  for 
paid  workers.  So  the  work  is  all  voluntary,  and  the  rape  crisis  centers 
run  24-hour  crisis  lines.  Considering  the  number  of  rapes  that  do 
occur  in  South  Africa,  only  a  very  small  percentage  of  the  women  go 
to  rape  crisis  centers  for  help.  Most  of  the  work,  however,  centers  on 
public  education  through  public  speaking,  and  using  the  media  to  put 

South  Africa/69 


70/Quest 


forward  alternative  views  on  the  issue.  The  media  have  not  been  very 
responsive  to  the  issue  and  still  use  phrases  such  as  "the  woman  was 
not  seriously  injured"  when  reporting  rapes.  Most  of  the  rape  crisis 
centers  provide  services  to  black  people,  but  are  staffed  primarily  by 
white  women  who  hope  that  similar  centers  will  arise  in  black 
communities.  Much  of  the  work  involves  having  a  telephone  and 
transport,  something  few  black  people  have,  which  is  one  of  the 
factors  accounting  for  the  mainly  white,  middle-class  membership.  In 
Natal,  women  in  Indian  communities  are  initiating  aid  and  advice 
centers,  which  as  a  result  of  talks  and  self-defense  lessons  given  by  the 
Durban  Rape  Crisis  Center  will  include  a  type  of  rape  crisis  service. 

The  Abortion  Reform  Action  Group  is  one  of  the  oldest 
organizations  dealing  with  a  specifically  feminist  issue,  although  many 
of  the  women  invovled  are  not  feminist.  They  are  not  very  effective, 
and  most  of  their  activity  involves  putting  out  a  monthly  newsletter 
and  responding  to  issues  as  they  arise.  Last  year  a  group  from  ARAG 
saw  the  Minister  of  Health  to  discuss  the  Abortion  and  Sterilization 
Act,  which  prohibits  all  abortions  save  on  the  ground  of  very  serious 
physical  or  mental  illness,  incest  and  rape.  Because  of  the  bureaucracy 
involved  in  getting  an  abortion,  the  ignorance  of  how  to  get  one  on 
the  part  of  otherwise  qualified  women,  and  the  stringent  regulations, 
the  number  of  legal  abortions  performed  in  South  Africa  is  very  low. 
Every  year,  however,  thousands  of  women  are  admitted  to 
Baragwanath  Hospital  in  Soweto,  one  of  the  largest  hospitals  in 
southern  Africa,  after  complications  arising  from  illegal  abortions. 
White  women  who  want  to  terminate  a  pregnancy  are  generally  able 
to  enlist  the  help  of  a  sympathetic  (or  moneymaking)  private  doctor, 
or  go  to  a  country  where  abortion  is  legal — all  of  which  costs  $1000  or 
more.  Clearly,  then,  this  is  an  issue  which  affects  black  just  as  much  as, 
or  more  than,  white  women.  The  Minister  of  Health  promised  the 
ARAG  team  he  would  set  up  a  committee  to  look  into  the  law  if  other 
groups  and  individuals  made  the  same  request.  What  this  would 
amount  to  is  anyone's  guess.  The  last  time  the  act  was  reviewed  it 
came  out  more  detrimental  to  women  than  previously,  tightening 
eligibility  criteria  and  requiring  approval  from  panels  of  doctors.  The 
policy  of  speaking  to  government  officials  is  dubious.  In  a  country 
where  most  of  the  people  reject  dialogue  after  being  denied  a  role  in 
consultations  for  centuries,  initiating  discussions  with  the  government, 
it  is  argued,  could  give  the  illusion  that  the  government  is  ready  to 
listen. 

A  lesbian  hot-line  was  started  in  Cape  Town,  but  due  to  lack  of 
response  it  did  not  continue.  Most  lesbians  and  gay  men  in  South 
Africa  appear  to  prefer  to  keep  their  sexuality  very  private  and  are 

South  Africa/71 


unwilling  to  make  it  a  political  issue.  Until  recently,  homosexual 
people  on  the  left  have  either  not  been  willing  to  come  out  because  of 
the  lack  of  support  and  fear  of  castigation,  or  have  seen  the  issue  as 
very  secondary  to  the  other  work  they  do.  The  social  atmosphere  is 
comparable  to  that  of  the  most  sexually  conservative  American 
communities.  With  the  increase  in  strength  of  women's  movements  in 
white,  English-speaking  universities  (and  that  is  where  most  white 
leftists  originate)  the  issue  of  homosexuality  is  being  given  far  more 
serious  treatment,  although  it  is  still  largely  only  feminists  in  leftist 
circles  who  are  willing  to  come  out.  As  far  as  I  am  aware,  the  issue  has 
never  been  raised  in  black  movements  or  in  liberation  movements, 
and  that  also  reflects  on  the  lack  of  attention  given  to  all  matters  of 
sexuality,  which  are  seen  as  very  low  on  the  list  of  priorities.  Indeed,  it 
is  here  that  I  believe  white  feminists  can  play  an  important  role,  as  they 
have  the  time  and  the  resources  to  keep  the  issue  alive.  Because  the 
feminist  community  is  so  small,  there  are  none  of  the  splits  on  this 
issue  that  there  are  in  the  U.S.A.  and  England.  It  is  a  community  which 
is,  in  some  ways,  threatened:  feminist  literature  is  often  banned,  and 
lesbian  literature  is  usually  banned.  On  the  whole,  heterosexual 
feminists  have  become  outspokenly  supportive  of  lesbian  women.  It 
would  be  almost  impossible  for  lesbian  feminists  to  take  a  separatist 
line,  as  they  would  be  isolated  and  too  small  to  operate. 

As  must  be  evident,  the  most  severe  limitation  on  the  feminist 
movement  in  South  Africa  is  that  it  is  largely  white  and  middle-class. 
Politically  aware  and  active  black  women  see  their  first  commitment  as 
being  one  to  the  "broader  struggle,"  sometimes  even  to  the  point  of 
rejecting  all  feminist  issues  as  irrelevant.  Others  bring  the  issues  up 
within  the  groups  in  which  they  are  operating.  However,  most 
politically  invovled  women  and  feminists  agree  on  one  point:  there 
will  be  no  fundamental  change  in  the  position  of  women  without 
radical  and  fundamental  change  in  the  social,  cultural  and  economic 
structure  of  the  country  as  a  whole.  Any  activity  must  be  seen  in  this 
context. 

White  women  have  more  time,  more  money  and  more 
conveniences  to  enable  them  to  work  on  feminist  issues.  The  racial 
separation  from  one  another  throughout  the  lives  of  South  African 
women  in  schools,  residential  areas,  even  toilets,  also  leads  to  their 
separation  in  other  issues.  Many  white  women  go  through  their  lives 
without  ever  talking  with  black  women  aside  from  giving  instructions 
to  their  domestic  servants.  And,  while  the  breakdown  in  family  life 
among  blacks  has  meant  that  many  black  women  are  the  heads  of 
families  in  terms  of  making  decisions  and  bringing  in  the  money  (what 
little  there  is  of  it),  most  white  women  are  defined  very  much  in  terms 

72/Quest 


of  their  fathers  and  husbands.  In  a  white  society  full  of  bigotry  and 
prejudice,  it  is  unlikely  that  white  women— especially  working-class 
white  women  who  are  even  more  bound  by  their  relationship  to  the 
men  in  their  lives — will  break  out  of  that  mold,  although  it  does 
happen.  Most  white  women  who  are  able  to  see  through  the  entire 
structure  within  which  they  have  been  brought  up,  and  therefore  to 
change  their  thinking  about  themselves  and  generally  about  the 
situation  in  South  Africa,  are  the  middle-class,  university-educated 
women  who  have  been  able  to  come  into  contact  with  black  people  in 
positions  other  than  those  of  servitude,  and  with  alternative  ideas. 

In  South  Africa,  white  women,  both  English  and  Afrikaner,  play  an 
important  part  in  upholding  the  status  quo — they  are  very  much 
responsible  for  the  education  of  children,  both  in  and  out  of  school 
(most  teachers  are  women),  and  for  ensuring  the  well-being,  both 
emotionally  and  physically,  of  the  men — the  people  who  run  the 
country.  More  recently,  white  women  are  becoming  increasingly 
important  in  supporting  the  growing  war  effort  along  the  Namibian 
and  Angolan  borders — more  women  are  joining  the  military  forces 
where  they  are  being  trained  to  keep  things  running  while  the  men 
are  sent  off  to  the  conflict  areas,  and  there  is  rumor  of  a  general 
conscription  of  young  women.  Women  also  play  a  large  role  behind 
the  scenes  in  organizing  such  things  as  food  parcels  and  entertainment 
to  keep  the  white  soldiers  happy.  But  with  many  women  now  being 
faced  with  the  actual  or  possible  death  of  their  brothers,  husbands, 
lovers  and  sons  in  a  war  the  South  African  army  cannot  win,  the  war 
against  the  growing  South  West  African  People's  Organization 
(SWAPO),  there  will  perhaps  be  a  growing  anger  among  these  women 
that  can  be  tapped  for  further  politicization  and  consciousness-raising. 

While  feminists  can  involve  themselves  in  groups  such  as  rape 
crisis  centers,  there  is  no  question  yet  of  a  movement  on  the  scale  that 
exists  in  some  other  countries.  After  a  structural  change,  society  will,  I 
believe,  give  full  attention  to  women's  issues.  Precedents  are  being  set 
in  Zimbabwe,  where  there  are  moves  to  start  a  women's-only 
organization  that  will  concentrate  solely  on  issues  involving  women, 
and  will  have  as  members  all  women,  no  matter  what  their  classes  or 
political  persuasions.  There  are  several  women  in  high  positions  in  the 
government,  and  this  situation  comes  after  a  struggle  for  recognition 
(which  they  eventually  got)  as  commanders  and  fighters  in  the  bush.  In 
Namibia,  SWAPO  women  are  fighting  for  the  same  recognition  within 
that  organization  and  are  tackling  men's  prejudices  about  women. 
South  African  women  are  going  into  exile  to  take  up  arms,  and  a  focus 
of  the  Women's  Secretariat  of  the  ANC,  now  based  in  Lusaka,  Zambia, 
is  to  increase  the  participation  of  women  in  the  movement,  as  well  as 

South  Africa/73 


to  bring  to  the  attention  of  women's  groups  around  the  world  the 
particular  oppression  of  women  in  South  Africa. 

White  women,  like  all  white  people  in  South  Africa  who  are 
politically  aware  and  sympathetic  to  the  aims  of  black  people,  cannot 
play  a  vanguard  role  in  the  movement  for  change  in  the  country.  They 
have  to  content  themselves  with  taking  a  back  seat.  What  they  do  have 
is  time  and  resources  which  they  can  make  available.  A  feminist  school 
publication  has  been  getting  a  lot  of  positive  feedback  in  Cape  Town. 
It  has  until  recently  been  published  by  an  ad-hoc  group  of  mainly 
white  non-students,  but  control  over  the  publication  has  been  passed 
to  students,  mostly  black.  There  also  are  plans  to  start  women's  writing 
groups  all  over  the  country,  involving  both  white  and  black  women. 
Some  groups  will  aim  to  bring  out  mainly  fiction  that  will  be  submitted 
to  glossy  magazines  read  by  thousands  of  women  all  over  the  country. 
Writing  by  and  about  women  has  not  been  taken  very  seriously  by  the 
censorship  board  in  South  Africa,  and  it  is  therefore  one  avenue  that 
still  remains  fairly  clear  and  open.  By  subtle  use  of  this  avenue, 
feminists  can  let  new  ideas  find  their  way  into  the  consciousness  of 
women,  and  also  become  part  of  other  movements'  strategies. 

The  bulk  of  work  feminists  can  do  in  South  Africa  is  on  an 
informal  basis:  continually  raising  issues  in  the  groups  and 
organizations  with  which  they  are  involved,  and  talking  with  people 
about  them.  I  believe  the  most  important  role  of  feminists  is  not  to 
allow  feminist  issues  to  fade  out,  but  to  keep  them  continually  alive 
until  demands  can  be  carried  out  realistically. 


Notes 

1  Editor's  Note:  We  are  unable  to  provide  specific  citation  for  these  quotes,  and  unable 
to  reach  the  author. 

2  Depo  Provera  is  a  hormone  used  as  a  form  of  birth  control;  it  has  been  banned  in  the 
United  States  because  of  its  dangerous  side  effects. 


Victoria  Snudge  is  the  pseudonym  of  a  white,  South  African,  feminist 
currently  living  in  London. 


74/Quest 


\ 


tfei^ 


South  Africa/75 


An  Anarchafeminist 

Looks  at 

Power  Relationships 


by  Carol  Ehrlich 


Women's  issues  cannot  be  seen  in  isolation  from  certain 
social  pathologies.  The  election  of  Reagan  is  very  likely  to  accelerate 
trends  that  already  existed — the  concentration  of  wealth,  the 
increasing  number  of  the  very  poor,  increasing  financial  stress  for  the 
working  class  and  the  lower  middle  class,  unemployment,  inflation, 
the  decimation  of  social  services,  intervention  in  other  countries  with 
the  increased  threat  of  war,  the  arms  race,  nuclear  power,  the 
poisoning  of  the  environment,  an  anti-communist  "Cold  War" 
mentality  straight  out  of  the  1950s,  the  ascendancy  of  the  right  wing. 
There  is,  of  course,  more— the  culture  of  violence,  the  continuation 
and  recent  sharp  escalation  of  racism,  and  the  poor  quality  of  life  in  a 
society  that  profoundly  alienates  us  from  ourselves.  Some  of  these 
problems  affect  women  differently,  or  more  severely,  than  they  do 
men  (for  example,  women  are  likely  to  be  poorer  to  begin  with,  and 
the  overall  rates  of  unemployment  are  higher  for  women);  others  (for 
example,  the  threat  of  nuclear  war,  the  devastation  of  the 
environment)  are  not  as  sex-specific. 

I'm  not  saying  that  the  women's  movement  should  subordinate 
itself  to  any  other  movement,  or  that  women's  issues  are  secondary. 
They  never  were  secondary,  and  they  aren't  now.  I  have  come 
increasingly  to  understand  that  power  relationships  are  at  the  core  of 
this  long  list  of  social  pathologies,  including  those  issues  which  have 
been  seen  exclusively  as  women's  issues,  and  those  that  have  not.  And 
this  has  profound  consequences  for  how  we  go  about  building  the 
women's  movement  in  the  1980s:  How  we  define  our  goals,  how  we 
develop  strategies  for  reaching  those  goals,  whom  we  organize,  how 
we  organize  them,  and  what  sorts  of  movement  structures  we  build. 

76/Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Vol.  V,  No.  4 


By  power  relationships  I  mean  the  conditions  under  which  some 
people  are  able  to  control  other  people  and  to  control  essential 
resources  as  well.  The  conditions  of  domination  are  in  part 
institutional  and  material  (i.e.,  being  in  a  position  to  grab  and  hold  on 
to  economic  resources,  weapons,  schools,  media,  government,  laws, 
and  the  military  and  police  forces  which  help  keep  one  in  that 
privileged  position).  They  are  in  part  psychological  (i.e.,  learning  and 
internalizing  the  ideas  that  there  will  always  be  leaders  and  followers, 
that  social  inequality  is  part  of  "human  nature,"  that  some  people  have 
the  right  to  decide  how  all  other  people  shall  live). 

In  order  to  attack  any  and  all  social  ills,  it  is  necessary  to  attack 
relationships  of  domination  and  subordination  (power  relationships)  in 
all  their  forms— institutional  and  psychological.  We  don't  need  to  stop 
short  by  attempting  to  "redistribute"  power;  we  need  to  end  power 
relationships.  In  this  country  a  white  male  elite  has  controlled  the  rest 
of  us  for  so  long  that  it  is  tempting  to  think  that  we  should  work 
towards  putting  some  other  category  of  people  in  control — whether  it 
be  women  in  general,  or  lesbians,  or  mothers,  or  the  working  class,  or 
minorities.  But  putting  any  group  in  control  will  eventually  rebuild 
hierarchies,  and  that  means  inequality  and  all  the  attending 
pathologies.  The  society  that  results  will  be  neither  free  nor  egalitarian. 

Thus,  any  strategies  we  devise  will  have  to  see  power  relationships 
as  the  source  of  our  difficulties.  Most  analyses  don't  go  this  far,  and 
most  strategies  for  reaching  the  goal  of  a  society  without  sexism, 
racism,  class  divisions,  and  all  the  other  forms  of  institutionalized 
oppression  do  not  sufficiently  consider  power.1  At  best,  most  are  only 
intermittently  concerned  with  trying  to  erode  power  relationships  now 
by  practicing  the  habits  of  freedom  and  equality  to  the  extent  that  it  is 
possible  in  our  daily  lives.  For  most  people,  this  is  possible  only  in  our 
political  groups  and  our  personal  relationships — but  even  so,  most  of 
us  could  make  it  much  more  of  a  priority  than  it  is. 

The  analysis  of  power  relationships  as  the  source  of 
institutionalized  inequality  and  the  call  for  strategies  for  eradicating 
relationships  of  domination  and  subordination  is  a  social  anarchist  one. 
Anarchists  (except  for  the  individualist  variety)  are  socialists,  but  of  a 
particular  sort.  Anarchists  share  with  all  socialists  the  vision  of  a  society 
based  on  equality  and  freedom,  but  we  have  a  different  view  of  the 
strategies  required  to  get  us  there.  For  anarchists,  means  and  ends 
must  be  consistent;  freedom  cannot  be  achieved  through  the  paradox 
of  limiting  it  in  the  present,  no  matter  how  compelling  the  reason 
seems  to  be.  Anarchist  organizations,  then,  are  neither  vanguardist  nor 

An  Anarchafeminist  Looks  at  Power  Relationships/77 


mass  groupings  structured  along  hierarchical  lines.  They  are  alternative 
forms  of  organization  which  are  intended  to  exist  alongside  the 
institutions  of  the  larger  society,  eventually  to  replace  them. 


The  Anarchist-Feminist  Connection 

Anarchist-feminists  share  with  radical  feminists  the  understanding 
that  men  as  a  group  hold  power  over  women  as  a  group,  but  don't 
view  male  domination  as  the  original  form  of  inequality,  or  as  the 
single  most  important  one  today.  This  is  because  of  the  anarchist  view 
of  domination  as  the  core  of  all  the  forms  of  inequality. 

Despite  this  theoretical  difference — a  difference  which  often 
shows  itself  in  different  strategies — there  are  many  parallels  between 
anarchism  and  radical  feminism.  The  anarchist-feminist  writer  Peggy 
Kornegger  has  pointed  out  that  "feminists  have  been  unconscious 
anarchists  in  both  theory  and  practice  for  years."2 

The  similarities  are  many:  the  linkage  of  the  personal  and  the 
political,  the  emphasis  upon  the  small  group,  the  coordination  of  small 
groups  into  networks,  the  stress  on  making  leadership  task-specific 
and  temporary,  the  sharing  of  skills,  resources,  and  knowledge  among 
all,  direct  action  rather  than  working  through  such  intermediaries  as 
elected  officials,  cooperation  and  mutual  aid,  and  consciousness- 
raising. 

Add  to  all  these  the  building  of  alternative  organizations  such  as 
women's  centers,  self-help  groups,  media  collectives,  living  collectives, 
clinics,  schools ....  Feminists  have  been  doing  these  things  for  years. 
As  have  anarchists.  That's  what  Kornegger  meant  by  saying  that 
feminists  are  unconscious  anarchists— because  the  anarchist-feminist 
connection  is  rarely  stated,  or  even  consciously  known. 


Strategies  for  the  80s 

Strategies  for  radical  change  fall  very  roughly  into  two  categories: 

(1)  Bring  down  the  system  by  attacking  it  from  the  outside,  and 

(2)  build  our  own  new  society  inside  the  old.  This  doesn't  mean 
accommodating  to  it — rather,  it  means  hollowing  it  out  Ifke  a  rotting 
old  tree,  until  it  is  weak  and  ready  to  fall.  Of  course,  in  real  life  (that  is, 
in  our  lives)  radical  strategies  almost  never  fall  neatly  into  one  category 
or  another,  but  they  do  emphasize  one  more  than  the  other. 

78/Quest 


As  an  anarchist-feminist,  my  own  emphasis  is  on  the  second 
category,  because  it  is  the  only  chance  we  have  to  end  relationships  of 
domination  and  subordination.  I  think  what  we  need  most  right  now  is 
to  gain  some  measure  of  control  over  the  resources  necessary  for 
survival.  Some  of  these  resources  are  material  (money,  housing,  health 
care,  safe  and  effective  contraception  for  women  who  choose  to  relate 
sexually  to  men,  education,  skills,  and  the  like)  and  others  are 
psychological  and  interpersonal. 

To  me,  this  means  building  alternative  institutions  and 
organizations,  structures,  and  ways  of  interacting  now,  that  are  so 
numerous,  so  varied,  so  attractive,  that  more  and  more  will  join  in — or 
at  least  will  not  invest  their  energy  in  maintaining  the  system. 

Institution-building,  if  it  is  to  be  successful  in  radical  terms, 
involves  paying  attention  to  how  we  do  things,  to  what  is  sometimes 
called  "process/'  as  well  as  to  our  specific  program.  I  don't  believe 
there  is  a  revolutionary  Before  and  After,  marked  off  by  a  "transitional 
stage."  The  way  to  revolution  is  in  the  continuing  present,  and  we 
need  to  keep  that  in  mind  so  that  our  actions  and  programs  won't  split 
off  the  political  from  the  personal. 

For  instance,  I  have  been  actively  involved  for  almost  ten  years 
with  a  radio  collective  in  Baltimore,  the  Great  Atlantic  Radio 
Conspiracy,  producing  and  distributing  low-cost,  explicitly  radical 
audiotapes.  We  have  attempted  to  break  down  hierarchy  by  sharing 
skills  and  tasks,  making  all  decisions  by  consensus,  and  by  inspiring  a 
number  of  those  who  have  left  us  to  join  or  to  form  other  political 
radio  collectives. 

Over  the  years,  perhaps  two  dozen  women  and  men  have  come 
and  gone,  with  the  majority  leaving  because  their  lives  had  changed, 
or  because  they  found  the  work  load  to  be  more  than  they  could 
tolerate.  Although  some  left  because  they  felt  personally  unrewarded, 
none  of  the  perceived  conflicts  were  the  types  that  have  plagued  so 
many  political  groups,  i.e.,  over  political  infiltration  and  attempts  at 
takeover,  or  battles  over  the  Correct  Line,  or  because  of  sexism. 

We  always  recruited  very  carefully,  asking  prospective  collective 
members  to  listen  to  our  programs,  to  tell  us  more  about  themselves, 
and  watch  us  work.  We  screen  very  carefully.  Does  a  male 
demonstrate  sexist  attitudes  or  behavior?  Is  a  male  or  female  anti- 
lesbian  or  anti-gay?  racist?  authoritarian?  Politically,  we  encourage 
people  who  are  somewhere  in  the  range  of  our  own  politics,  which  we 
describe  as  "nonsectarian  left  and  radical  feminist."  We  draw  from 
anarchists,  libertarian  Marxists,  gays  and  lesbians  who  are  not  rigidly 

Power  Relationships/79 


separatist,  radical  feminists,  dissatisfied  liberals.  I  think  the  work  that 
goes  into  screening  people  for  attitudes  about  politics  and  working 
collectively  is  partly  responsible  for  our  stability  and  for  our  ability  to 
work  well  together. 


Change  Starting  Now 

If  we  think  of  change  as  starting  now  instead  of  at  some  point  in 
the  future,  it  alters  our  perspective  on  quite  a  number  of  things.  One 
which  seems  terribly  ordinary,  yet  which  is  extremely  important,  is  the 
way  we  treat  one  another.  That  is  political:  "The  community"  should 
not  be  an  abstraction;  it  should  not  simply  be  a  geographic  location 
filled  with  people  who  live  there;  it  most  definitely  should  not  be  a 
band  of  holier-than-thou  people  who  always  know  better  than  anyone 
else  what  is  Politically  Correct;  neither  should  it  be  a  set  of  political 
clones,  nor  a  cluster  of  people  who  supposedly  share  a  set  of  views  but 
who  are  always  squabbling. 

We  need  to  stress  personal  relations  as  well  as  issues  and 
institutional  structures,  for  in  each  of  these  are  the  seeds  of  a  good 
society  or  a  bad  one.  Inside  political  movements  as  well  as  outside,  it  is 
very  hard  to  change  the  way  we  treat  each  other.  But  I  have  seen  many 
people  leave  political  groups  and  get  invovled  in  assertiveness  training, 
est,  religious  cults,  spirituality,  or  simply  in  personal  relationships.  And 
I  think  this  often  happens  because  people  want  friends,  lovers,  family, 
self-respect,  human  connection — and  they  haven't  found  these  in  the 
movement. 

I  suspect  more  women  have  left  the  movement  because  of  the 
way  we  often  treat  each  other  than  for  reasons  of  politics,  lack  of 
commitment  or  time,  burnout,  or  any  other  reason.  Sometimes  the 
problem  is  that  we  are  casually  insensitive  towards  other  women; 
other  times  it  involves  some  really  vicious  trashing.  But  while  doing 
our  political  work,  while  envisioning  a  nonsexist  society,  and  while 
trying  to  create  and  apply  strategies  for  building  towards  it,  we  need  to 
nurture  one  another.  Being  emotionally  worked  over  by  a  "sister"  is 
no  less  painful  than  being  similarly  treated  by  an  enemy.  In  fact,  it  may 
be  worse  because  our  expectations  of  each  other  are  higher. 

Of  course,  I  have  seen  groups  spend  too  much  time  on  how  their 
members  are  feeling,  and  far  too  little  on  the  work  that  drew  them 
together  in  the  first  place.  What  that  means  is  that  we  need  to  maintain 
a  balance  between  process  and  work.  But  if  we  can  do  it,  we  are  doing 

80/Quest 


something  very  important  in  building  towards  a  community  that  is 
supportive  and  not  damaging. 

I  want  to  stress  that  building  alternative  institutions  does  not  mean 
withdrawing  from  the  rest  of  the  world  and  "doing  your  own  thing/' 
Realistically  speaking,  there  is  no  hiding  place,  anyway— people  who 
look  for  refuge  in  the  desert  or  in  some  bucolic  rural  area  will  find 
themselves  next  to  a  toxic  waste  dump  or  an  MX  missile  track,  to  name 
just  two  possibilities. 

On  another  level,  I  think  it's  politically  irresponsible  to  turn  one's 
back  on  others— on  people  who  because  of  race,  or  poverty  level,  or 
lack  of  education,  or  any  other  life  circumstance  that  in  this  society 
keeps  people  down,  have  few  options.  While  as  an  anarchist  I  don't 
think  it  is  ultimately  possible  to  liberate  others,  it  is  possible  to  help 
create  the  conditions  under  which  they  can  begin  to  liberate 
themselves. 

A  network  of  alternative  institutions  can  serve  as  models  on  three 
levels:  (1)  providing  services  (health  care,  training,  lower-cost  and 
better  food,  skills  such  as  carpentry,  and  so  on);  (2)  providing 
community  (ways  of  relating  and  caring  for  one  another);  and  (3) 
providing  organizational  forms  for  political  action  (for  example,  the 
affinity  group  structure  which  initially  functioned  well  in  the  Clamshell 
Alliance's  direct  actions  against  the  Seabrook  nuclear  reactors).  Such 
organizations,  when  linked  together  in  networks,  enable  people  to 
take  part  in  mass  actions  which  they  themselves  have  planned  instead 
of  having  it  planned  for  them.  And  on  all  three  levels,  people  in 
alternative  organizations  can  strive  to  eliminate  the  old  relationships  of 
dominance  and  subordination  to  which  we  are  all  so  accustomed. 


Our  radio  conspiracy 

What's  worked  out  the  best  over  the  life  of  our  group?  I  think 
we've  developed  a  fine  collective  process  for  producing  radio 
programs.  Although  our  political  perspectives,  values,  and  sense  of 
what's  important  diverge  somewhat,  we  really  have  been  able  to  work 
through  consensus.  People  who  disagree  use  the  power  to  block 
consensus  very  cautiously — they  have  to  feel  very  strongly  about 
something  before  they  continue  to  disagree.  I  think  for  this  reason  that 
the  losers  don't  usually  feel  as  if  they  have  lost,  and  don't  harbor  the 
resentments  that  usually  go  along  with  defeat. 

Another  thing  that  has  been  a  positive  experience,  at  least  for  me, 

Power  Relationships/81 


is  learning  that  it  is  possible  for  people  with  very  different  personalities 
to  work  together  in  a  pressure-cooker  situation,  such  as  producing  a 
weekly  program,  and  do  it  without  constantly  fighting.  Of  course, 
having  the  pressure  of  a  weekly  program  helps— there's  no  time  to 
argue  endlessly  over  obscure  political  points,  or  to  engage  in  lengthy 
personal  hassles.  If  the  script  isn't  finished,  there's  no  show  to  tape, 
and  if  there's  no  show  to  tape,  we're  off  the  air.  This,  for  me,  is  a  strong 
argument  for  the  necessity  of  having  a  focused  political  project— 
whether  it's  a  radio  program,  an  organizing  project,  a  health  clinic,  or 
anything  else.  I  saw  one  fine  radio  group  in  another  city  disintegrate 
after  it  lost  a  regular  outlet  for  its  programs.  It  began  to  take  weeks  to 
produce  a  single  program,  then  months;  they  began  to  argue  about 
politics,  whereas  before  they  hadn't  had  the  time.  They  broke  up 
several  years  ago. 

All  of  this  is  part  of  trying  to  do  meaningful  political  work  in  a 
society  that  makes  it  extremely  difficult.  To  give  an  over-all  assessment 
of  this  one  small  media  collective  in  terms  of  the  three  criteria  I 
mentioned  earlier: 

(1)  Do  we  provide  a  needed  political  service?  Here  I  think  we've 
been  most  successful.  The  mass  media  do  not  tell  the  people  what's 
going  on,  or  provide  them  with  ways  to  try  to  change  things.  By 
producing  radio  programs  which  are  anti-capitalist,  anti-sexist,  anti- 
racist,  and  which  try  to  suggest  alternatives,  I  think  we  are  doing  a  real 
service. 

(2)  Do  we  provide  better  ways  of  relating  to  each  other,  and  caring 
for  each  other,  within  our  group?  Here,  I  think  the  results  are  a 
mixture  of  good  and  bad.  The  group  is  nonhierarchical  and  nonsexist, 
and  it  has  enabled  several  people  to  develop  skills  and  the  related  self- 
confidence  that  they  lacked  before.  But  we  are  often  less  sensitive  to 
each  other  than  we  should  be,  and  some  collective  members  left 
because  they  did  not  find  enough  personal  satisfactions. 

(3)  Do  we  provide  an  organizational  form  for  political  action?  Our 
organizational  structure  is  itseJf  a  political  statement.  Early  on,  in  an 
"unconsciously  anarchist"  way  (none  of  us  at  that  time  defined 
ourselves  as  anarchists),  we  decided  that  each  of  us  would  learn  how 
to  do  all  the  work  of  producing  a  radio  show.  This  work  included  field 
interviewing,  editing  of  tape,  script  writing  and  editing,  reading  the 
script  on  the  air,  sound  engineering  and  all  of  the  necessary  office 
administration. 

As  far  as  political  actions  are  concerned,  we  are  an  educational 
group  far  more  than  an  action  group.  But  we  have  been  part  of  several 

82/Quest 


nonhierarchical  media  networks,  and  this  has  worked  well  for  us.  And 
from  time  to  time  we  do  take  part  as  a  collective  in  mass  actions,  while 
maintaining  our  identity  as  a  collective.  But  the  very  nature  of  our 
work,  even  in  radical  media,  has  sometimes  produced  a  real  split  in  my 
consciousness.  Do  I  attend  a  demonstration  as  a  participant?  As  a 
chronicler?  Sometimes  the  roles  are  not  in  conflict,  but  other  times 
they  are.  The  very  nature  of  reporting  on  something — even  something 
with  which  I  am  in  complete  sympathy— has  a  distancing  effect.  This  is 
a  problem  I  don't  know  how  to  solve. 

All  this  seems  a  long  way  from  talking  about  building  a  movement 
in  the  1980s,  yet  on  a  concrete,  day  to  day  level,  this  is  what  is 
involved:  people  working  in  their  own  groups,  sometimes  in  networks 
or  coalitions  with  others,  trying  to  end  the  power  relationships  that  are 
the  root  cause  of  social  ills. 

And  while  we're  trying  to  do  things  as  well  as  we  can,  it's 
important  that  we  not  have  unrealistic  notions  about  "success."  An 
organization  that  has  flaws  is  not  necessarily  a  failure.  An  organization 
that  dissolves  is  also  not  necessarily  a  failure.  Much  depends  upon  the 
work  that  it  did,  the  changes  it  has  made  in  people's  lives,  and  whether 
or  not  some  of  those  involved  went  on  to  try  something  similar  (or 
something  better)  again.  This  is  the  history  of  many  movement 
organizations — dissolving,  reforming  in  somewhat  different  patterns, 
changing  with  the  times,  changing  as  strategies  are  sharpened. 
Significant  change  takes  a  long  time,  and  many  false  starts  and  partial 
successes,  and  it  will  be  made  by  people  who  are  overworked  and 
overburdened  with  the  problems  of  growing  up  in  an  anti-human 
society.  We  have  to  learn  from  our  own  past,  and  persist  in  building 
the  revolution  in  the  continuing  present.  There  really  isn't  any  other 
option. 

Notes 

1  For  example,  Marxist  analyses  see  power  relationships  as  a  function  of  class 
relationships;  radical  feminist  and  lesbian  feminist  analyses  do  stress  power,  but  of  a 
particular  sort:  male,  or  heterosexual  male,  domination. 

Peggy  Kornegger,  "Anarchism:  The  Feminist  Connection,"  The  Second  Wave,  4:1 
(Spring,  1975),  pp.  26-37. 


Carol  Ehrlich,  who  has  lived  in  Baltimore  since  7977,  is  a  writer,  editor, 
radio  producer  and  occasional  teacher.  She  is  co-editor  of 
Reinventing  Anarchy:  What  Are  Anarchists  Thinking  These  Days?  and 
of  Social  Anarchism:  Journal  of  Practice  and  Theory. 


Power  Relationships/83 


Word  Watc 


84/Quest 


Feminism  and  Suffrage:  The  Emergence  of  an  Independent  Women's 
Movement  in  America,  1848-1869.  By  Ellen  Carol  Dubois.  Ithaca: 
Cornell  University  Press  (paperback  edition,  1980).  $4.95. 

The  Rising  of  the  Women:  Feminist  Solidarity  and  Class  Conflict,  1880- 
1917.  By  Meredith  Tax.  New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press(1980).  $17.50. 

Review  by  EILEEN  BORIS 

In  this  period  of  political  reaction  and  economic  crisis,  the  question 
of  whether  we  should  enter  coalitions  has  become  the  problem  of 
how  to  build  them  and  specifically  with  whom.  Under  what  conditions 
should  revolutionary  feminists  (i.e.,  socialist  feminists  and  anticapitalist 
radical  feminists)  form  political  alliances  with  national  liberation 
movements,  trade  unionists,  democratic  socialists  and  the  sectarian 
left?  In  what  ways  should  we  unite  with  liberal  feminists  to  push  for 
necessary  reforms  (like  the  ERA)  and  simultaneously  expose  their 
limits?  How  general  can  our  principles  of  unity  be  in  a  coalition 
without  devaluing  our  larger  feminist  vision?  Should  we  enter  into 
expedient  coalitions  without  agreement  on  fundamental  principles 
(e.g.,  with  groups  hostile  to  gay  liberation)?  To  what  extent  do  class 
and  race  interests  limit  the  possibilities  for  coalition? 

Too  often  we  have  approached  these  and  similar  questions  in  a 
vacuum  without  benefit  from  the  cumulative  experience  of  women. 
Historical  analysis  of  coalition  building  can  tell  us  under  what 
conditions  alliances  work  or  fail.  In  their  own  ways,  Ellen  DuBois  and 
Meredith  Tax  have  provided  us  with  treatises  on  coalition  building. 
Each  has  taken  her  questions  from  the  movement;  we,  in  turn,  can 
sharpen  our  strategy  by  exploring  the  past  which  they  have  uncovered. 

The  autonomous  women's  movement  of  the  late-nineteenth 
century  developed  only  after  middle-class  feminists  failed  to  forge 
alliances  with  either  the  major  political  parties,  male  trade  unionists  or 
working  women.  Feminism  and  Suffrage  traces  the  process  through 
which  women  learned  that  "they  had  to  look  to  women  themselves 
not  only  to  articulate  the  problem,  but  to  provide  the  solution  to 
women's  oppression  as  well. "1  With  consummate  skill  and  clarity, 
DuBois  shows  how  an  independent  women's  movement  emerged  out 
of  the  caldron  of  Reconstruction  politics  in  the  late  1960s.  Through  an 
analytical  narrative  of  the  national  political  scene,  she  explores  the 
convergence  of  interests  that  made  alliances  possible  and  the 
fundamental  differences  that  soon  shattered  them. 


Word  Watch/85 


Feminism  and  Suffrage  follows  Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton  and  Susan 
B.  Anthony's  searches  for  allies  in  the  wake  of  the  abolitionist  decision 
to  abandon  women's  rights  and  support  suffrage  for  black  men  alone. 
Before  the  Civil  War,  abolitionism  had  fostered  women's  rights 
activities;  women  had  composed  the  rank  and  file  of  the  antislavery 
crusade  and,  through  their  fight  for  the  slave,  had  gained 
organizational  skills  as  well  as  the  confidence  to  act  on  their  own 
behalf.  During  the  war,  they  suspended  women's  rights  work  for  the 
"larger"  Union  cause,  in  the  hope  of  being  rewarded  with  the  vote. 
With  slavery  defeated,  however,  abolitionist  men — the  left  wing  of  the 
new  Republican  Party — were  reluctant  to  jeopardize  the  prospects  of 
the  newly  freed  blacks  by  linking  black  suffrage  with  women's.  They 
traded  their  radicalism  for  influence  within  the  governing  Republican 
Party,  pushing  the  Fifteenth  Amendment,  which  guaranteed  universal 
male  suffrage  but  left  black  as  well  as  white  women  disenfranchised. 

This  abolitionist  betrayal  led  Stanton  and  Anthony  to  conclude 
that  men  were  incapable  of  understanding  that  "woman  feels  the 
invidious  distinction  of  sex  exactly  as  the  black  man  does  of  color. "2 
DuBois  places  this  feminist  assessment  in  perspective  by  reminding  us 
that  such  generalizations  "cannot  explain  why  men  sometimes  act  to 
support  feminist  demands  and  sometimes  do  not,  why  feminists  felt 
compelled  to  break  away  from  abolitionists  in  1867  and  not  twenty 
years  before."-*  The  shifting  political  situation,  she  contends,  united 
and  then  divided  the  abolitionist  men  from  the  feminists. 

By  tracing  the  politics  of  suffrage  in  detail,  DuBois  is  able  to 
situate  the  changing  character  of  the  feminist  movement  in  its 
historical  context.  She  correctly  notes  that  the  coalition  that  Stanton 
and  Anthony  attempted  to  form  with  the  predominantly  racist 
Democrats — after  the  dismissal  of  feminism  by  the  abolitionists — was 
opportunistic.  Forced  to  adopt  racist  and  elitist  arguments  for  women's 
suffrage  that  claimed  well-born  white  women  deserved  the  vote  over 
"barely  civilized"  black  men,  Stanton  and  Anthony  chose  political 
expediency  over  ideological  consistency — a  dangerous  choice  for  a 
movement  dependent  on  the  righteousness  of  its  cause.  DuBois  never 
whitewashes  the  political  maneuverings  of  Stanton  and  Anthony,  nor 
does  she  let  her  admiration  for  them  interfere  with  a  critical 
understanding  of  their  limits  as  middle-class  white  people.  Yet  she 
blames  the  antifeminism  of  Republican  men  for  driving  a  wedge 
between  the  black  cause  and  women's  rights,  thereby  leading 
feminists  to  ally  with  avowed  racists.  She  fails  to  see  that  although 
political  isolation  encourages  coalition  building  with  groups  holding 


86/Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Vol.  V,  No.  4 


sharply  different  fundamental  values,  it  does  not  excuse  such  alliances. 
Ultimately,  the  choice  of  Stanton  and  Anthony  to  ally  with  the 
Democrats  weakened  antiracist  forces,  since  it  devalued  the  meaning 
of  natural  rights  for  all  and  narrowed  the  feminist  vision  to  include 
only  white  women. 

DuBois  is  more  sensitive  to  the  consequences  of  class  bias,  which 
further  limited  the  feminist  constituency  to  middle-class  women.  After 
failure  to  unite  with  the  Democrats,  Anthony  and  Stanton  turned  to 
the  National  Labor  Union,  the  largest  organized  body  of  workers  of 
the  time,  as  the  basis  for  a  new  reform  coalition.  Labor's  egalitarian 
ideology  reinforced  the  feminists'  original  faith  in  democracy  and 
allowed  them  to  break  free  from  the  major  political  parties.  But,  here 
too,  potential  allies  had  conflicting  interests.  Though  the  labor 
movement  and  feminists  both  embraced  equal  rights,  feminists  saw 
that  the  collective  acts  of  men  "to  defend  their  sexual  privileges"^ 
created  barriers  to  women's  labor  force  participation.  Male  unionists 
as  men  benefited  from  restricting  women's  entrance  to  the  skilled 
trades.  Organized  labor,  in  turn,  was  suspicious  of  the  feminists,  not 
only  for  their  attack  on  male  privilege  at  the  workplace,  but  also  for 
their  middle-class  aversion  to  class  conflict.  Like  many  reformers  from 
privileged  backgrounds,  the  feminists  fought  against  class  antagonism, 
rather  than  against  the  existence  of  classes  themselves. 

The  coalition  with  the  National  Labor  Union  was  shaky  from  the 
start,  but  the  feminist  analysis  of  Stanton  and  Anthony  appealed  to 
skilled  women  workers.  These  workers  agreed  with  the  feminist  belief 
that  paid  labor  outside  of  the  home  was  a  key  element  of  women's 
freedom.  Female  typesetters,  who  were  discriminated  against  on  the 
basis  of  sex  by  the  union  and  had  found  work  only  as  scabs,  joined  the 
Working  Women's  Association,  set  up  by  Stanton  and  Anthony  in  1868. 
Feminist  support  helped  these  women  form  their  own  organization 
and  forced  the  male-dominated  national  union  to  recognize  them, 
though  as  a  separate  female  local  under  union  discipline  but  without 
full  union  benefits. 

Gender  brought  the  feminists  and  the  working  women  together, 
but  class  eventually  divided  them.  The  female  typesetters  resigned 
from  the  Working  Women's  Association  when  the  feminists  hired 
nonunion  women  printers  during  the  typographical  strike  of  1869. 
Stanton  and  Anthony  misjudged  the  importance  of  working-class 
solidarity  during  a  strike,  even  for  women  whose  own  union 
discriminated  against  them.  Feminists  were  able  to  challenge  the 
sexism  of  organized  labor,  but  they  had  little  comprehension  of  the 

Word  Watch/87 


equally  debilitating  impact  of  class  on  working  women. 

The  feminist  vision  of  the  working  woman  as  independent,  skilled 
and  competent  contrasted  with  the  dependent  and  unskilled  status  of 
most  women  workers.  Unable  to  attract  the  bulk  of  New  York's 
working  women,  who  were  seamstresses,  to  their  Working  Women's 
Association,  Stanton  and  Anthony  were  left  with  an  organization 
increasingly  composed  of  women  writers,  doctors  and  business 
proprietors,  the  exceptional  women  professionals  of  their  day.  These 
middle-class  women,  "organized  on  behalf  of  their  own  emancipation 
and  not  the  uplift  of  their  less  fortunate  sisters,  were  the  people 
around  whom  an  independent  feminist  movement  would  be  built,"5 
DuBois  concludes. 

To  develop  a  movement  in  the  interests  of  white  middle-class 
women  meant  watering  down  what  DuBois  perceives  as  the  radicalism 
of  the  suffrage  demand.  According  to  DuBois,  in  a  world  structured  by 
the  ideology  of  separate  spheres,  with  citizenship  and  public  life 
belonging  to  men  and  domesticity  and  the  home  belonging  to 
women,  feminists  truly  believed  that  suffrage  was  a  revolutionary 
demand.  The  vote,  they  felt,  would  force  male  recognition  of  female 
equality  because  it  would  bring  women  into  the  public  sphere. 
However,  as  DuBois  recognizes,  "In  retrospect ...  it  was  women's 
involvement  in  the  movement,  far  more  than  the  eventual 
enfranchisement  of  women,  that  created  the  basis  for  new  social 
relations  between  men  and  women. "6  Participation  in  the  suffrage 
movement  provided  what  Stanton  hoped  to  gain  through  the  vote:  "it 
demonstrated  that  self-government  and  democratic  participation  in 
the  life  of  the  society  was  [sic]  the  key  to  women's  emancipation. "^ 
The  failure  of  coalition  building,  then,  was  not  without  its  rewards; 
from  their  experience,  Stanton  and  Anthony  developed  a  strong 
critique  of  male  dominance. 

In  her  concern  with  understanding  the  framework  of  the 
ninteenth-century  feminists,  DuBois  refrains  from  judging  them.  She 
leaves  us  with  a  sense  of  inevitability,  with  the  consequence  of 
exonerating  their  choices.  Her  sympathetic  position,  however,  allows 
DuBois  to  illuminate  the  forces  against  which  women  attempted  to 
make  their  own  history.  While  she  avoids  formulating  object  lessons 
from  this  past,  Feminism  and  Suffrage  is  not  devoid  of  political 
perspective.  By  focusing  on  the  struggle  for  suffrage,  DuBois  attacks 
women  historians  and,  by  implication,  cultural  feminists,  who  avoid 
examination  of  political  events  in  their  attempts  to  recover  the  world 
of  women's  culture.  DuBois  has  put  politics  into  the  center  of 
understanding  women's  place;  her  close  discussion  of  coalition  politics 

88/Quest 


in  the  past  offers  a  model  for  the  kind  of  sexual  political  analysis  we 
need  for  evaluating  our  own  projected  alliances. 

While  Ellen  DuBois  reveals  the  historical  basis  for  the  white, 
privileged  constituency  of  feminism  in  late-nineteenth-century 
America,  she  fails  to  ask  why  the  middle  class  leadership  of  the 
women's  movement  was  so  little  challenged.  In  The  Rising  of  the 
Women,  Meredith  Tax  promises  an  answer  to  this  question  through 
her  investigation  of  the  potential  challengers  of  these  liberal  feminists; 
the  left-wing  or  socialist  feminists  who  tried  to  organize  working 
women  and  create  a  united  front  with  male  trade  unionists  and 
middle-class  feminists.  For  Tax,  the  economism  of  the  most  militant 
socialists,  the  International  Workers  of  the  World  (IWW),  the 
organizational  weakness  of  trade  union  feminists,  and  the  sectarianism 
of  the  Socialist  Party,  seen  in  its  creation  of  separate  socialist  suffrage 
organizations,  explain  much  of  the  liberal  feminists'  grip  on  the 
women's  movement.  In  showing  how  "alliances  across  class  lines  have 
sometimes  worked  for  and  sometimes  against  the  long-term  political 
interests  of  working  women/'8  Tax  subtly  attacks  modern-day  socialist 
feminists  and  radical  feminists  for  retreating  into  autonomous 
organizations,  for  refusing  the  struggle  that  a  united  front  always 
brings. 

Central  to  Tax's  analysis  is  the  concept  of  "a  united  front  of 
women,"  which  she  defines  as  "the  alliance,  recurring  through  time  in 
various  forms,  of  women  in  the  socialist  movement,  the  labor 
movement,  the  national  liberation  movements,  and  the  feminist 
movement."9  Sometimes  she  also  speaks  of  a  more  general  united 
front  that  includes  men.  Differentiating  her  use  of  united  front  from 
"the  catchall  sense"  of  the  Communist  Party,  USA  during  the  Popular 
Front  of  the  1930's,  Tax  borrows  from  current  Third  World  definitions 
"to  describe  the  coming  together  of  different  classes  and  their 
organizations  (as  well  as  different  national  and  gender  groups)  for  a 
goal  of  some  magnitude  that  takes  a  considerable  length  of  time  to 
achieve.'0  Coalitions,  in  contrast,  bring  groups  together  for  more 
specific  and  limited  goals.  "A  united  front  of  women"  also  differs  from 
what  we  understand  as  the  autonomous  women's  movement.  The 
women  in  Tax's  account  viewed  themselves  as  "the  human  links 
between  the  feminist  movement,  the  labor  movement,  and  the 
socialist  movement."1    While  they  worked  for  women's  liberation, 
addressing  the  special  needs  of  women  workers,  they  sought  to 
integrate  women  "into  the  general  struggle  for  socialism."12 

"A  united  front  of  women"  remains  an  abstract  term  apart  from 
the  case  studies  which  Tax  draws  upon  to  flesh  out  its  meaning. 

Word  Watch /89 


Through  histories  of  women  organizers,  their  activities  and  political 
groups,  Tax  explicitly  draws  lessons  from  the  past.  She  asks  us  to 
remember  the  Illinois  Women's  Alliance  of  1888-1894  "because  it 
shows  what  a  united  front  can  achieve,  even  in  such  a 
nonrevolutionary  situation  as  prevailed  in  Chicago's  Gilded  Age, 
where  public  policy  was  openly  made  by  the  corporations  and 
implemented  by  one  of  the  earliest  and  most  developed  big-city 
political  machines."  '3  Composed  of  women  from  the  socialist,  labor 
and  suffrage  movements,  along  with  members  of  middle-class 
women's  clubs  and  professional  associations,  the  Alliance  campaigned 
for  factory  inspection  and  sweatshop  regulation,  better  schools  and 
child  labor  laws.  With  an  understanding  of  the  political  uses  of 
violence  against  women,  it  also  fought  police  harassment  of 
prostitutes.  Though  Tax  represents  the  Alliance  as  an  ideal  vehicle  for 
progressive  demands,  the  philanthropic  impulse  of  its  middle-class 
members  increasingly  collided  with  the  political  initiatives  of  its  trade 
unionists  and  socialists.  At  that  time,  women  rarely  conducted  internal 
political  discussion  of  the  influence  of  class  background  on  political 
questions. 

Tax  focuses  on  two  great  strikes  for  her  historical  lessons:  the 
Uprising  of  the  Thirty  Thousand,  the  1909  strike  of  the  New  York 
ladies'  garment  workers,  and  the  Lawrence  textile  strike  of  1912.  The 
1909  strike,  which  led  to  the  organization  of  the  International  Ladies' 
Garment  Workers,  exposed  how  sexual  division  in  the  workplace 
combined  with  male  dominance  in  society  to  shape  up  a  bureaucratic 
union  unable  or  unwilling  to  address  the  needs  of  its  predominantly 
female  rank  and  file.  "Only  certain  kinds  of  wars  can  be  won  by  such  an 
army"  (in  which  the  generals  were  men  and  the  soldiers  were  women), 
Tax  points  out,  "and  a  war  for  women's  liberation  is  not  among 
them."      Tax  concludes  from  this  experience,  "When  women  fill  all 
the  most  exploited  categories  in  an  industry,  a  fight  for  economic 
justice  is  inseparable  from  a  struggle  for  women's  liberation.5  Yet 
this  statement  remains  a  truism,  since  she  does  not  accompany  it  with 
a  discussion  of  strategies  to  link  the  two  struggles.  (Tax  finds  an 
attempt  to  organize  women  workers  as  women  in  the  efforts  of  the 
cross-class  feminist  Women's  Trade  Union  League,  but  her  persuasive 
analysis  of  the  League's  bourgeois  bias  overwhelms  her  praise  for  its 
women-centered  tactics.) 

Though  the  garment  strike  resulted  in  the  establishment  of 
industrywide  protocols  negotiated  between  male  bosses  and  male 
union  officials,  the  militancy  and  dedication  of  the  women  strikers 


90/Quest 


overturned  the  myth  that  women  were  unorganizable.  The  Lawrence 
textile  strike  of  1912  also  demonstrated  that  housewives  and  working 
mothers  were  far  from  the  backward  elements  that  male  socialists  and 
unionists  usually  judged  them  to  be.  Despite  the  burdens  of  their 
families,  "They  had  been  able  to  rise  when  their  whole  class  rose:  in 
the  crisis  enough  pressure  was  lifted  from  the  backs  of  working 
mothers  to  give  them  room  to  think  and  move." '6  (Indeed  Tax  shows 
that  housewives,  with  more  time  than  women  factory  workers, 
composed  the  cadre  of  socialist  women  whose  work  in  the  1880s  and 
1890s  paved  the  way  for  the  extraordinary  number  of  organized 
women  in  Chicago  in  the  first  years  of  the  twentieth  century.) 

IWW  leadership  in  Lawrence  encouraged  community 
involvement,  not  only  because  the  Wobblies  advocated  participatory 
democracy,  but  also  because  Wobbly  women,  most  notably  Elizabeth 
Gurley  Flynn,  had  developed  a  practice  which  went  beyond  the 
workplace  focus  of  IWW  ideology.  Flynn  understood  reproductive 
freedom  "as  the  'most  fundamental  of  all  the  claims  made  by  women/ 
for  only  a  woman's  'right  to  her  own  body — Sex  independence  in  and 
out  of  marriage— 'could  bring  about  'equality  in  the  home'  and  the 
'breakdown  of  that  modern  and  bad  institution,  the  man-supported 
family."       In  the  struggle  for  birth  control,  the  major  reproductive 
demand  of  those  years,  Flynn  advocated  "solidarity  among  women  to 
achieve  these  ends/       But  the  IWW  as  an  organization,  with  its 
cowboy  heroism  and  general  masculinist  aura,  provided  a  difficult 
arena  for  women  radicals. 

Tax's  own  activity  in  the  women's  liberation  movement,  including 
the  socialist-feminist  Chicago  Women's  Liberation  Union  and  the  New 
York  Committee  for  Abortion  Rights  and  Against  Sterilization  Abuse 
(CARASA),  has  allowed  her  to  penetrate  the  randomness  of  history, 
but  she  does  so  at  the  risk  of  flattening  the  complexity  of  the  past  into 
a  correct  line.  That  is,  she  judges  past  choices  from  a  present 
perspective  without  full  consideration  of  the  impediments  presented 
by  the  situation's  historical  context.  For  instance,  she  reduces  the 
decision  of  trade  union  women  to  leave  the  Illinois  Women's  Alliance, 
which  they  had  organized,  to  a  personal  reaction  to  betrayal.  She 
thinks  that  socialist  women  should  have  remained  in  the  cross-class 
Alliance  to  fight  for  its  leadership.  Whether  the  general  political  and 
economic  situation  in  Chicago  in  the  early  1890s  warranted  such  a 
strategy  remains  questionable.  To  conclude  that  "where  there  is  no 
battle,  there  can  be  no  victory;  and  when  leadership  of  the  whole 
women's  movement  is  voluntarily  turned  over  to  its  bourgeois 


Word  Watch/91 


members,  they  will  certainly  take  it"19  may  apply  to  the  work  of 
socialist  feminists  today  in  relation  to  NOW  or  NARAL,  but  seems 
superimposed  on  Tax's  historical  narrative  of  socialist  and  trade  union 
women  in  Chicago  a  century  ago. 

Throughout  her  case  studies,  Tax  suggests  that  women's  liberation 
depends  on  the  state  of  the  socialist  revolution  and  the  strength  of 
socialists  in  the  trade  union  movement.  While  her  theoretical 
conclusion  hastens  to  add  that  dependency  does  not  mean 
subordination,  that  "The  relationship  between  socialist  revolution  and 
women's  liberation  is  complex  and  dialectical,"  u  she  nonetheless  sees 
proletarian  revolution  as  a  precondition  for  women's  liberation.  While 
she  labels  "mechanical"  the  Marxist  "class-first"  analysis,  which  judges 
women's  liberation  to  be  secondary  to  class  struggle,  she  also  rejects 
the  dual  systems  theory  developed  by  socialist  feminists.      Dual 
systems  theory  postulates  two  intertwined,  but  separate,  systems  of 
social  relations,  capitalism  and  patriarchy;  the  first  governs  economic 
relations  and  the  second  governs  the  relations  between  the  sexes.  Tax 
correctly  notes  the  static  quality  of  early  socialist-feminist  theory,  but 
rather  than  work  towards  a  historical  analysis  of  the  sometimes 
contradictory  and  sometimes  complementary  interplay  of  capitalism 
and  patriarchy,  as  some  women  are  doing,  she  retreats  to  "the 
fundamental  fact  that  women  are  very  much  a  part  of  the  class  struggle 
and  their  lives  are  entirely  mediated  by  class  relations."22  To  contend 
that  "There  is  no  struggle  for  women's  liberation  that  is  separate  and 
independent  of  class"23  ignores  the  complex  and  dialectical 
interaction  of  male  dominance  with  class,  an  interaction  that  her  own 
case  studies  of  IWW  and  Socialist  Party  behavior  illustrate. 

Such  a  theoretical  framework  leads  Tax  to  some  dubious 
emphases.  In  general,  she  judges  middle-class  feminists  more  harshly 
than  male  socialists  or  unionists.  Yet  feminist  support  of  working 
women,  as  DuBois  shows,  at  times  proved  crucial  for  craft  union 
attention  to  working  women.  Tax  criticizes  liberal  feminists  but  still 
attacks  socialist  women  for  splitting  from  them  to  form  "pure" 
organizations.  With  the  current  scene  in  mind,  she  rebukes  left 
feminists  for  a  failure  to  "envision  a  difficult,  protracted  relationship 
combining  unity  on  some  questions  with  contention  over  others .  .  . 
The  united  front  of  women  involves  both  a  necessary  sisterhood  and 
class  war:  both  can  be  unpleasant;  both  are  unavoidable."      To 
struggle  with  liberal  feminists,  to  work  with  them  and  against  them, 
need  not  take  place  within  the  same  organization,  as  Tax  seems  to 
suggest,  especially  if  liberal  feminists  control  the  organizational 
apparatus  and  restrict  democratic  process. 

92/Quest 


The  Rising  of  the  Women  calls  for  a  dual  struggle:  for  women's 
own  liberation  and  for  general  social  change.  In  light  of  women's 
"particular  needs/'  Tax  supports  autonomous  women's  organizations; 
but  by  minimizing  the  significance  of  patriarchy,  she  weakens  the 
material  basis  for  autonomy  and  reduces  autonomy  to  a  strategic 
question.  While  Tax  understands  how  women's  work  in  the  home — 
household  maintenance  and  child  rearing— and  her  lack  of 
reproductive  control  shape  labor  force  participation,  she  chooses  not 
to  elaborate  on  these  subjects.  Such  an  omission  seriously  restricts  her 
analysis,  because  the  lives  of  working  women  do  not  neatly  divide  into 
home  and  workplace. 

Such  objections  aside,  Meredith  Tax  pushes  us  to  rethink  strategy 
in  a  way  that  few  historical  or  theoretical  works  do.  Chastising  those  in 
our  movement  who  focus  on  "women's  issues"  and  leave  the 
economy,  war  and  racism  to  men,  Tax  offers  us  the  challenge  of 
struggling  within  a  united  front. 

Neither  Feminism  and  Suffrage  nor  The  Rising  of  the  Women 
offers  panaceas  for  our  present  dilemmas.  Knowing  how  Elizabeth 
Cady  Stanton  and  Susan  B.  Anthony  reacted  to  betrayal  by  male  allies 
or  how  socialist  women  rarely  received  credit  from  liberal  feminists  in 
their  coalition  work  will  not  save  us  from  similar  betrayals  or  neglect. 
These  books  cannot  tell  us  whether  to  work  with  NOW  or  NARAL 
against  the  Human  Life  Amendment  or  to  forge  our  own  grassroots 
strategy  for  reproductive  control.  They  cannot  advise  us  to  join  the 
Democratic  Socialist  Organizing  Committee  (DSOC),  the  Socialist 
Workers  Party  or  the  Anti-Klan  Network.  But  they  can  encourage  us  to 
question  the  assumptions  we  bring  to  coalition  building. 
Understanding  the  historical  basis  of  the  privileged,  white, 
independent  women's  movement  and  of  the  failure  of  socialist 
feminists  to  bridge  class  and  gender  oppression  in  a  viable  institutional 
form  forces  us  to  look  at  our  own  class  and  race  composition.  As 
books  inspired  by  the  women's  liberation  movement,  both  works 
reflect  the  maturing  of  feminism  in  our  time:  the  realization  that 
spontaneity  without  strategy  is  no  way  to  win  a  political  struggle. 
DuBois  and  Tax  have  challenged  us  to  take  seriously  the  structures  and 
platforms  upon  which  we  build  the  current  struggle. 


Notes 

•  Ellen  Carol  DuBois,  Feminism  and  Suffrage:  The  Emergence  of  an  Independent 
Women's  Movement  in  America,  1848-184%  (Ithaca:  Cornell  University  Press,  paperback 
edition,  1980),  p.  201. 


Word  Watch/93 


2-  DuBois,  p.  102. 

3-  DuBois,  p.  102. 

4-  DuBois,  p.  136. 
5- DuBois,  p.  161. 
6- DuBois,  p.  201. 

7-  DuBois,  pp.  201-202. 

8-  Meredith  Tax,  The  Rising  of  the  Women:  Feminist  Solidarity  and  Class  Conflict,  1880- 
1917  (New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press,  1980),  p.  12. 

9-  Tax,  p.  13. 
10Tax,  pp.  13-14. 
'•''•Tax,  p.  14. 

12- Tax,  p.  15. 

13-  Tax,  p.  66 

14-  Tax,  p.  240. 
15Tax,  p.  240. 
16>  Tax,  275. 
17- Tax,  p.  156. 
18Tax,  p.  156. 

19-  Tax,  p.  89. 

20-  Tax,  p.  278. 

21-  For  the  most  comprehensive  discussion  of  dual  systems  theory,  see  Lydia  Sargent,  ed., 
Women  and  Revolution:  A  Discussion  of  the  Unhappy  Marriage  of  Marxism  and 
Feminism  (Boston:  South  End  Press,  1981). 

22-  Tax,  pp.  278-279. 

23-  Tax,  p.  279 

24-  Tax,  p.  283. 

Eileen  Boris  is  a  radical  historian  active  in  the  D.C.  Area  Feminist 
Alliance,  the  Reproductive  Rights  National  Network  and  Solidarity:  A 
Socialist-Feminist  Network.  Her  writings  have  appeared  in  such 
journals  as  Signs  and  Victorian  Studies. 


94/Quest 


Word  Watch/95 


Non-ProfitOrg. 
U.S.  POSTAGE 

PAID 

Permit  45679 

Washington,  D.C. 


Future  Issue 


Designing  Our  Future 

This  issue  will  examine  why  ecology,  the  environment,  nuclear  power  and 
appropriate  technology  are  feminist  issues.  How  can  women  as  producers, 
as  designers,  as  consumers  influence  new  technologies?  What  are  the  points 
of  access  for  women  for  use,  development  and  control  of  alternate 
technologies?  How  do  we  demythologize  technology  and  move  towards 
control  of  such  technologies?  What  will  an  environmental/feminist  Utopia 
look  iike?  We  welcome  articles  from  women  who  are  scientists,  grass-roots 
organizers  on  safe  energy  issues,  women  in  government,  in  public  interest 
organizations,  in  environmental  and  energy  education,  researchers,  and 
hands-on  appropriate  technologists  and  futurists. 


