$2.00 


quarterly 


PROCESSES  of  CHANGE 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth 
feminist  political  analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is 
not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the 
women's  movement  possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as 
regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization  or  a  poli- 
tical party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the 
movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached  a  point  where  each 
answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been  through  various 
ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle 
brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power 
for  women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence 
against  women?  Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do 
not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across 
the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


vol.  I  no.  1 
Summer,  1974 

a    feminist  quarterly 
PROCESSES  of  CHANGE 
contents 

SPIRAL  of  CHANGE:  An  Intoduction  to  Quest 

Karen  Kollias  2 

POLITICAL  CHANGE:  Two  Perspectives  on  Power 

Nancy  Hartsock  10 

DAYDREAM-A  Poem 

Chris  Llewellyn  26 

An  Interview  on  WOMEN'S  HEALTH  POLITICS 

Part  I        Frances  Hornstein  27 

The  REFORM  TOOL  KIT 

Charlotte  Bunch  37 

MOVING  MEDIA:  The  EXORCIST 

Dolores  Bargowski  53 

The  GOOD  FAIRY 

Rita  Mae  Brown  58 

LIBERATION  of  WOMAN:  To  Change  the  World 

and  Re-invent  Life 

Rosiska  Darcy  de  Oliveira/Mireille  Calame  65 


editorial 

advisory 

board 

Juanita  Weaver,  Gerri 
Traina,  Emily  Medvec, 
Mary-Helen  Mautner,  Ka- 
ren Kollias,  Nancy  Hart- 
sock,  Alexa  Freeman, 
Beverly  Fisher,  Jane  Dol- 
kart,  Charlotte  Bunch, 
Rita  Mae  Brown,  Dolo- 
res Bargowski. 


1974  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights 
reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  pro- 
hibited. Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times 
a  year  in  January,  April,  June,  and  October  by  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  1909  Que  St.,  N.W.  Washington, 
D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Application  to  mail  at  second-class 
postage  rates  is  pending  at  Washington  D.C. 


I 


Printed   by    Diana   Press,    Baltimore,  Maryland,   U.S.A. 

ubscription  rates  are  $7.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 

8.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $10.00/year  overseas; 

12.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.00/sample  copy.  Address 
all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box 
8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003.  For  change  of  address, 
please  give  eight  weeks  notice  and  include  the  mailing  label 
of  your  most  recent  copy  of  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly. 
Bulk  rates  available  upon  request.  Advertising  rates  and 
deadlines  available  upon  request. 


editorial 
staff 

Copy  Editors:  Charlotte 
Bunch,  Gerri  Traina  Bu- 
siness Manager:  Beverly 
Fisher  Art  &  Production 
Manager:  Alexa  Freeman 

Our  thanks  to  all  who 
helped  make  this  first 
issue  possible. 

Cover  design  by  Casey 
Czarnik 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth 
feminist  political  analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is 
not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the 
women's  movement  possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as 
regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization  or  a  poli- 
tical party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the 
movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached  a  point  where  each 
answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been  through  various 
ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle 
brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power 
for  women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence 
against  women?  Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do 
not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across 
the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


Notes  on  submission  of  material 


Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8V2  x  11  paper,  using  a 
black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy).  All 
manuscripts,  poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by 
a  stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable.  Authors  will  receive 
edited  manuscripts  for  review. 

Listed  references  should  be  collected  and  typed  at  the  end  of 
the  paper  in  numerical  order.  Authors  are  encouraged  to  study  The 
MLA  Style  Sheet,  2nd  ed.,  and  follow  this  in  preparing  their 
papers.  Letters  and  responses  to  published  articles  are  encouraged. 
Letters  and  responses  to  Vol.  1  No.  1  will  be  accepted  through 
July  31,  1974. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  requested.  For  information 
concerning  specifications,  please  address  all  correspondence  to 
the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


by  Karen  Kollias 


When  we  talk  about  change,  we  ac- 
cept the  fact  that  nature  transforms 
itself  four  times  a  year.  It  is  no  longer 
questioned  that  our  planet  makes  yearly 
revolutions  around  the  sun.  While  we 
observe  the  change  and  growth  of 
foliage,  animals  and  children,  we  active- 
ly participate  in  changing  our  clothes, 
our  plans  and  our  minds.  The  moon 
passes  from  one  phase  into  another 
monthly;  these  monthly  intervals 
[menses)  explain  the  origin  of  the  word 
"menstruation."  Why,  then,  is  there  re- 
sistance, questioning  and  fear  when 
people  hear  the  word  change? 

This  article  examines  the  process  of 


change  on  a  societal  level,  within  indi- 
viduals, as  the  motion  of  rebellion,  and 
as  it  affects  the  women's  movement. 
Second,  it  introduces  us,  Quest:  a  femi- 
nist quarterly,  as  part  of  a  process  of 
change  that  needs  to  be  initiated  affir- 
matively within  the  women's  move- 
ment. 

Processes  of  Change  and 
Power  Structures 

The  process  of  change  for  human 
development  must  be  oriented  toward 
positive  life-energy  forces.  Large-scale 
change  in  our  society  seems  to  occur 
in  two  major  ways.  In  the  first  way, 


21  Quest,  vol.  I  no.l,  summer,  1974 


those  in  power  think  out,  plan  and 
create  active  changes,  such  as  techno- 
logical advances,  for  their  own  benefit. 
This  form  of  change  should  be  exam- 
ined in  a  separate  article,  especially 
when  used  as  the  means  of  maintaining 
power. 

The  second  form  of  change  usually 
occurs  as  a  reaction  against  the  power 
structures  by  those  who  are  confined 
daily  by  objective  conditions,  who  have 
little  power  or  control  over  their  lives, 
much  less  over  the  system  which  keeps 
them  dependent.  I  will  focus  on  this 
form  of  change  since  it  deals  with  the 
activities  of  various  political  move- 
ments, including  the  women's  move- 
ment. I  will  also  suggest  what  consti- 
tutes productive  changes. 

Those  who  are  not  a  part  of  the 
power  structure  (now  to  be  identified 
as  the  powerless),  are  still  dependent 
on  it  for  survival,  which  often  limits 
the  changes  that  can  be  made. 

The  most  common  forms  of  change 
carried  out  by  the  powerless  are  spon- 
taneous, unorganized,  or  possibly  viol- 
ent one-time  attacks  against  objective 
conditions.  Unfortunately,  many  or- 
ganizers still  romanticize  spontaneous 
uprisings  as  a  sign  of  strength  and  vic- 
tory by  and  for  the  people.  Uprisings 
that  are  unorganized,  not  grounded  in 
clearly  thought-out  ideology,  and  initi- 
ated  by   those   the   system   does  not 


need,  begin  from  a  weak  position  com- 
pared with  the  power  structure,  and 
often  end  in  a  worse  one.  There  usual- 
ly aren't  any  concrete,  constructive 
changes  to  show  for  the  struggles. 

Struggle  for  survival  forces  the  pow- 
erless to  live  at  a  level  of  daily  exis- 
tence, a  time-consuming  process.  Day- 
to-day  struggle  also  alters  the  power- 
less' perceptions  of  their  immediate 
conditions.  It  is  therefore  sometimes 
difficult  for  people  to  realize  that  the 
system  responsible  for  feeding  them  is 
also  their  worst  enemy.  For  example, 
some  will  take  action  against  the  small 
neighborhood  market,  holding  it  res- 
ponsible for  the  increasing  food  prices, 
unable  to  see  that  the  real  control  lies 
beyond  that  market. 

I  by  no  means  intend  to  discount 
the  potential  of  spontaneous  actions, 
violence  or  riots  as  part  of  the  processes 
of  change.  These  actions  in  their  times 
have  revealed  to  the  powerless  other 
problems  in  the  societal  structure,  per- 
suaded some  people  to  become  allies, 
and  sometimes  forced  minimal  conces- 
sions from  the  power  structure.  (It  is  in 
the  interest  of  the  power  structure  to 
absorb  as  many  demands  as  possible 
without  threat  to  its  basic  fabric.)  The 
crucial  point  is  that  the  process  of 
achieving  change  partially  determines 
the  outcome  of  any  action.  Our  priori- 
ty must  be  to  determine  which  con- 


Spiral  of  Change/3 


crete    forms    of   change  will  be   most 
effective  for  our  society. 

Processes  of  Change  and 
Individual  Solutions 

Power  structures  permit  at  least  one 
means  of  constructive  change— the  indi- 
vidual solution— in  order  to  prove  their 
concern  for  the  development  of  the 
people.  This  change,  however,  does  not 
embrace  positive  life-energy  forces,  but 
benefits  private  interests  instead. 

There  is  a  difference  between  "indi- 
vidual change"  and  "individual  solu- 
tion." Power  structures  allow  indivi- 
dual solutions,  primarily  to  those  who 
can  afford  them,  and  when  they  can 
be  absorbed  into  the  system.  Providing 
benefits  for  one  individual  is  one  of 
the  safest  methods  of  pacifying  and 
directing  that  individual's  anger  or  des- 
pair away  from  the  power  structure. 
Individual  change,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  a  continuous  process  that  builds  re- 
sponsible persons  with  strong  self-con- 
cepts and  a  political  group  identity, 
particularly  when  they  belong  to  an 
oppressed  group.  Individual  change 
must  occur  simultaneously  with  funda- 
mental social  change. 

Individual  solutions,  based  on  priv- 
ileges, pose  no  threat  to  the  power 
structure  and  divide  people  against  one 
another,  because  they  are  centered 
around  personal  security  rather  than 
group  struggle  for  a  new  society.  If  one 
accumulates  rewards  (material  security, 
family,  status)  through  individual  solu- 
tions, she  or  he  will  not  readily  support 
an  oppressed  group  or  participate  in 
the  struggle  against  institutions  upon 
which  she  or  he  depends  for  those  re- 


wards. That  is,  individual  solutions,  not 
rooted  in  political  awareness,  divide 
people  and  work  against  a  widespread 
understanding  of  the  interrelationships 
of  the  oppressions  suffered  by  the 
powerless. 

The  power  structure  has  institu- 
tionalized a  number  of  acceptable 
changes  and  individual  solutions.  Some 
of  the  more  obvious  means  of  this  kind 
of  pacification  are  service  programs, 
therapy  (cited  as  "adjustment,"  not 
"change,"  by  Rough  Times),  social 
events  and  rehabilitation  programs. 
Class,  race  and  sex  all  function  to 
determine  which  institutions  affect 
whom:  the  socialization  processes  put 
people  into  different  roles  and  teach  us 
what  changes  are  allowable  for  our 
group. 

Change  as  the  Motion  for 
Rebellion 

Rebellion  is  defined  by  Webster  as, 
"opposition  to  one  in  authority  or 
dominance;  open  defiance  of  or  resis- 
tance to  an  established  government;  to 
act  or  show  disobedience."  Rebellion, 
as  a  process  of  change,  is  usually  an 
individual  or  isolated  act.  The  primary 
institutions  which  govern  us  are  firmly 
grounded  in  ideologies  of  sexism, 
racism  and  capitalism.  However,  secon- 
dary institutions  maintain  the  ruling 
ideologies,  and  it  is  against  these  that 
most  rebellious  acts  are  focused.  These 
institutions,  the  church,  family,  state, 
and  educational  system,  are  the  pro- 
pagandizing and  socializing  agents  of 
the  ruling  ideologies. 

As  secondary  institutions,  they  can 
change,  be  eliminated  or  fall  apart  with- 


4/Quest 


out  necessarily  threatening  the  ruling 
forces.  Students  for  a  Democratic  So- 
ciety (S.D.S.),  for  example,  organized 
against  the  oppressive  regulations  of 
higher  education.  They  called  them- 
selves revolutionaries  regardless  of  how 
their  analyses  were  limited  and  ex- 
cluded a  major  proportion  of  the 
powerless.  Still  others  battled  the  edu- 
cational system  by  individually  drop- 
ping out.  Yet  despite  these  efforts, 
millions  of  students  are  caught  in  the 
public  schools'  tracking  systems. 

The  United  States  has  always  had 
its  share  of  rebellion  against  organized 
religion,  too.  Many  leaders  of  the  civil 
rights  and  peace  movements  were  from 
within  the  church.  Yet  little  concrete 
analysis  of  the  relationship  between 
church  and  state  action  resulted.  To  be 
sure,  the  past  few  years  brought  the 
creation  of  new  forms  of  religion  and 
spiritualism;  thousands  of  people  be- 
came followers  of  these  various  beliefs. 
But  the  results  were  more  individual 
solutions,  and  no  appreciable  basic 
changes. 

Perhaps  the  most  visible  example 
came  in  the  fifties  and  sixties  in  the 
form  of  active  rebellion  against  the  in- 
stitution of  the  family.  Children,  ali- 
enated from  their  parents,  acted  out 
their  defiance,  as  documented  in  Rebel 
Without  a  Cause.  Struggling  under 
more  and  more  layers  of  institution- 
alized structures,  many  people  rebelled 
against  the  most  immediate  force  of 
authority— the.family,  the  parents. 

As  a  result,  marriage  and  family  are 
being  questioned  and  new  lifestyles  are 
being  adopted.  The  women's  move- 
ment itself  has  led  much  of  the  female 


dissent  against  the  restrictive  nature  of 
the  nuclear  family.  But,  while  they  are 
important  signs  of  discontent,  none  of 
these  rebellions  has  ever  reached  revo- 
lutionary stages,  or  has  successfully 
involved  organized  action  to  gain  pow- 
er and  force  structural  change. 

A  New  Process  of  Change 
for  the  Women's  Movement 

The  women's  movement  must  recog- 
nize that  change  moves  upward  and 
outward,  as  in  a  spiral.  As  the  move- 
ment grows  and  changes,  more  can  be 
encompassed,  bringing  about  greater 
effects  on  the  institutions  maintaining 
the  power  structure.  Change  cannot  be 
viewed  in  the  conventional  ways:  it  is 
neither  horizontal  nor  vertical,  circular 
nor  two-dimensional.  If  we  do  not  see 
the  shortcomings  of  rebellion  or  the 
vulnerability  of  individual  solutions, 
we  will  fall  short  of  our  desired  goals 
and  needs. 

Processes  of  change  are  shaped  by 
time,  group  make-up,  geography,  emo- 
tional outlooks,  intensity  of  needs  and 
motives.  Since  different  groups  have 
differing  needs,  many  overlapping,  the 
women's  movement  must  be  flexible 
enough  to  accomodate  variation  with- 
out losing  its  governing  sense  of  direc- 
tion. Often  the  women's  movement 
has  accepted  any  and  all  change  as  an 
end  in  and  of  itself.  It  is  easy  to  lose 
our  sense  of  timing  and  direction  when 
we  are  faced  with  abrupt  starts,  small 
success  and  long  battles.  But  we  must 
recognize  our  past  mistakes  and  success 
in  order  to  use  them  as  building  tools 
for  the  spiral  construct  of  change.  We 
must   not   fear   the   unknown   or  the 


Spiral  of  Change/5 


challenging,  but  be  able  to  plan  and 
carry  out  actions  that  will  give  us 
power  over  our  lives  and  over  societal 
decision-making.  Organizers,  leaders, 
thinkers  and  hustlers  of  the  women's 
movement  should  make  conscious  ef- 
forts to  expand  our  minds,  force  us  to 
think  in  a  totality,  and  to  envision  con- 
tinous  processes.  As  long  as  we  ex- 
perience physical  changes  within  our- 
selves, our  words,  ideas  and  actions 
must  be  in  continual  motion.  We  must 
live  the  processes  of  change  and  take 
the  risks  as  well  as  the  victories. 

Alexa  Freeman 


Introduction  to  Quest 

Quest  is  our  name.  Our  goal  is  to 
promote  a  continuing,  active  search 
for  ideologies  and  strategies  that  will 
bring  about  the  most  comprehensive 
change  by  the  most  effective  and  hu- 
mane methods. 

We  dare  to  challenge  ourselves  to 
new  forms  of  thinking,  to  the  creation 
of  those  needed  strategies,  and  to  take 
on  issues  which  affect  women  but 
which  have  not  been  defined  as  "wom- 
en's issues." 


6/Quest 


We  feel  that  the  leaders,  organizers 
and  active  participants  in  the  women's 
movement  should  examine  what  we 
have  done  in  the  past  six  or  seven 
years,  what  we  are  doing  now,  and 
where  we  are  headed. 

The  women's  movement  has  evolved 
to  an  historic  point  at  which  we  need 
new  and  deeper  content,  new  ap- 
proaches, further  commitment,  recog- 
nition of  political  growth,  and  con- 
structive criticism.  Quest  intends  to  be 
a  part  of  this  process  through  con- 
tributing to  fundamental  change. 

We  are  about  open  political  forums. 

Quest  wishes  to  explore  differences 
and  similarities  in  ideologies  and  stra- 
tegies among  the  various  segments  of 
the  women's  movement.  We  are  a 
journal  of  long-term,  in-depth  political 
analysis;  a  searching-ground  for  answers 
to  unresolved  questions. 

Quest  serves  as  a  means  of  com- 
munication among  all  quarters  of  the 
women's  movement,  and  comes  into 
being  because  the  national  channels  of 
exchange  have  lately  become  lax. 

Quest  also  reaches  out  to  those  who 
are  creating  and  teaching  political,  soc- 
ial or  economic  change  in  other  areas, 
and  who  are  concerned  with  how  the 
women's  movement  deals  with  issues, 
structures  and  power. 

We  see  Quest  as  more  than  just  a 
magazine.  We  hope  to  contribute  to  the 
organization  of  ideological  conferences 
and  to  the  creation  of  new  projects— 
both  locally  and  nationally.  The  ar- 
ticles we  print  should  expose  a  wider 
audience  to  new  and  different  ap- 
proaches to  the  struggle  for  change. 
Short  articles  and  letters  to  the  editor 


are  important  to  us  as  a  means  of  open, 
political  debate  and  exchange  con- 
cerning the  issues  presented  in  the 
journal.  We  are  searching  for  substance, 
not  merely  for  description.  The  sec- 
tions, "Moving  Media"  and  "Written 
Word"  will  review  films,  television, 
books  and  magazines  that  affect  the 
lives  of  many  people.  But  rather  than 
reviewing  only  feminist  creations,  we 
also  wish  feminists  to  examine  the 
larger  society  through  its  visual  and 
written  mediums. 

We  are  about  strategies. 

Quest  wishes  to  contribute  to  the 
evolution  of  better  strategy  and  tactics, 
to  be  a  process  for  evaluating  previous 
theory  and  practice.  We  must  learn  to 
understand  the  role  of  time  in  our 
strategies.  We  must  build  from  our 
past  mistakes  and  patent  our  victories. 
Criteria  must  be  developed  to  deter- 
mine whether  specific  tactics  will  work, 
will  be  worth  our  time,  energy  and 
resources. 

We  are  about  change. 

We  all  have  been  involved  with  the 
women's  movement  for  several  years. 
During  this  time  we  have  experienced 


Spiral  of  Change/7 


personal  changes,  political  changes,  and 
have  adapted  to  changes  in  objective 
conditions.  We  assume  that  the  wom- 
en's movement,  and  those  involved  in 
it,  consider  complete  and  fundamental 
change  as  a  primary  goal. 

Quest  recognizes  total  change  as  a 
necessity  for  survival  for  the  majority 
of  people— not  as  an  individual  choice 
for  those  securing  personal  comfort. 
Social  welfare  projects  have  been  fun- 
ded and  absorbed  by  the  government; 
economic  change  has  been  read  about 
and   discussed   at   a   distance;  limited 


personal  change  has  become  institu- 
tionalized; and  political  change  has 
either  been  left  alone,  misunderstood 
or  labeled  "cultural  awareness." 

Each  issue  of  the  journal  will  deal 
with  the  processes  of  change,  though 
the  entire  first  issue  centers  on  this 
topic.  We  will  discuss  how  to  identify 
productive  change  as  opposed  to  re- 
gressive change.  We  want  to  bring  forth 
the  relationship  between  frameworks 
of  change,  leadership  and  ideology. 

We  are  about  ideology. 

So  far  we  have  not  developed  an 


S/Quest 


ideology  that  accurately  describes  us 
or  that  was  comprehensive  enough  to 
include  all  our  questions,  answers, 
needs  and  visions. 

The  time  has  come  to  expand  femi- 
nist ideology.  We  have  been  discussing 
and  working  around  issues  and  con- 
ditions that  affect  all  women,  yet  it 
has  been  easy  to  overlook  the  varying 
needs  and  differences  among  women. 
Differences  in  geographical  location, 
race,  class,  sex  preference,  religion,  age 
and  other  factors  must  be  included  for 
a  broader,  more  realistic  ideology  that 
moves  toward  a  workable  base  for 
unity. 

Women  will  not  be  handed  our 
self-determination.  We  must  take  pow- 
er in  order  to  achieve  and  maintain 
our  self-determination.  We  must  have 
significant  control  over  the  decisions 
and  directions  of  our  society,  to  im- 
prove the  lives  of  as  many  people  as 
possible. 

We  want  to  be  involved  in  making 
decisions  about  the  institutions  which 
affect  our  lives.  The  weakening  of 
secondary  institutions  alone  does  not 
insure  the  elimination  of  sexism,  ra- 


cism or  capitalism.  Nor  does  the  crea- 
tion of  alternatives  to  these  forces 
necessarily  weaken  secondary  institu- 
tions. The  system  must  be,  can  be,  and 
will  be  changed.  We  will  not  settle  for 
less. 

Improved  ideology  and  strategies 
will  give  feminists  a  basis  from  which 
we  can  work  with  a  clearer  sense  of 
direction.  Therefore,  our  ideology  must 
also  include  the  importance  of  contin- 
uous processes  of  change,  strong  self- 
concepts,  and  group  identity. 

The  Quest  group  is  excited  about 
our  endeavor.  We  hope  that  this  excite- 
ment carries  to  women  in  many  dif- 
ferent places  and  back  to  us  again  with 
feedback,  additions  and  criticisms.  We 
want  Quest  to  reflect  different  exper- 
iences and  ideas  from  both  here  and 
abroad.  We  hope  that  many  others  will 
see  clarification  and  development  of 
feminist  ideology  as  a  necessity,  and 
make  it  a  priority  for  the  future  of 
women. 


Karen  Kollias,  a  feminist  activist 
and  public  speaker,  was  a  co-founder 
of  the  DC  Rape  Crisis  Center  and  the 
National  Student  Association  Women  *s 
Center;  named  one  of  Ms.  1973  "Found 
Women. " 


Spiral  of  Change/9 


Political  Change: 

TWO  PERSPECTIVES  ON  POWER 


by  Nancy  Hartsock 

Feminists  agree  that  the  political 
change  we  seek  means  an  end  to  sexism 
in  all  its  forms,  but  political  change 
involves  more  specific  and  more  con- 
troversial goals  as  well.  While  most  of  us 
would  agree  that  free,  24-hour,  client- 
controlled  child  care  and  proper  health 
care  for  women  are  goals  whose  achieve- 
ment would  both  result  from  and  re- 
present major  political  change,  agree- 
ment is  not  widespread  about  many 
other  issues  such  as  the  Equal  Rights 
Amendment,  or  campaigns,  to  integrate 
women  into  police  forces.  Does  the 
women's  movement  see  the  last  two  as 
demands  for  political  change?  Some 
women  argue  that  they  are  not,  while 
others  see  these  as  important  and  cen- 
tral political  changes.  In  order  to  work 
effectively,  we  must  understand  what 
political  change  means  from  a  feminist 
perspective  and  work  out  criteria  for 
developing  and  evaluating  strategies 
for  change. 


Power,  Change,  and 
Social  Science 

1.)  Power 

Sp 

lolitics  is  about  power— that  much 
is  generally  agreed  upon  by  practi- 
tioners and  students  of  the  political— 


and  discussions  of  politics  have  in- 
cluded power  as  a  fundamental  con- 
cern. Most  social  scientists  have  based 
their  discussions  of  power  on  defini- 
tions of  power  as  the  ability  to  compel 
obedience,  or  as  control  and  domina- 
tion. They  link  this  definition  with 
Bertrand  Russell's  statement  that  pow- 
er is  the  production  of  intended  effects, 
and  add  that  power  must  be  power 
over  someone— something  possessed,  a 
property  of  an  actor  such  that  he*  can 
alter  the  will  or  actions  of  others  in  a 
way  which  produces  results  in  con- 
formity with  his  own  will.  Effects  on 
the  actions  of  others  are  fundamental 
to  this  understanding  of  power. 

Social  theorists  have  argued  that 
power,  like  money,  is  something  pos- 
sessed by  an  actor  which  has  value  in 
itself  and  which  is  useful  as  well  for 
obtaining  other  valued  things.  In  an  ar- 
ticle on  the  concept  of  power,  Talcott 
Parsons,  the  most  influential  of  these 
theorists,  states  that  he  regards  power 
as  "a  circulating  medium,  analogous  to 
money,  within  what  is  called  the  poli- 
tical system,"  and  suggests  that  we  can 
best   understand  power  by  looking  at 


*Note  on  gender:  "He"  and  "men"  are 
not  generic  terms  in  this  article,  but  refer 
specifically  to  men  and  not  women.  Here, 
"she"  is  the  more  generic  pronoun. 


10/Quest,  vol.  I  no.l,  summer,  1974 


"the  relevant  properties  of  money  as 
such  a  medium  in  the  economy." 

Parsons  argues  that  money  itself  has 
no  value  in  use  but  acts  as  a  measure  of 
value.  He  adds  that  modern  monetary 
systems  require  an  institutionalized 
confidence  in  the  system  as  a  whole, 
and  argues  that  money  only  works  as  a 
medium  of  exchange  within  networks 
of  market  relationships.  By  analogy, 
power  "is  generalized  capacity  to  se- 
cure the  performance  of  binding  obli- 
gations by  units  in  a  system  of  collec- 
tive organization."  Both  kinds  of 
transactions  require  a  system  within 
which  they  can  be  managed  as  symbols. 

That  Parsons  and  others  compare 
the  uses  of  power  with  the  uses  of 
money  in  a  capitalistic  market  society 
indicates  their  acceptance  of  that  so- 
ciety's assumptions  about  the  nature  of 
market  transactions,  and  their  expan- 
sion of  these  patterns  to  cover  essen- 
tially all  human  interactions.  Their 
analogy  of  the  uses  of  money  and 
power  supports  Marx's  claim  that  the 
development  of  the  importance  of 
money  (or,  as  Marx  designated  the 
broader  category,  exchange  value)  leads 
to  the  transformation  of  all  human 
activities  into  patterns  modeled  on 
monetary  transactions. 

Money  functions  as  a  universal  com- 
modity, since  it  is  defined  as  the  ex- 
change value  of  other  commodities 
and  at  the  same  time  has  an  indepen- 
dent existence.  The  parallel  properties 
of  power  are  apparent  in  the  distinction 
between  power  as  a  value  in  itself  and 
the  other  values  which  one  can  obtain 
if  one  has  power. 

Marx  stressed  the  historical  impor- 


tance of  exchange  value  in  creating  a 
society  in  which  power  functions  like 
money  when  he  pointed  out  that  "the 
influence  of  exchange  over  all  produc- 
tion relationships  can  only  develop 
fully  and  ever  more  completely  in 
bourgeois  society."  Only  in  a  society 
based  on  the  market,  in  which  human 
interdependence  is  not  personal  but 
based  on  exchange  value,  can  power 
come  to  be  sought  as  a  value  in  itself, 
and  domination  of  others— or  the  use 
of  power  to  "purchase"  certain  beha- 
vior—become the  almost  exclusive  mea- 
sure of  power. 

The  idea  that  power  refers  to  some- 
thing possessed  by  individuals  (a  com- 
modity) and  means  domination  over 
others  can  be  found  in  philosophical 
writing  of  the  seventeenth  century 
where  it  served  as  a  justification  for 
the  ways  society  was  managed  and 
controlled  by  the  marketplace. 

Thomas  Hobbes,  one  of  the  earliest 
and  most  influential  theorists  in  this 
tradition,  conceived  of  society  as  the 
structured  relations  of  exchange  be- 
tween proprietors,  and  of  political 
society  as  a  "device  for  the  protection 
of  this  property  and  for  the  mainten- 
ance of  an  orderly  relation  of  ex- 
change." In  order  to  form  the  state, 
Hobbes  argued,  each  individual  gave 
up  "the  right  of  protecting  and  de- 
fending himself  by  his  own  power," 
and  turned  to  the  sovereign  for  pro- 
tection. "Without  that  security,  there 
is  no  reason  for  a  man  to  deprive  him- 
self of  his  own  advantages,  and  make 
himself  a  prey  to  others."  It  is  not 
surprising  that  Marx  could  say  of  such 
a  society  that  we  carry  both  our  power 


Political  Change/ 11 


over  society  and  our  association  with 
it  in  our  pockets.  Similar  formulations 
have  persisted,  all  of  them  based  on  the 
assumption  that  individuals  are  iso- 
lated, in  competition,  and  without 
community. 

These  definitions  of  power  aid  us  in 
discussing  male  supremacy.  Berenice 
Carroll  notes  Bertrand  de  Jouvenel's 
statement  that  "a  man  feels  himself 
more  of  a  man  when  imposing  himself 
and  making  others  the  instrument  of 
his  will,"  and  adds  that  "It  is  no  acci- 
dent that  the  subject  of  this  assertion 
is  'a  ma*?.'  The  associative  links  be- 
tween ideas  of  manliness  and  virility 
on  the  one  hand,  and  domination,  con- 
quest and  power  on  the  other  hand, 
are    strong   and    pervasive    in  Western 


culture 


„ro 


2.)  Change 


)ocial  scientists'  discussions  of 
change  are  based  on  the  same  assump- 
tions as  their  discussions  of  political 
power,  Webster's  Third  International 
Dictionary  defines  the  verb  '"change" 
as  "to  make  different,"  and  then  dis- 
tinguishes variation,  alteration,  and 
modification  from  transformation.  So- 
cial science  treatments  of  change  have 
focused  on  either  societal  change  or 
individual  change,  but  have  frequently 
ignored  the  process  or  dynamic  of 
change  itself. 

One  major  textbook  on  methodolo- 
gy, The  Language  of  Social  Research, 
treats    only   change    in  individuals.   It 


presents  three  methods  for  measuring 
individual  change.  These  methods 
for  measuring  change  assume  that 
change  is  variance  and  make  little  at- 
tempt to  separate  variance  from  the 
concepts  of  modification  or  transfor- 
mation. Any  difference  uncovered  in 
what  is  measured  over  time  is  labeled 
"change."  These  methods  do  not  dis- 
tinguish superficial  differences  from 
fundamental  social  change. 

Other  social  scientists,  such  as  Lass- 
well  and  Kaplan  in  Power  and  Society, 
understand  that  political  change  can 
involve  a  transformation.  But  Lasswell 
and  Kaplan  still  conceptualize  revolu- 
tion as  a  change  of  elites:  "the  counter- 
elite  cannot  attain  power  without  the 
instrumentality  of  the  mass,  but  the 
instrument  is  a  threat  to  its  own  posi- 
tion as  well  as  to  that  of  the  elite  it 
seeks  to  supplant."  Moreover,  "the 
course  of  a  revolution  is  sought  to  be 
limited  by  each  participant  group  to 
the  attainment  of  a  favorable  power 
position  for  itself."  Lasswell  and 
Kaplan  clearly  regard  human  beings, 
both  individuals  and  groups,  as  compe- 
titors in  a  hostile  world. 

In  summary,  social  scientific  discus- 
sions of  political  change  give  little 
attention  to  the  process  of  change 
itself,  and  the  assumption  that  the 
basic  units  of  society  are  competitive, 
hostile  and  isolated  individuals  leads 
to  over-emphasis  on  people  taking 
power  for  their  own  advantage,  and 
under-emphasis  on  the  importance  of 
change  in  the  institutions  and  struc- 
tures of  society. 


12/ Quest 


Other  Approaches  to 
Political  Change 


V  feminist  redefinition  of  the  con- 
cept of  political  change  requires  an 
understanding  of  the  women's  move- 
ment's concern  for  the  relationships  of 
the  personal  and  the  political;  a  per- 
spective on  the  struggles  within  the 
movement  over  the  nature  and  uses  of 
power,  leadership  and  organization; 
sensitivity  to  the  importance  of  pro- 
cess and  interaction  in  social  change; 
and  finally,  recognition  of  the  funda- 
mental links  between  economics  and 
social  relationships.  Feminists  regard 
change  as  a  process  which  takes  place 
on  several  levels:  the  personal,  the 
group  or  organizational,  and  the  level 
of  social  institutions.  Political  change, 
then,  involves  redefining  the  self, 
building  different  kinds  of  political  or- 
ganizations, gaining  economic  power 
for  women,  and  most  importantly,  a 
sense  of  how  each  of  these  arenas  for 
change  relates  to  the  interlocking  struc- 
tures of  patriarchy,  white  supremacy, 
and  capitalism.  Finally,  change  at  each 
of  these  levels  must  be  understood  as 
important  not  only  as  a  facet  of  politi- 
cal change  in  itself,  but  as  a  precondi- 
tion for  further  change  which  can  take 
place  in  several  of  these  structures 
at  once. 

TSSBM 

The  Personal  and  the 
Political 


what  we  change  does  not  change 


us  we  are  playing  with  blocks. 


14 


—Marge  Piercy 


)mall  group  consciousness-raising  at 
the  beginning  of  the  contemporary 
women's  movement— with  its  stress  on 
clarifying  the  links  between  the  per- 
soanl  and  the  political— led  women  to 
conclude  that  change  in  consciousness 
and  in  the  social  relations  of  the  indi- 
vidual is  one  of  the  most  important 
components  of  political  change.  Wom- 
en talked  to  each  other  to  understand 
and  share  experiences  and  to  set  out  a 
first-hand  account  of  women's  oppres- 
sion. 

But  a  great  deal  of  unexpected 
energy  and  method  came  out  of  these 
groups.  We  learned  that  it  was  impor- 
tant to  build  an  analysis  of  sexual 
politics  from  the  ground  up— from  our 
own  experiences.  The  idea  that  the 
personal  lives  of  women  should  be 
analyzed  in  political  terms  both  grew 
out  of  the  experience  of  women  in 
these  groups  and  served  as  a  focus  for 
continued  small  group  activity.  We 
drew  connections  between  personal  ex- 
perience and  political  generalities  about 
the  oppression  of  women:  we  took  up 
our  experience  and  transformed  it 
through  reflection.  This  transformation 
of  experience  by  reflection  and  the 
subsequent  alterations  in  women's  lives 
laid  the  groundwork  for  the  idea  that 
liberation  must  pervade  aspects  of  life 
not  considered  politically  important  in 
the  past.  While  many  of  the  questions 
addressed  by  the  small  groups  were  not 
new,  the  methodology  differed  from 
the  practice  of  most  social  movements, 


Political  Change/ 13 


particularly  those  in  Western  capitalist 
countries. 

Stressing  the  links  between  the  per- 
sonal and  the  political  led  women  to 
conclude  that  first,  a  fundamental  re- 
definition of  the  self  was  an  integral 
part  of  action  for  political  change;  and 
second,  that  the  changed  consciousness 
and  changed  definition  of  the  self 
could  only  occur  in  conjunction  with  a 
restructuring  of  the  social  relationships 
in  which  each  person  was  involved. 

In  the  process  of  developing  a  new 
sense  of  self,  we  made  many  advances. 
However,  we  took  good  points  too  far 
and  created  new  kinds  of  problems. 
Charlotte  Bunch  notes  four  of  them: 
Women  have  turned  oppression  into  a 
source  of  identity  but  have  also  made 
it  an  excuse  for  inaction;  we  have 
relied  on  the  women's  movement  to 
provide  a  ready-made  identity;  we  have 
fixed  on  ideals  which  we  require  of  all 
women  without  attention  to  what  each 
woman  can  do  well;  and  we  have  built 
identity  and  respect  not  on  our  own 
strength  but  on  our  relationships  with 
other  women.  Each  of  these  can 
become  a  way  to  avoid  creating  an  in- 
dependent and  responsible  self.  At  the 
same  time,  each  of  these  problems 
represents  a  successful  attempt  to 
create  change,  and  each  provides  us 
with  one  element  of  a  feminist  defini- 
tion of  change:  change  is  the  process 
of  creating  new  problems  out  of  our 
solutions  to  earlier  problems. 

Developing  an  independent  sense  of 
self  necessarily  calls  other  areas  of  our 
lives  into  question.  We  must  ask  how 
our  relationships  with  other  persons 
can    foster  self-definition  rather  than 


dependence  and  accomodate  our  new 
strengths.  What  is  the  role  of  conscious- 
ness in  creating  change?  What  kinds  of 
organizational  structures  contribute  to 
the  process  of  changing  our  self-con- 
cept? How  does  our  sense  of  self  relate 
to  economic  issues,  to  class  within 
capitalism,  heterosexuality  within  pat- 
riarchy? Finally,  our. efforts  to  develop 
new  selves  focus  our  attention  on  pro- 
cess and  interaction.  We  constantly 
confront  new  situations  in  which  we 
act  out  of  our  changed  awareness  of 
the  world  and  experience  the  changed 
reactions  of  others.  As  Georg  Lukacs 
summarized  it,  "to  posit  oneself,  to 
produce  and  reproduce  oneself— that  is 
reality."  By  working  out  the  links 
between  the  personal  and  the  political, 
the  women's  movement  has  begun  to 
understand  existence  as  a  social  pro- 
cess, the  product  of  human  activity. 
The  realization  that  the  social  world  is 
a  human  creation  and  that  through  our 
own  activity  we  have  already  changed 
important  aspects  of  that  world  leads 
to  a  sense  of  our  own  power  and  pro- 
vides a  source  of  energy  for  further 
changes. 


HEM* 


Organization  and  Leadership 


Independent  and  strong  selves  at 
the  personal  level  must  be  expressed 
and  reinforced  by  organizations.  Dis- 
cussion has  centered  on  the  kinds  of 
organizations  which  can  both  express 
and  develop  women's  strengths,  and 
power   within   women's  organizations 


14 1  Quest 


has  come  to  be  an  important  issue. 
While  leadership  and  power  are  not  the 
only  issues  important  in  working  out 
questions  of  organizational  structure, 
they  bear  on  the  central  issues  of  poli- 
tical power,  and  consideration  of  those 
problems  is  useful. 

Reaction  against  leadership  was  of- 
ten a  reaction  to  the  earlier  experience 
of  some  women  in  male-dominated 
organizations,  but  soon  it  became  an 
issue  within  the  women's  movement 
as  well.  Women  who  had  been  active 
in  male-dominated  organizations  as- 
sociated power  with  "loudmouthed, 
pushy,  ego-centered  men,"  who  ad- 
vocated a  "macho"  style  of  violence 
and  sometimes  listed  women  among 
the  objects  to  be  readily  available  after 
the  revolution.  The  predominance  in 
the  movement  of  middle  class  women, 
who  lacked  the  tradition  of  women's 
strength  and  independence  more  fre- 
quent among  lower,  working  class,  and 
rural  women  also  contributed  to  the 
identification  of  leadership  and  power 
as  oppressive  male  characteristics. 

"Informal"  leaders  developed,  and 
some  were  recognized  by  the  media 
and  transformed  into  stars,  at  both 
national  and  local  levels.  Women  who 
had  argued  for  the  abolition  of  leader- 
ship and  power  found  that  some  wom- 
en were  far  more  influential  than 
others.  It  is  useful  to  examine  this 
issue  as  one  concerning  what  kinds  of 
power  are  legitimate  in  the  women's 
movement.  Women  were  rightly  dis- 
satisfied with  the  idea  of  power  as 
money  (a  value  in  itself  and  a  posses- 
sion which  enables  one  to  obtain  other 
things)  in  the  male  Left.  There  are  alter- 


native definitions  of  power  which  do 
not  require  domination  of  others. 

Berenice  Carroll  points  out  that  in 
Webster's  International  Dictionary 
(1933),  power  is  first  defined  as  "abili- 
ty, whether  physical,  mental  or  moral, 
to  act;  the  faculty  of  doing  or  per- 
forming something,"  and  is  synony- 
mous with  "strength,  vigor,  energy, 
force,  and  ability."  The  words  "cont- 
rol" and  "domination"  do  not  appear 
as  synonyms.  Although  this  concept 
of  power  does  appear  in  contemporary 
social  science,  it  has  not  been  as  im- 
portant as  ideas  of  power  as  a  form  of 
domination.  Christian  Bay  cites  one 
such  definition  of  power  as  "any  acti- 
vity where  there  is  accomplishment, 
satisfaction  of  needs,  mutual  attain- 
ment of  goals  not  distorted  by.  .  . 
thwarting.  .  .  experience."  Carroll, 

too,  cites  arguments  about  power  as 
the  need  for  activity  and  achievement, 
the  drive  to  "interact  effectively  with" 
the  environment  She  also  notes  chat 
the  work  of  A.  Kardiner  on  the  "de- 
velopment of  the  effective  ego"  pre- 
sents a  similar  view. 

Significantly,  these  understandings 
of  power  do  not  require  domination  of 
others;  energy  and  accomplishment 
are  understood  to  be  satisfying  in 
themselves.  This  kind  of  power  is  much 
closer  to  what  the  women's  movement 
has  sought,  yet  this  aspect  of  power  is 
denied  to  all  but  a  few  women:  the 
common  female  experience  of  being 
treated  as  though  we  were  invisible 
can  scarcely  be  characterized  as  effec- 
tive interaction  with  the  environment. 

One  source  of  the  difficulties  in  the 
women's  movement  about  leadership, 


Political  Change/ 15 


strength,  and  achievement  has  been  our 
lack  of  clarity  about  the  differences 
between  the  two  concepts  of  power.  A 
letter  of  resignation  from  the  women's 
movement,  used  by  two  different 
women  in  different  cities,  expresses 
some  of  these  problems.  They  com- 
plain of  being  attacked  by  their  sisters 
for  having  achieved  something,  and  of 
being  "labelled  a  thrill  seeking  oppor- 
tunist,  a   ruthless  mercenary,  out  to 

make   her  fame  and  fortune  over  the 

91 
dead  bodies  of  selfless  sisters."       The 

letter  argues  that  leadership  qualities 
should  not  be  confused  with  the  desire 
to  be  a  leader,  and,  similarly,  that 
achievement  or  productivity  should 
not  be  confused  with  the  desire  to  be 
a  leader  (by  implication,  to  dominate 
others).  These  statements  indicate  that 
women  have  not  recognized  that  pow- 
er understood  as  energy,  strength,  and 
effective  interaction  need  not  be  the 
same  as  power  which  requires  domina- 
tion of  others  in  the  movement. 

But  we  must  nevertheless  recognize 
and  confront  the  world  of  traditional 
politics  in  which  money  and  power 
function  in  similar  ways.  Thus,  crea- 
ting political  change  involves  setting 
up  organizations  based  on  power  as 
energy  and  strength,  groups  which  are 
structured  and  not  tied  to  the  person- 
ality of  one  individual,  groups  whose 
structures  do  not  permit  the  use  of 
power  as  a  tool  for  domination  of 
others  in  the  group.  At  the  same  time, 
our  organizations  must  deal  with  the 
society  in  which  we  live  on  its  own 
terms— that  is  ,  terms  of  power  as  con- 
trol, power  as  a  means  of  making 
others  do  what  they  do  not  wish  to  do. 


Recognition  of  the  two  faces  of 
power,  and  of  the  necessity  for  work- 
ing on  both  levels,  means  that  our 
organizations  must  be  structured  and 
on-going.  With  few  exceptions,  the 
radical  wing  of  the  women's  movement 
has  fragmented  into  small  groups  which 
are  difficult  to  find  and  join.  We  can- 
not create  political  change  until  we 
structure  our  own  organizations  to 
deal  with  power  as  domination  in  the 
institutions  of  society.  As  our  sense  of 
self  develops,  we  should  be  able  to  ex- 
periment more  with  different  forms  of 
organization  and  to  understand  how 
changes  in  organizational  structure  in- 
crease our  ability  to  control  the  struc- 
tures which  now  control  us.  Thus, 
while  political  change  is  about  changes 
in  power  relationships,  we  are  not 
talking  about  women  simply  partici- 
pating in  power  relationships  as  they 
are  presently  constituted,  but  rather 
using  our  methods  of  organization  as 
strategies  for  the  redefinition  of  politi- 
cal power  itself.  The  organizations  we 
build  are  an  integral  part  of  the  process 
of  creating  political  change,  and  in  the 
long  term  can  perhaps  serve  as  the 
groundwork  for  new  societal  institu- 
tions. 

The  process,  however,  is  not  as  easy 
as  it  sounds.  History  provides  many 
confirmations  of  Lord  Acton's  famous 
dictum  that  power  corrupts  and  abso- 
lute power  corrupts  absolutely.  We 
have  seen  organizations  in  the  male- 
dominated  Left  mirror  some  of  the 
worst  evils  of  the  capitalist  structures 
they  said  they  wanted  to  replace.  We 
must  constantly  ask:  To  what  extent 
must    we    build    organizations   which 


16  /Quest 


mirror  the  institutions  we  are  trying  to 
destroy?  Can  organizations  based  on 
power  as  energy  and  initiative  be  ef- 
fective tools  for  changing  sexist,  hete- 
rosexist,  racist,  and  classist  institutions 
such  as  the  media,  the  health  industry, 
etc.?  To  what  extent  will  both  we  and 
our  organizations  be  transformed  by 
the  struggle  for  power  (domination)? 
Can  our  organizations  serve  as  tools 
for  taking  power  for  women  and  still 
lay  the  groundwork  for  new  non-sexist, 
non-racist,  non-classist  societal  institu- 
tions? While  there  are  no  easy  answers 
to  these  questions,  we  must  continue 
to  ask  them  as  we  work  to  create 
political  change. 


fflfflHS 


Patriarchy,  Capitalism, 
and  White  Supremacy 


lhe  transformation  of  our  sense  of 
self  and  the  creation  of  organizations 
which  express  our  new  ideas  cannot 
take  place  in  a  vacuum.  We  change 
ourselves  and  our  organizations  for  the 
purpose  of  changing  the  interlocking 
structures  which  control  our  lives.  The 
economic  position  of  women  is  funda- 
mental to  the  political  change  we  seek. 
Moreover,  when  we  look  closely  at  the 
economic  roles  of  women  we  see  the 
ways  capitalism,  patriarchy*,  and  white 
supremacy  reinforce  each  other  and 
how  the  ideology  of  individualism  pro- 
vides a  philosophical  justification  for 
these  structures.  When  we  understand 
that  the  economic  condition  of  women 
is  maintained  and  structured  by  several 


institutions  rather  than  only  one,  it 
becomes  clear  that  the  change  we  are 
working  for  cannot  succeed  in  the 
economic  sphere  merely  by  providing 
paid  work  for  every  woman. 

Women  are  exploited  as  wage  labo- 
rers just  as  men  are,  but  our  position 
differs  from  theirs  in  three  major  ways; 
first,  women  are  heavily  concentrated 
in  service  and  clerical  jobs;  second,  we 
are  paid  less  than  men  who  do  com- 
parable work;  and  finally,  all  women, 
along  with  minority  group  men,  are 
used  as  a  reserve  labor  force.  In  sum, 
we  are  viewed  as  supplementary  work- 
ers to  be  brought  into  the  money 
economy  when  needed  and  removed 
when  no  longer  necessary.  That  more 
than  half  the  population  can  be  re- 
garded as  supplementary  workers  in- 
dicates the  strength  of  the  institution 
of  patriarchy  and  the  roles  it  forces  on 
women. 

Western  capitalist  society  presents 
the  middle  class  family  as  the  ideal,  a 
unit  in  which  the  man  has  both  econo- 
mic and  psychological  power  over  its 
other  members.  Family  relationships 
structured  in  "acceptable"  ways  act  as 
a  stabilizing  force  for  the  economic 
system  as  a  whole.  Economic  depen- 
dence of  several  people  on  one  wage 
earner  (male  or  female),  and  wages  so 
low  that  both  parents  must  work  to 
support  their  children  are  useful  re- 
sources for  capitalism.  As  one  manu- 
facturer pointedly  remarked,  he  prefers 


*  Institutionalized  heterosexuality  is  an 
important  element  of  patriarchy  and  my 
references  to  patriarchy  in  the  text  include 
it.  The  discussion  of  the  importance  of  the 
family  should  be  read  with  this  in  mind. 


Political  Change/ 17 


married  women,  "especially  those  who 
have  families  at  home  dependent  on 
them  for  support;  they  are  attentive, 
docile,  more  so  than  unmarried  fe- 
males, and  are  compelled  to  use  their 
utmost  exertions  to  procure  the  ne- 
cessities of  life." 

The  ideology  of  the  family  per- 
forms other  services  as  well.  The  pro- 
per role  of  woman  is  supporter  and 
reconstructor  of  the  male  ego  after  the 
work  place  has  damaged  it.  The  male 
worker's  position  of  domination  in  the 
family  reverses  his  own  domination  by 
his  boss  at  work  and  enables  him  to 
transfer  tensions  developed  at  the 
work-place  to  the  family,  thus  lower- 
ing the  probability  that  he  will  focus 
anger  on  the  work-place. 

Patriarchy  considers  work  for  wages 
improper  for  women  and  imposes  the 
myth  of  "woman's  place"  on  working 
women.  Many  women  believe  they  are 
temporary  or  supplemental  wage  earn- 
ers. Patriarchal  ideas  are  also  used  by 
the  employer  to  question  the  motives 
of  women  who  complain  about  their 
jobs.  If  they  are  older  and  single,  he 
dismisses  their  protests  as  the  neuroses 
of  spinsters;  if  the  women  are  young, 
he  dismisses  their  protests  as  those  of 
temporary  workers  who  will  leave  when 
they  marry  or  get  pregnant;  if  they 
have  husbands,  they  are  regarded  as 
both  supplementary  and  temporary; 
and  the  problems  of  women  with  chil- 
dren to  support  alone  are  simply  not 
recognized.  That  the  reality  of  wom- 


en's lives  often  runs  counter  to  these 
myths  does  not  significantly  lessen 
their  impact. 

Capitalism  makes  a  place  for  the  ec- 
onomically dependent  woman  through 
consumption.  According  to  Friedan, 
advertising  consultants  know  that  find- 
ing "bargains"  has  come  to  be  a  house- 
wife's major  contribution  to  the  eco- 
nomy of  the  family,  just  as  the  hus- 
band's contribution  consists  of  bringing 
home  a  paycheck.  The  up-grading  of 
consumption  assumes  that  every  family 
has  at  least  a  middle  class  income,  con- 
tains a  woman,  a  man,  and  several 
children,  and  is  supported  by  the  paid 
labor  of  one  (male)  worker.  While 
many  women's  lives  contradict  the 
myth,  the  ideas  it  expresses  affect  us 
all.  Women  working  for  wages  can  be 
led  to  buy  things  for  their  families 
out  of  guilt  for  spending  time  away 
from  home.  The  woman  who  must 
support  others  is  in  a  double  bind:  she 
is  blamed  for  leaving  her  children  and 
her  wages  are  often  so  low  that  she  is 
unable  to  purchase  many  of  the  goods 
every  family  "needs." 

Women's  services  in  the  home  are 
the  source  of  another  link  between 
patriarchy  and  capitalism.  The  work  of 
housewives  increases  the  real  wages  of 
families  with  two  adults  and  thereby 
enables  them  to  purchase  commodities 
they  could  not  otherwise  afford.  At 
the  same  time,  women  employed  out- 
side the  home  still  produce  a  portion 
of  this   value   in  the   home.  The  em- 


18/ Quest 


ployment  of  married  women  living 
with  their  husbands  thus  provides  a 
measure  of  expansion  in  the  market 
for  goods  and  services  in  boom  times. 
Firing  women  at  other  times  provides 
a  cushion  against  the  full  consequences 
of  recession,  since  the  women's  in- 
creased home  production  will  partially 
make  up  for  their  lost  salaries. 

Capitalism  and  patriarchy  in  the 
United  States  are  also  linked  with  white 
supremacy.  The  popularization  of  the 
myth  that  black  matriarchy  is  respon- 
sible for  the  problems  of  the  black 
community  is  one  of  the  most  obvious 
and  vicious  links  between  patriarchy 
and  white  supremacy.  The  efforts  by 
both  Blacks  and  Whites  to  make  the 
black  family  mirror  the  white,  middle 
class,  patriarchal  family,  and  efforts  to 
push  black  women  into  supportive 
roles  not  only  oppress  black  women 
but  also  decrease  the  energy  available 
for  the  struggle  against  white  domina- 
tion. The  creation  of  divisions  and 
hostilities  between  black  women  and 
men  is  useful  to  the  ruling  class  to  de- 
fuse effective  attacks  on  racism. 

Second,  capitalism  requires  margi- 
nal work  forces,  and  white  supremacy 
as  well  as  patriarchy  are  convenient 
instruments  for  this  purpose.  Racial 
and  ethnic  minorites  are  used  as  margi- 
nal labor  in  most  advanced  industrial 
countries— Southern  Europeans  in  Ger- 
many, North  Africans  in  France.  Racial 
minorities  are  used  by  capitalism  in 
other  ways  as  well: 


The  extent  to  which  the  capitalist 
class  is  able  to  isolate  segments  of  the 
working  class  from  each  other  streng- 
thens its  position.  .  .If  one  group  of 
workers  is  able  to  command  higher 
pay,  to  exclude  others  from  work,  and 
if  the  other  group  or  groups  of  workers 
are  limited  in  their  employment  oppor- 
tunities to  the  worst  jobs  and  lowest 
pay,  then  a  marginal  working  class  has 
been  created  which  benefits  the  labor 
aristocracy  and  to  an  even  greater  ex- 
tent the  capitalist  class. 

Third,  minority  group  men  provide 
a  more  varied  reserve  labor  force  than 
women  who  are  confined  to  a  few 
types  of  work.  Finally,  the  idea  that 
the  problems  of  minority  group  work- 
ers can  be  traced  to  "discrimination" 
alone  is  an  important  tool  for  capitalist 
control.  One  writer  has  argued  that 
ending  discrimination  as  such  would 

make  only  a  small  difference  in  the 

97 
economic  role  of  minorities.      Yet  the 

concept  of  discrimination,  based  on  an 
understanding  of  the  individual  as  a 
person  who  carries  both  her  power 
over  society  and  her  association  with 
it  in  her  pocket,  helps  to  maintain  the 
belief  that  employers  buy  some  pro- 
ducts (workers)  rather  than  others  for 
reasons  as  innocuous  as  preference  or 
taste.  They  can  argue  that  those  of  us 
who  object  are  inconsistent: 

We  do  not  regard  it  as  'discrimina- 
tion'—or  at  least  not  in  the  same  invi- 
dious sense— if  an  individual  is  willing 
to  pay  a  higher  price  to  listen  to  one 


Political  Change/19 


singer  than  another,  although  we  do  if 
he  is  willing  to  pay  a  higher  price  to 
have  services  rendered  to  him  by  a  per- 
son of  one  color  rather  than  by  a  per- 
son of  another. 

The  idea  that  persons  are  products 
whose  value  is  measured  by  their  price, 
the  stress  on  freedom  of  "contract" 
between  equals,  the  assumption  that 
each  individual  goes  to  the  market 
with  the  ability  and  willingness  to  pay 
certain  prices  to  achieve  some  prefer- 
ences—all these  are  implied  by  the 
concept  of  discrimination. 

While  we  have  discussed  only  a  few 
of  the  links  between  capitalism,  patri- 
archy and  white  supremacy,  it  is  ob- 
vious that  we  cannot  end  any  woman's 
economic  oppression  and  dependency 
without  at  the  same  time  destroying 
those  structures.  Power  as  domination 
is  fundamental  to  the  three:  taking 
power  as  domination  appears  to  be  the 
only  way  to  take  over  and  transform 
them. 


&PBs2I 


Ideas  and  History 


It  is  difficult  to  refer  to  the  concept 
of  the  individual  as  a  structure  in  the 
same  sense  as  capitalism,  patriarchy, 
or  white  supremacy.  However,  these 
structures  could  not  be  maintained 
without  a  set  of  assumptions  about 
what  human  beings  are  and  what  they 
might  become.  We  cannot  work  effec- 
tively for  change  without  understand- 
ing the  importance  of  ideas  and  re- 
cognizing   the    reciprocal    effects    of 


consciousness  on  actions  and  organiza- 
tions. 

The  content  of  the  intellectual  and 
emotional  life  of  a  society  is  bound 
up  with  the  way  it  reproduces  its 
material  life.  Ideas  play  the  role  of 
justifying,  legitimating  and  then  stabi- 
lizing economic  changes.  As  Marx 
stated,  when  each  new  class.  .  .puts 
itself  in  the  place  of  one  ruling  before 
it,  (it)  is  compelled,  merely  in  order  to 
carry  through  its  aim,  to  represent  its 
interest  as  the  common  interest  of  all 
the  members  of  society,  that  is  ex- 
pressed in  ideal  form;  it  has  to  give  its 
ideas  the  form  of  universality  and 
represent  them  as  the  only  rational, 
universally  valid  ones. 

Thus,  bourgeois  philosophers,  poli- 
tical economists  and  others  developed 
the  ideas  capitalist  society  required  for 
its  survival  and  growth,  and  saw  their 
assumptions  as  universal  and  eternal 
truths  about  humankind. 

Earlier  I  argued  that  contemporary 
definitions  of  power  as  domination 
were  based  on  assumptions  of  posses- 
sive individualism  and  the  require- 
ments of  capitalist  society.  In  addition 
to  power,  the  possessive  individual  is 
concerned  with  the  myth  of  equality 
and  the  compartmentalization  of  life. 

The  idea  of  equality  as  presented 
by  Hobbes  begins  from  a  world  which 
in  its  state  of  nature  is  populated  by 
"human  calculating  machines,"  each 
one  basically  equal  to  all  the  others. 
Marx  argued  that  the  idea  of  self- 
interested  and  fundamentally  equal 
beings  was  important  because  capita- 
lism required  interchangeable  laboring 
units.   Once   human   equality  had  be- 


20/Quest 


come  accepted  as  a  universal  truth,  the 
argument  could  be  made  that  since  all 
persons,  are  in  fact  equal— that  is,  have 
"equality  of  opportunity"— then  those 
who  are  unable  to  get  as  much  money 
as  others  are  solely  responsible  for 
their  own  state. 

Nineteenth  century  employers  con- 
sistently objected  to  labor  legislation 
as  interference  with  freedom  of  con- 
tract. They  argued  that  such  legislation 
encouraged  "the  workman  to  look  to 
the  law  for  the  protection  which  he 
ought  to  secure  for  himself  by  volun- 
tary contract;"  the  legislation  "limits  a 
man's  power  of  doing  what  he  will 
with  what  he  considers  his  own."  (my 
italics)32 

This  argument  relies  on  the  assum- 
ption that  the  employer  and  employee 
are  in  equal  positions  of  power  with 
respect  to  each  other.  This  assumption 
is  not  accurate,  since  the  laborer  can- 
not survive  without  selling  her  labor 
power;  yet  it  has  been  widely  accepted 
by  those  who  suffer  from  it  as  well  as 
those  who  benefit.  The  practice  of 
blaming  the  victim  for  her  plight  is  a 
powerful  obstacle  to  the  creation  of 
political  change,  since  it  suggests  that 
if  those  involved  were  "worth"  equali- 
ty of  treatment,  they  would  in  fact  be 
accorded  equality. 

We  know  from  our  efforts  to  break 
free  of  them  that  these  are  powerful 
ideas.  The  idea  of  the  isolated  individ- 
ual who  protects  and  expands  his  own 
position  allows  the  ruling  classes  to 
justify  and  expand  their  positions  of 
dominance  as  the  just  reward  for  hav- 
ing the  strength  to  act  on  their  own 
interests.  Those  of  us  who  are  not  so 


successful  are  kept  from  looking  be- 
yond ourselves  by  our  shame  at  failing 
to  expand  our  power  (domination). 

The  compartmentalization  or  frag- 
mentation of  life  is  a  second  corollary 
of  possessive  individualism.  The  system 
of  purchasing  labor  by  the  day  or 
hour  rather  than  by  lifetimes  of  loyal- 
ty is  compatible  with  the  idea  that  in 
different  spheres  one  behaves  accor- 
ding to  different  rules.  An  important 
separation  in  industrial  society  has 
been  between  modes  of  behavior  ap- 
propriate for  the  family  and  behavior 
appropriate  for  the  work-place  or  pub- 
lic life.  The  women's  movement  has 
been  particularly  concerned  with  the 
separation  of  the  personal  from  the 
political,  but  this  distinction  is  simply 
one  of  many  co Departmentalizations 
which  divide  the  world  into  disparate 
spheres:  the  public  is  separated  from 
the  private;  professional  judgments 
from  human  ones;  the  world  of  facts 
(reason)  from  that  of  values  (emotion). 

Anais  Nin  has  commented  on  this 
phenomenon  from  a  woman's  perspec- 
tive: I  have  always  been  tormented  by 
the  image  of  a  multiplicity  of  selves.  .  . 
My  first  concept  of  people  about  me 
was  that  all  of  them  were  coordinated 
into  a  whole,  whereas  I  was  made  up 
of  a  multitude  of  selves,  of  frag- 
ments. .  .There  were  always,  in  me, 
two  women  at  least,  one  woman  des- 
perate and  bewildered,  who  felt  she 
was  drowning,  and  another  who  only 
wanted  to  bring  beauty,  grace,  and 
aliveness  to  people,  and  who  would 
leap  into  a  scene,  as  upon  a  stage,  con- 
ceal her  true  emotions  because  they 
were  weaknesses,  helplessness,  despair, 


Political  Change/21 


and  present  to  the  world  only  a  smile, 
an    eagerness,    curiosity,    enthusiasm, 

34  i. 

interest.       Compartmentalization  is  a 

way  of  separating  us  from  ourselves, 
but  it  is  also  a  technique  of  survival:  if 
we  have  only  the  self  who  is  drowning, 
we  die. 

W.E.B.  DuBois  comments  on  a  simi- 
lar phenonmenon  among  Blacks:  It  is 
a  peculiar  sensation,  this  double-cons- 
ciousness, this  sense  of  always  looking 
at  one's  self  through  the  eyes  of  others, 
of  measuring  one's  soul  by  the  tape  of 
a  world  that  looks  on  in  amused  con- 
tempt and  pity.  One  ever  feels  his 
tempt  and  pity.  One  ever  feels  his  two- 
ness—an  American  and  a  Negro;.  .  . 

The  compartmentalization  of  the 
world  leads  to  a  fragmentation  of  the 
self  among  working  and  lower  class 
people  as  well.  Dividing  the  self  de- 
fends against  the  pain  a  person  would 


otherwise  feel,  if  he  had  to  submit  the 
whole  of  himself  to  a  society  which 
makes  his  position  a  vulnerable  and 
anxiety-laden  one. 

After  passing  through  the  prisms  of 
capitalism,  white  supremacy,  and  pat- 
riarchy, the  compartmentalization  of 
the  world  takes  different  forms  in 
middle  and  upper  class  white  women, 
in  minority  women  and  men,  and 
among  white  working  and  lower  class 
people.  But  in  each,  the  fragmentation 
of  the  self  is  a  mechanism  for  survival, 
a  way  (however  damaging  to  us)  of 
getting  by  in  an  oppressive  world,  a 
way  of  coping  with  the  all  too  frequent 
failures  in  one  or  more  areas  of  our 
lives.  Yet  the  fragmentation  of  the  self 
maintains  our  oppression.  By  compart- 
mentalizing our  lives  we  implicitly  ac- 
cept individual  responsibility  for  the 
failures  which  grow  out  of  our  collec- 


22/Quest 


tive  oppression  and  absorb  into  our- 
selves the  impact  of  these  failures.  As 
long  as  we  fail  to  challenge  the  struc- 
tures controlling  our  lives,  the  frag- 
mentation of  ourselves  is  necessary  for 
survival.  By  contrast,  the  process  of 
directly  challenging  patriarchy,  white 
supremacy,  and  capitalism  both  creates 
and  requires  a  sense  of  ourselves  as 
wholes  rather  than  fragments. 


M+iaJm 


Conclusions 


a 


w. 


'e  have  returned  to  the  importance 
of  our  sense  of  self,  but  now  can  see  it 
as  a  part  of  our  efforts  for  political 
change.  Since  our  sense  of  self  is  bound 
up  with  the  structures  of  social  con- 
trol, we  cannot  allow  our  work  for 
political  change  to  stagnate  at  the 
level  of  personal  change.  At  the  same 
time,  we  must  recognize  that  change 
takes  place  in  several  areas  and  both 
affects  and  is  affected  by  changes  in 
other  areas.  We  have  seen  that  patriar- 
chy, capitalism,  and  white  supremacy 
have  pervasive  effects  on  ail  aspects  of 
our  lives.  Thus,  efforts  for  change  in 
any  area  should  lead  us  to  examine  the 
obstacles  to  change  created  by  the 
existence  of  the  other  structures  as  well. 
Political  change  is  a  process  of 
transforming  not  only  ourselves  but 
also  our  most  basic  assumptions  about 
humanity  and  our  sense  of  human 
possibility.  Political  change  means  re- 
structuring our  organizations  to  reflect 
our  constantly  changing  understanding 
of  the  possible  and  to  meet  the  new 


needs  and  new  problems  we  create. 
Political  change  requires  strategies 
which  attack  the  interlocking  struc- 
tures of  control  at  all  levels.  At  bot- 
tom, political  change  is  a  process  of 
changing  power  relationships  so  that 
the  meaning  of  power  itself  is  trans- 
formed. 

Our  strategies  for  change  must  grow 
out  of  the  tension  between  using  our 
organizations  as  instruments  for  taking 
and  transforming  power  in  a  society 
structured  by  power  understood  only 
as  domination,  and  using  our  organi- 
zations to  build  models  for  a  new 
society  based  on  power  understood  as 
energy  and  initiative.  Thus,  in  evalua- 
ting a  particular  strategy  we  must  ask: 
1)  how  it  will  affect  women's  sense  of 
self,  and  sense  of  our  own  collective 
power;  2)  how  it  will  make  women 
aware  of  problems  beyond  questions 
of  identity— that  is,  how  it  will  politi- 
cize women;  3)  how  the  strategy  will 
work  to  build  organizations  which  will 
increase  both  our  strength  and  com- 
petence, and  will  give  women  power  to 
use  (like  money)  to  weaken  the  con- 
trol and  domination  of  capitalism, 
patriarchy,  and  white  supremacy;  and 
4)  how  the  strategy  will  weaken  the 
links  between  these  institutions. 

As  Juliet  Mitchell  pointed  out,  a 
change  in  one  of  several  interlocking 
structures  can  be  offset  by  changes  in 
the  others.  This  is  a  particularly 
difficult  question,  since  weakening  the 
structures  which  oppress  us  depends 
heavily  on  how  the  strategy  is  con- 
ceived, followed  through,  and  expan- 
ded. How,  for  example,  can  support 
for  the  Equal  Rights  Amendment  lead 


Political  Change/23 


to  women  taking  power  in  such  a  way 
that  the  structures  of  social  relations 
as  presently  constituted  cannot  survive? 

Finally,  we  must  examine  every 
strategy  for  change  in  terms  of  the 
understanding  of  process  and  inter- 
action it  contains:  Does  the  strategy 
contain  at  least  the  seeds  of  its  own 
supersession,  or  is  it  a  way  of  forever 
doing  the  same  things  for  the  same 
people? 

These  criteria  for  evaluating  stra- 
tegies for  political  change  grow  out  of 
the  four  concerns  I  listed  at  the  begin- 


ning of  the  discussion:  the  importance 
of  the  relationship  between  the  person- 
al and  the  political;  questions  of  power 
and  leadership  in  feminist  organiza- 
tions; the  importance  of  process  and 
interaction;  and  the  problems  posed  by 
the  interlocking  nature  of  capitalism, 
patriarchy,  and  white  supremacy.  Poli- 
tical change  can  only  occur  if  each  of 
these  concerns  is  an  important  and 
continuing  element  of  our  thought. 
They  call  our  attention  to  the  fact  that 
what  we  mean  by  political  change  is 
structural  change. 


offl® ;  wnvw^pw 


Footnotes 


1See  Bertrand  Russell,  Power,  A  New 
Social  Analysis  (n.p.:1936),  p.  35,  cited  by 
Anthony  de  Crespigny  and  Alan  Wertheimer, 
Contemporary  Political  Theory  (New  York: 
Atherton  Press,  1970),  p.  22;  Harold  Lass- 
well  and  Abraham  Kaplan,  Power  and  Socie- 
ty (New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press,  1950), 
p.  76;  and  Howard  Warrender,  The  Political 
Philosophy  of  Hobbes  (Oxford:  The  Claren- 
don Press,  1957),  p.  312. 

2Talcott  Parsons,  "On  the  Concept  of 
Political  Power,"  in  Political  Power,  eds. 
Roderick  Bell,  David  V.  Edwards,  and  R. 
Harrison  Wagner  (New  York:  Free  Press, 
1969),  P.  256. 

3 Ibid.,  p.  257. 

4Karl  Marx,  The  Grundrisse,  ed.,  David 
McLellan  (New  York:  Harper  and  Row, 
1971 ),  p.  65.  The  discussion  of  the  develop- 
ment of  credit,  in  which  all  that  one  has  or 
is  or  does  can  be  translated  into  a  measure  of 
one's  exchange  value,  provides  an  example 
of  how  the  transformation  takes  place.  See 
David  McLellan,  Marx  Before  Marxism  (New 
York:  Harper  and  Row.  1971),  p.  176. 

^Grundrisse,  p.  65. 

6C.  B.  MacPherson,  The  Political  Theo- 
ry of  Possessive  Individualism  (London:  Ox- 
ford University  Press,  1962),  p.  3. 

7Thomas  Hobbes,  De  Cor  pore  Politico, 
English  Works,  Molesworth  ed.,  Vol.  IV,  pp. 
128-9  quoted  by  Warrender,  The  Political 
Philosophy  of  Hobbes,  pp.  1 1 2-3. 


8Marx,  Grundrisse,  p.  66. 

9Christian  Bay,  The  Structure  of  Free 
dom  (New  York:  Atheneum,  1968),  p.  250, 
and  Kate  Millett,  Sexual  Politics  (Garden 
City,  New  York:  Doubleday  and  Company, 
Inc.,  1970),  p.  23  cite  a  number  of  these 
discussions. 

10Berenice  Carroll,  "Peace  Research:  The 
Cult  of  Power,"  a  paper  presented  to  the 
American  Sociological  Association  in  Den- 
ver, Colorado,  Sept.,  1971,  p.  6.  She  takes 
de  Jouvenel's  statement  from  Hannah  Arendt, 
"Reflections  on  Violence."  Journal  of  Inter- 
national Affairs,  X X 1 1 1 ,  1  ( 1 969) ,  1 2. 

11  J.  A.  Ponsioen,  in  The  Analysis  of 
Social  Change  Reconsidered  (The  Hague: 
Mouton  and  Co.,  1965),  discusses  a  number 
of  writers. 

12Paul  Lazarsfeld  and  Morris  Rosenberg, 
The  Language  of  Social  Research  (Glencoe, 
Illinois:  The  Free  Press,  1955),  pp.  203-281. 

1 3  Lasswell  and  Kaplan,  Power  and  Socie- 
ty, pp.  268-278. 

14Marge  Piercy,  "A  Shadow  Play  for 
Guilt,"  To  Be  Of  Use  (Garden  City,  New 
York:  Doubleday,  1973),  p.  17. 

15Charlotte  Bunch,  "Perseverance  Fur- 
thers: Woman's  Sense  of  Self,"  The  Furies, 
February,  1973,  pp.  3-4. 

16Georg  Lukacs,  History  and  Class  Cons- 
ciousness (Cambridge,  Massachusetts:  MIT 
Press,  1971),  pp.  15-16. 

17 Rita  Mae  Brown,  "Leadership  vs.  Star- 


24/Quest 


dom,"  The  Furies,  February,  1972,  p.  20. 

18Carroll,  "Peace  Research,"  p.  7.  The 
author  is  indebted  to  her  paper  for  the 
scholarly  sources  discussing  power  as  energy. 

19Bay,  The  Structure  of  Freedom,  p. 
248,  cited  by  Carroll,  p.  8. 

20Robert  White,  "Motivation  Recon- 
sidered: The  Concept  of  Competence,"  Psy- 
chological  Review,  LXVI  (1959),  297,  310, 
318,  cited  by  Carroll,  pp.  9-10. 

21  Anselma  dell'Olio  and  Joreen,  printed 
in  Chicago  Women's  Liberation  Union  News- 
letter, July,  1970. 

22Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I  (New  York: 
International  Publishers,  1967),  p.  402. 

23  Betty  Friedan,  The  Feminine  Mystique 
(New  York:  Dell,  1963),  pp.  214-215. 

24chong  Soo  Pyun,  "The  Monetary  Val- 
ue of  a  Housewife,"  in  Woman  in  a  Man- 
made  World,  eds.,  Non  Glazer-Malbin  and 
Helen  Youngelson  Waehrer  (New  York: 
Rand  McNally  and  Company,  1972),  P.  192. 

25See  Robert  Staples,  "The  Myth  of  the 
Black  Matriarchy,"  The  Black  Scholar,  Jan.- 
Feb.,  1970,  p.  15. 

26william  K.  Tabb,  "Capitalism,  Colo- 
nialism, and  Racism,"  in  Institutions,  Poli- 
cies, and  Goals:  A  Reader  in  American 
Politics,  eds.,  Kenneth  M.  Dolbeare  and 
Murray  J.  Edelman,  with  Patricia  Dolbeare 
(Lexington,  Massachusetts:  D.C.  Heath  and 
Co.,  1973),  p.  174. 

27 ibid.,  p.  175. 

28lbid.,  p.  167. 

29Karl  Marx  and  Frederick  Engels,  The 


German  Ideology,  ed.,  C.J.  Arthur  (New 
York:  International  Publishers,  1970),  pp. 
65-66.  They  also  point  out  that  "the  ideas 
of  the  ruling  class  are  in  every  epoch  the 
ruling  ideas,  i.e.  the  class  which  is  the  ruling 
material  force  of  society,  is  at  the  same 
time  its  ruling  intellectual  force." 

30MacPherson,  Possessive  Individualism, 
has  documented  the  role  of  these  assump- 
tions in  political  philosophy. 

31  ibid.,  p.  92. 

32t.  H.  Green,  The  Political  Theory  of 
T.  H.  Green,  ed.,  John  R.  Rodman  (New 
York:  Appleton-Century-Crofts,  1964),  pp. 
43-44. 

330n  this  point  see  Eli  Zaretsky,  "Capi- 
talism, the  Family,  and  Personal  Life:  Part 
2",  Socialist  Revolution,  III,  3  (May- June, 
1973). 

34Anais  Nin,  Diary,  1931-34  (Harcourt, 
Brace,  and  World,  and  the  Swallow  Press, 
1966),  quoted  by  Meredith  Tax,  "Woman 
and  Her  Mind:  The  Story  of  Everyday  Life," 
in  Notes  from  the  Second  Year  (1 970),  p.  1 5. 

35W.E.B.  DuBois,  The  Souls  of  Black 
Folk  (New  York:  Fawcett  World  Library, 
6th  printing,  1968),  p.  16  in  Joyce  Ladner, 
Tomorrow's  Tomorrow  (New  York:  Anchor 
Books,  1971),  pp.  273-4. 

36Rjchard  Sennett  and  Jonathan  Cobb, 
The  Hidden  Injuries  of  Class  (New  York: 
Random  House,  1972),  p.  208. 

37 Juliet  Mitchell,  Woman's  Estate  (New 
York:  Pantheon  Books,  1971),  p.  120. 


graphics  by  Casey  Czarnik 


Ivancy  Hart  sock,  feminist  on  various 
university  and  professional  committees, 
is  currently  Assistant  Professor  of  poli- 
tical science  at  the  University  of  Michi- 
gan, studying  the  roles  of  women  in 
technological  society. 


Political  Change/ 25 


You  both  smile 

In  at  me 

as  you  pass  by 

in  the  hall. 

Two  Black  women 

in  their  blue 

housekeeping  uniforms. 

Your  eyes  see  me 

white  girl 

behind  a  blue  desk. 

Your  mind  sees  me 

as  another  of  the 

thousand  still 

photographs 

in  your  brain. 

Someone  else 

to  "Yess  Ma'am." 

Sittin  on  her 

white  ass. 

Cushy  desk  job. 

Someday  I  will 

surprise  you 

when  you  look  in. 

You'll  see  me 

in  a  silver  tunic 

made  of  paper  clips. 

And  I'llbeholdin 

a  staple  gun  and 

letter  knife. 

For  once  I'll 

standup  straight 

—from  notebook 

reinforcements 

stuck  up 

and  down 

my  spine. 

My  warpaint 

will  be  red 

PRINTED  MATTER 

SECOND  CLASS 

stamped  across 

my  face  and  hands. 

My  medals  will  be 

postage  stamps. 

20  f  Lucy  Stone 

8  4  Emily  Dickinson. 

Boots  bright  with 

thumbtack  studs. 

Grenades  of 

xerox  cartridges 

hangin 

from  my  belt 


by 


/      #yO  1i)/l   // H 


Then  in  a  minute 

you  the  leaders 

like  witches 

you  will  brandish 

broomsticks 

and  toilet  brushes 

and  molotov  cocktails 

of  snobowl. 

We  will  charge: 

Ripout  file  drawers. 

Paper  hurricanes 

up  and  down 

the  halls. 

We  will  plug 

all  the  typewriters 

intoeachother 

and  let  them 

play 

with  themselves. 

You  will  take 

adding  machines 

coffee  pots 

and  stuffed 

executive  chairs 

home  with  you. 

And  your  kids 

will  each  have 

one  hundred 

felt-tip  pens. 

Enuff  to  cover 

every  construction 

fence  in  town 

with  rainbows 

fulla  names. 

We  will  pour 

duplicator  fluid 

in  all  the  toilets 

and  play 

kick  the  can 

with  unwindin 

rolls  of 

of 

toilet 

paper. 

Yes  we  will  write  it. 

Our  Amerikan  Graffiti: 

WEAINTTAKIN 

NO  MORE  SHIT! 

And  for  one 

holiday 

for  one  holyday 

we  will  be 


An  Interview  on  Women's 
Health  Politics  part  i 


by  Frances  Hornstein 


Editors'  Introduction:  The  history 
of  the  FWHC  (Feminist  Women's 
Health  Center)  is  a  study  in  growth 
and  change.  In  spring,  1971,  a  group 
of  women  began  meeting  as  a  self-help 
clinic.  Their  primary  goal  was  to  dis- 
seminate information  to  women  about 
self-help,  proper  medical  attention  for 
women,  and  methods  for  gaining  con- 
trol over  their  bodies.  A  national  tour 
by  the  two  founders,  Carol  Downer 
and  Lorraine  Rothman,  helped  create 
a  network  of  similar  groups.  In  Los 
Angeles,  the  group  organized  the  Wom- 
en's Abortion  Referral  Service,  which 
took  a  percentage  of  the  fees  for  per- 
forming abortions  to  give  the  FWHC 
the  beginnings  of  an  economic  base. 

In  a  period  of  three  years,  the 
FWHC  has  accomplished  many  things. 
They  set  up  the  first  women-owned, 
women-controlled  abortion  clinic  in 
Los  Angeles,  soon  followed  by  others 
in  Oakland  and  Orange  County.  Now 
the  FWHC  works  on:  1)  self-help 
clinics  and  their  educational  bases, 
2)  paramedic  training  programs,  3)  free, 
well-woman  clinic  services  which  in- 
clude counseling,  information,  and 
gynecological  and  pregnancy  testing, 
4)  abortion  health  care  and  advocacy 
services,  5)  speakers  bureaus,  and  6) 
advanced  research  projects. 

The  Quest  staff  presents  the  FWHC 
politics,  strategies  and  perspectives  as 
a    model  for   other  feminist   service 


programs,  educational  projects,  and 
counseling  groups.  The  FWHC  is  unique 
because  it  is  set  up  around  solutions 
and  women's  strengths  rather  than 
crises  and  oppressions;  because  it  gen- 
erates capital  which  is  reinvested  in 
similar  programs;  and  because  it  is  a 
political  organization  which  recognizes 
that  real  change  will  not  be  accepted 
by  the  power  structure,  and  that 
organization,  direction,  and  power  it- 
self are  required  to  bring  about  the 
change  it  seeks. 

This  interview  is  in  two  parts.  The 
first  section  is  concerned  primarily 
with  FWHC  policies,  internal  organi- 
zation, and  politics-especially  as  they 
pertain  to  processes  of  change.  The 
second  section  will  appear  in  our  next 
issue,  "$$s  Fame,  and  Power,"  and 
will  focus  on  the  FWHC  view  of  the 
uses  and  importance  of  money  in  a 
feminist  organization. 

Q.  What  are  the  goals  of  the  Femi- 
nist Women's  Health  Center  and  how 
have  you  sought  to  achieve  them? 

A.  As  feminists,  our  ultimate  goal 
is  to  give  us,  as  women,  the  power  to 
control  our  own  lives.  This  means  we 
are  concerned  not  only  with  bringing 
about  immediate  changes  which  will 
improve  our  lives,  but  also  with  mak- 
ing basic  long-range  structural  changes 
which  will  give  us  this  power.  To  do 


Women's  Health  Politics/27 


this,  we  must  confront  existing  insti- 
tutions and  people  who  now  hold  that 
power.  Our  strategy  of  confrontation 
takes  place  along  two  main  fronts:  we 
must  learn  all  we  can  about  our  enemy 
and  begin  to  erode  the  system  we 
want  to  destroy;  and  we  must  create 
new  forms  and  institutions  which  meet 
our  needs  and  carry  on  our  ideals. 
Much  of  our  strength  lies  in  the  fact 
that  within  this  framework  we  work 
on  many  levels  at  one  time.  We  are  not 


merely    a    service    organization,   a   re- 
search group,  or  a  resource  center. 

We  engage  in  intensive  community 
education  through  public  relations  and 
meetings  with  community  groups  and 
individuals  and  in  the  form  of  self- 
help  clinics.  We  gain  experience  and 
learn  skills  through  the  Women's  Choice 
Clinics  and  the  Women's  Abortion 
Referral  Service.  We  have  also  created 
a  business  so  that  we  can  survive  and 
be  strong  enough  to  continue  our  work 


/cMa&pJ 


2%lQuest,  vol.  I  no.l ,  summer,  1974 


Nan  Moron 


without  being  dependent  on  external 
sources  of  money.  Equally  important, 
we  have  worked  to  maintain  communi- 
cation with  other  women's  groups  and 
women's  publications  which  are  involv- 
ed in  forcing  change  and  creating  a 
feminist  revolution.  We  do  research 
into  the  work  of  the  institutions  and 
individuals  who  maintain  the  patriar- 
chal structures  in  which  we  live.  And, 
at  the  same  time,  we  provide  good 
health  care  for  as  many  women  as  we 
can  reach.  Our  multi-level  approach  to 
gaining  power  should  serve  as  a  model 
for  other  groups. 

Q.  How  do  you  confront  the  insti- 
tutions and  people  who  hold  power? 

A.  Our  practice  of  confronting  the 
enemy  might  best  be  illustrated  by 
recounting  an  event  that  occurred  late 
last  year.  In  December,  1973,  repre- 
sentatives of  International  Planned  Par- 
enthood, the  United  Nations  Council 
on  Family  Planning,  the  Agency  for 
International  Development  (AID),  East- 
West  Population  Institute,  Batelle  Pop- 
ulation Study  Center  and  others  gath- 
ered in  Hawaii  for  the  Menstrual  Regu- 
lation Conference,  called  to  introduce 
the  concept  of  Menstrual  Regulation* 
(defined  as  early  abortion  by  the  medi- 
cal profession)  as  a  means  of  world- 
wide "family  planning." 


When  Laura  Brown,  Director  of  the 
Oakland  Feminist  Women's  Health  Cen- 
ter arrived  at  the  conference,  a  "P.R." 
man  was  immediately  assigned  to  fol- 
low her  wherever  she  went.  Conference 
officials  held  a  lengthy  discussion  to 
decide  what  to  do  about  the  presence 
of  a  feminist  involved  in  the  Self-Help 
Movement.  The  morning  of  the  open- 
ing of  the  conference,  the  P.R.  man 
who  had  been  assigned  to  Laura  began 
to  tell  her,  very  calmly,  that  she  must 
leave  the  conference.  She  explained, 
very  calmly,  that  she,  as  a  woman,  as  a 
feminist,  and  as  a  representative  of  the 
Feminist  Women's  Health  Center  had 
every  right  to  remain  at  the  conference 
as  a  participant.  After  more  than  an 
hour  of  very  low-keyed  conversation, 
the  man  made  his  power  play:  "All 
right,  if  you  won't  leave  I'll  have  to 
call  the  police."  Laura  responded: 
"O.K.,  and  I'll  call  the  press."  He 
looked    at    her,    walked   over   to    the 


Menstrual  Regulation  is  the  patriarchal 
medical  world  rip-off  synonym  for  the 
Menstrual  Extraction  procedure  developed 
by  Lorraine  Rothman,  Carol  Downer,  and 
the  women  of  the  Self-Help  Clinic.  The 
concept  and  the  practice  were  developed 
for  women  to  gain  more  control  over  our 
own  bodies.  Like  most  women's  inven- 
tions  and   technology,   the   idea   has   been 


stolen  and  used  for  men's  purposes.  Men- 
strual Regulation  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the 
medical  profession  where  it  is  being  used 
for  population  control.  As  Shelley  Farber, 
Co-Director  of  the  L.A.  FWHC  stated  in  her 
address  to  the  American  Public  Health 
Association,  "Menstrual  Extraction  in  the 
hands  of  women  for  women  is  fantastic.  In 
the  hands  of  those  who  are  not  affected  by 
the  procedure,  it  is  dangerous. " 


Women's  Health  Politics/29 


registration  table  and  signed  Laura 
Brown's  name  to  the  registration  book. 
That,  my  sisters,  is  power. 

As  Laura  Brown  said  in  her  report 
on  the  Menstrual  Regulation  Confer- 
ence, "The  reason  I  was  registered  at 
the  conference  was  not  because  I  was 
nice,  nor  that  I  represented  the  true 
interests  of  women,  nor  because  they 
liked  me.  It  was  because  they  had  to 
register  me."  The  presence  of  a  repre- 
sentative of  the  Feminist  Women's 
Health  Center  and  her  competence 
at  that  conference  was  one  event  of 
strategic  importance  in  terms  of  wom- 
en regaining  control  over  our  lives 
and  our  bodies.  By  the  time  the  con- 
ference had  begun,  people  were  lined 
up  to  speak  with  Laura  about  why 
she  had  come,  who  she  represented, 
and  what  we  were  doing.  Besides 
gathering  information  on  the  people 
and  institutions  represented  at  the 
conference,  Laura  Brown  was  there 
confronting  the  very  people  who  main- 
tain our  oppression  and  using  her 
power  to  force  them  to  listen. 

Q.  What  is  self-help  and  how  does 
it  fit  into  political  change? 

A.  We  describe  our  political  activity 
for  purposes  of  illustration,  as  an  ice- 
berg. Self-help  and  our  clinic  services 
are  the  parts  which  are  visible  above 
the  water  line.  There  are  other  levels 
of  activity  below  the  water  line,  such 
as  our  development  and  use  of  men- 
strual extraction,  which  are  not  obvious 
to  anyone  who  steps  through  our  front 
door. 

Self-help,  as  the  most  visible  part  of 


our  work,  is  definitely  the  backbone 
of  the  activities  and  politics  of  the 
Feminist  Women's  Health  Center.  Our 
philosophy  is  based  on  the  idea  that 
control    should    be    in    the    hands   of 


the  people  whose  lives  are  affected  by 
a  system— in  this  case,  the  need  for 
woman-controlled  gynecology. 

One  way  control  of  our  own  lives 
has  been  kept  from  us  is  by  withhold- 
ing information.  We  have  been  kept 
ignorant  of  the  way  our  bodies  func- 
tion ever  since  women's  medicine  was 
taken  out  of  the  hands  of  women  by 
the  male  medical  profession.  Through 
Self-Help  Clinics,  we  are  reclaiming 
that  knowledge  for  our  own  use. 

One  important  problem  we  have 
had  to  deal  with  is  how  to  keep  the 
ideology  of  self-help  out  of  the  con- 
trol of  the  enemy.  The  Self-Help 
Clinic  itself,  its  dissemination  of  infor- 
mation, and  the  technology  of  men- 
strual extraction  are  in  constant  danger 
of  co-optation  by  men  and  even  by 
some  professional  women  who  want 
to  claim  our  ideology  as  their  own. 
The  problem  is  that  the  key  issues  of 
power  and  control  are  lost  in  their 
transmission  of  the  "self-help"  mes- 
sage. For  if  all  people  have  the  know- 
ledge and  awareness  needed  to  control 
their  lives,  those  who  are  now  in  con- 
trol have  a  great  deal  to  lose. 


30/Quest 


A  vivid  example  of  how  reformists 
can  undermine  our  struggle  for  radical 
change  can  be  seen  in  an  examination 
of  the  spate  of  articles  about  self-help 
health  care  which  have  appeared  in 
virtually  every  major  women's  maga- 
zine. While  the  mass  media  can  bring 
information  to  many  more  people 
than  we  can  afford  to  reach,  the  mes- 
sage being  disseminated  simply  urges 
doctors  to  become  more  sympathetic 
and  sensitive  to  women's  needs,  and 
does  not  call  for  women  to  take  con- 
trol of  our  bodies.  Many  professionals 
have  picked  up  part  of  the  self-help 
message:  they  have  recognized  the 
need  for  change  in  health  care  delivery. 
However,  they  give  the  illusion  of  sensi- 
tivity and  the  crumbs  of  health  educa- 
tion without  transferring  any  power  or 
control  to  women.  Here  is  where  the 
real  battle  lies. 


are  acquiring  a  great  deal  of  valuable 
information  about  money,  finances, 
and  how  women  can  gain  more  control 
over  them. 

We  have  also  thought  about  estab- 
lishing a  legal  self-help  clinic,  to  be 
used  by  people  who  want  to  under- 
stand legal  processes  in  order  to  con- 
trol their  own  lives  when  subject  to 
the  legal  system.  The  de mystification 
of  law  is  as  important  as  the  demystifi- 
cation  of  medicine.  The  self-help  con- 
cept may  be  used  to  confront  all  insti- 
tutions. It  is  our  hope  that  other  wom- 
en's projects  will  make  full  use  of 
our  politics  to  gain  control,  for  it  is 
only  when  women  have  control  over 
all  institutions  that  we  will  have  con- 
trol of  our  lives. 

Q.  What  have  been  your  experiences 
with  leadership? 


Q.  Do  you  see  your  politics  reaching 
beyond  the  area  of  health  care?  Can 
your  experience  be  transferred  to  other 
women's  projects  that  aren't  linked 
to  control  over  biology  ? 

A.  Definitely.  Since  we  began,  we 
have  wanted  to  "plug  in"  the  self-help 
concept  to  other  areas  of  concern 
to  women.  Only  our  lack  of  time  has 
prevented  us  from  doing  so.  For  in- 
stance, the  Feminist  Federal  Credit 
Union  (18700  Woodward,  Detroit, 
Mich.)  is  an  organization  which  grew 
directly  out  of  self-help.  Through  a 
self-help  financial  center,  Joanne  Par- 
rent  and  Valerie  Klaetke  have  created 
a  project  which  will  put  money  to  use 
for  women.  At  the   same   time,  they 


A.  The  women's  movement  has 
weakened  itself  by  refusing  to  recog- 
nize leaders  among  our  own  people. 
We  have  adopted  pseudo-equalitarian 
principles  which  have  prevented  many 
women  from  exercising  their  talents, 
abilities,  and  skills  to  their  fullest 
capabilities.  We  do  not  come  to  every 
group  and  every  area  of  work  with  the 
same  experience  and  ability.  We  must 
be  aware  of  these  differences  and 
use  them.  This  does  not  mean  that  we 
value  each  other  any  less  as  people.  It 
does  mean  we  recognize  and  value 
leadership.  It  means  that  we  value 
women  who  have  more  experience 
than  others,  that  we  utilize  and  appre- 
ciate women  who  have  skills  and 
talents.  As  Carol  Downer  put  it,  "lead- 


Women's  Health  Politics/31 


ers  are  people  who  help  groups  achieve 
their  goals."  We  desperately  need 
everyone  and  everything  to  help  us 
progress  and  win. 

We  must  learn  to  recognize  the 
differences  between  women  who  may 
be  working  for  their  own  personal 
self-aggrandizement  and  women  who 
are  simply  more  qualified  to  handle 
certain  situations.  Far  too  many  valu- 
able women  have  been  destroyed  be- 
cause they  were  accused  of  being 
"heavies"  or  power-mongers  or  elitists. 
We  must  judge  ourselves  by  the  suc- 
cess of  our  plans,  projects,  and  strate- 
gies, not  by  the  tone  of  our  voices  or 
the  way  we  say  things.  We  have  to 
value  each  other  for  our  work  for  and 
commitment  to  women,  not  for  our 
life-styles.  We  have  shown  our  own 
immaturity  as  a  political  movement 
in  our  superficial  value  judgments.  We 
have  and  will  continue  to  struggle 
with  ageism,  sexism,  classism,  and 
heterosexism  within  our  own  move- 
ment. As  we  continue  to  grow,  we 
will  always  have  these  basic  struggles. 
Groups  who  believe  they  have  rid 
themselves  of  all  traces  of  bigotry  are 
either  lying  or  stagnating— probably 
they  are  doing  both. 

Q.  How  have  your  ideas  about 
organizational  structures  developed? 

A.  The  tremendous  aversion  to 
structure  is  an  attitude  that  crept  in 
from  the  hippe-male-Left.  It  also  re- 
sulted from  the  oppressive  male-domi- 
nated structures  that  most  of  us  have 
lived  with.  Loose  structures  can  work 
for  some  groups  with  a  limited  range 


of  activity.  But  the  more  complex  an 
organization  becomes,  the  more  there 
is  a  need  for  some  kind  of  formal 
structure.  2 

Throughout  the  development  of 
the  Feminist  Women's  Health  Center, 
we  have  created  different  structures. 
For  example,  as  we  grew  larger,  we 
saw  the  need  for  developing  some 
objective  criteria  for  defining  leader- 
ship in  the  FWHC.  By  leadership,  I 
mean  those  members  of  the  group  who 
1)  are  involved  in  making  policy,  2) 
have  more  areas  of  responsibility  than 
others,  and  3)  are  capable  of  repre- 
senting the  group  in  situations  that 
rise.  We  were  careful  to  make  sure  the 
structure  was  open-in  other  words, 
that  it  would  allow  any  woman  who 
came  into  the  group  equal  access  to 
leadership  positions. 

The  system  is  based  on  points 
representing  levels  of  activity.  Any 
staff  member  can  involve  herself  to 
whatever  extent  she  chooses.  If  she 
has  met  certain  objective  criteria,  and 
has  accumulated  a  set  amount  of 
points,  she  is  considered  a  director  of 
the  FWHC.  When  we  originally  insti- 
tuted the  system  we  were  concerned 
that  defining  people  by  the  number  of 
points  they  had  would  encourage  them 
to  stagnate.  In  fact,  the  system  has 
worked  very  well.  Every  member  of 
the  group,  no  matter  how  long  she  has 
been  involved  at  the  FWHC,  has  an 
accurate  idea  of  the  basis  for  everyone's 
position  in  the  Health  Center  struc- 
ture. She  also  knows  exactly  what  she 
must  achieve  in  order  to  become  more 
involved  in  the  activities  and  the  leader- 
ship. Staff  women  progress  at  various 


32/Quest 


rates  in  becoming  more  involved,  de- 
pending on  the  amount  of  time  they 
spend  at  the  center,  on  their  initiative, 
and  on  how  quickly  they  learn  skills. 
One  woman  was  able  to  become  a 
director  of  the  FWHC  about  three 
months  after  she  started  working  full- 
time.  The  system  also  allows  staff 
women  to  become  less  involved  than 
they  had  previously  been.  This  chart 
illustrates  how  the  point  system  works. 

Q.  What  do  you  see  as  the  biggest 
problem  in  the  women's  movement? 

A.  Perhaps  the  major  place  we  have 
fallen  down  has  been  our  inability  to 
recognize  and  use  our  power.  Men  are 
not  going  to  give  up  their  power  mere- 
ly because  we  ask  them  to  do  so.  We 
have  only  scratched  the  surface  in 
our  attempts  to  develop  powerful 
strategies.  The  work  of  the  FWHC  in 
creating  a  power  base  for  women  in 
the  area  of  health  and  in  regaining 
control  over  our  bodies  is  one  positive 
step  toward  utilizing  our  own  power. 

Q.  Why  do  women  not  use  the 
power  we  have? 

A.  Our  socialization  has  touched 
us  very  deeply.  As  women,  we  have 
tended  to  look  at  strength  and  power 
as  something  that  oppresses  us,  and 
therefore  as  a  negative  attribute.  Both 
in  and  out  of  the  women's  movement, 
strong  women  have  been  punished.  We 
must  change  the  concepts  of  strength 
and  power  into  positive  characteristics 
to  which  all  women  aspire. 

Our  ability  to  be  strong  and  to  use 


power  is,  to  some  extent,  class  based. 
Women  from  the  upper  classes  simply 
have  more  to  lose,  at  least  materially, 
from  "stepping  out  of  line"  and  acting 
aggressively.  Poor  women  are  often 
very  strong  because  they  have  to  be 
in  order  to  survive  and  because  they 
have  nothing  to  lose  by  asserting  them- 
selves to  get  what  they  need. 

Self-help  has  grown  out  of  the  needs 
of  poor  women.  Many  of  the  principles 
on  which  self-help  is  based  are  taken 
directly  from  experiences  of  women 
who  have  not  had  access  to  the  same 
resources  as  middle  class  women.  Low- 
er class  women  have  always  had  infor- 
mation which  was  shared  by  word  of 
mouth  within  their  community  and 
have  often  been  very  supportive  of  one 
another.  The  practice  of  sharing  exper- 
iences in  self-help  clinics  is  in  the 
tradition  of  women  who  have  learned 
from  the  practical  experiences  of  their 
everyday  lives.  This  body  of  know- 
ledge is  perhaps  the  only  thing  we,  as 
women,  have  which  is  truly  ours. 

We  have  begun  to  see  that  along 
with  power  and  control  comes  the 
responsibility  to  use  our  strength.  If  a 
physician  is  not  performing  in  an 
acceptable  manner,  we  have  an  obliga- 
tion to  the  women  who  use  the  clinic 
to  confront  that  physician.  Yet  even 
in  our  own  Women's  Choice  Clinic 
where  physicians  work  for  us  and  we 
have  the  ultimate  power  of  firing  them, 
many  of  us  still  find  it  difficult  to 
confront  doctors  about  their  medical 
skills,  their  professionalism,  or  their 
sexism. 

We  are  still  not  comfortable  enough 
with  being  strong  and  aggressive  to  act 


Women's  Health  Politics/33 


Participation 
Criteria 

NOTE: 


The  underlined  numbers  are  the  points. 
Add  the  points  and  relate  self  on  scale. 
If  more  input  is  wanted,  do  things  to 
get  more  points  in  essence.  If  wish  to 
withdraw,  cut  out  activities. 


easily  in  situations  which  require  that 
behavior.  Within  our  own  staff,  we  are 
struggling  to  develop  the  ability  to  act 
in  a  strong  and  aggressive  manner 
when  the  situation  calls  for  it.  Weak 
behavior  is  not  reinforced  because  it 
is  in  the  best  interest  neither  of  the 
group  nor  of  the  individual  woman. 

Q.   How   has  your  strength  as  an 
organization  grown  ? 

A.   In  terms  of  sheer  numbers,  we 
have   grown   at   a  fantastic  rate.  The 

34/Quest 


original  Self-Help  Clinic  was  a  group 
of  about  six  women.  When  I  began 
work,  the  Self-Help  Clinic  was  just 
expanding  into  the  FWHC  and  there 
were  three  full-time  staff  women. 
Shelley  Farber,  Debra  Law  and  I 
doubled  the  staff  when  we  came  to 
work!  We  have  since  grown  into  three 
health  centers  in  California  with  a 
combined  staff  membership  of  about 
50  women.  There  are  Feminist  Wom- 
en's Health  Centers  starting  now  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah;  Tallahassee,  Flor- 
ida; and  Boston,  Massachusetts.  There 


I.  Hours  per  week  worked 

4— as  needed,  including  weekends,  evenings, 

etc. 
3.— full-time,  40  plus  hours, 
^—part-time. 
1— temporary  or  at  convenience 

II.  Length  of  time  with  center 
2^- over  2  months. 

J^—  under  2  months. 

III.  Involvement 

5— proficient  at  pregnancy  screening,  abor- 
tion counselling,  presentations,  PR  or 
publicity,  paramedic  training,  mail  and 
special  responsibility. 

^—proficient  at  pregnancy  screening,  abor- 
tion counselling,  PR  or  publicity,  mail, 
paramedic,  has  given  outside  oresenta- 
tions. 

3— exposed  to  all  aspects  of  the  health  cen- 
ter, accompanied  outside  presentations, 
proficient  in  some  aspects. 

2— exposed  to  some  aspects,  proficient  in 
some  aspects. 

J^— exposed  to  some  aspects. 

IV.  Keeping  informed 

3— attends  all  meetings,  reads  mail  regularly, 
knows   tallies  daily,  aware  of  financial 


conditions  and  personnel. 
2— attends  policy  and  staff  and  collom 
meetings,  usually.  Reads  mail  sometimes. 
Checks  tallies,  financial  situation  and 
personnel  situation  once  a  week. 
_l^reads  bulletin  board  (notes  of  meetings 
not  attended),  attends  meetings  (especi- 
ally  collom  training  meetings)  when 
possible. 

V.  Political  experience  and  involvement 
3— reads  feminist  literature,  health  literature, 
health  literature,  political  works,  all  files, 
correspondence,  SHC  literature,  partici- 
pates in  women's  liberation  activities. 
2—  reads  SHC  literature,  some  feminist  liter- 
ature,  some   correspondence   and  some 
political  material.  Participates  in  wom- 
en's liberation  activities. 
1— participation  in  women's  liberation  acti- 
vities or  reads  feminist  literature,  some 
political    literature,    and    some    corres- 
pondence. 

VI.  Input 
\— talks  and  contributes 

VII.  Special  responsibilities 
,^-gets  special  job  done  at  all  costs. 
J^gets  special  job  done,  if  possible. 
J^-no    specific    area    of  responsibility   but 
does  assigned  jobs. 


are  also  several  other  very  strong  self- 
help  clinics  and  many  women's  health 
clinics  throughout  the  U.S.,  Canada, 
Europe,  New  Zealand  and  Australia. 
There  is  even  a  self-help  clinic  news- 
letter, the  Monthly  Extract,  An  Irregu- 
lar Periodical,  published  by  Lolly  and 
Jeanne  Hirsch  (available  from  New 
Moon  Publications,  Box  3488  Ridge- 
way  Station,  Stamford,  Conn.  06905). 
Probably  the  best  indicator  of  our 
strength  and  growth  came  on  Sept. 
20,  1972  with  the  raid  of  the  FWHC 
and  the  arrests  of  Carol  Downer  and 
Colleen  Wilson  for  practicing  medicine 
without  a  license.  (Carol  Downer  was 
acquitted  on  Dec.  5,  1972,  after  a 
two-week  jury  trial.  Colleen  Wilson 
pled  guilty  to  one  of  the  eleven  counts 


against  her,  was  fined  $250,  and  placed 
on  a  two-year  probation.)  At  that 
point  we  knew  we  had  become  strong 
enough  to  threaten  the  medical  estab- 
lishment. 

Q.  What  are  some  of  your  projects 
and  visions  for  the  future  ? 

A.  By  the  time  this  interview  is 
published,  we  will  be  in  the  first 
quarter  of  our  first  FWHC  Institute, 
an  internship  program  for  women 
interested  in  women's  health  care.  Its 
purpose  is  to  train  women  in  various 
aspects  of  women's  health  and  to  share 
the  knowledge  we  have  gained  over  the 
last  few  years. 

One  of  our  most  ambitious  goals, 


Women's  Health  Politics/35 


after  three  years  of  struggling  with 
hospital  administrators,  is  to  have  a 
women's  hospital,  not  merely  a  hospi- 
tal which  deals  exclusively  with  wom- 
en's health  problems.  There  are  al- 
ready several  of  the  latter  kind  of 
hospitals  in  existence  and  the  care 
they  offer  is  not  better  than  any  other 
gynecological  care.  What  we  want  is  a 
hospital  which  is  owned  and  controlled 
by  women.  We  have  thought  of  chang- 
ing the  whole  concept  of  a  hospital, 
working  from  the  idea  that  many 
people,  particularly  women,  who  go  to 
a  hospital  are  not  sick.  Women  who 
are  giving  birth  to  babies  and  women 
having  abortions  are  well  women.  A 
hospital  should  be  a  part  of  the  com- 
munity and  should  not  necessarily  be 
as  frightening  and  restrictive  an  insti- 
tution as  it  is  now.  For  example,  a 
hospital  should  include  space  for  other 
than  medical-relaced  functions-meet- 
ing rooms  for  community  groups,  edu- 
cational and  social  programs  for  people 
both  in  and  out  of  the  hospital.  In  this 
way,  the  hospital  would  become  a 
familiar  place. 

Another  plan  we  have  is  to  develop 
on-going  self-help  clinic  groups  wher- 
ever women  travel  and  live:  churches, 
synagogues,  schools,  offices,  YWCA's, 
community  centers.  This  is  closely  tied 
to  the  concept  of  the  "speculum  party" 
(patterned  after  the  "tupperware  par- 
ty") where  women  would  present  self- 
help  clinics  in  the  homes  of  their 
friends.  This  idea,  developed  by  Carol 
Downer,  would  allow  the  Self-Help 
Clinic  to  reach  women  who  are  not 
able  to  leave  their  homes  or  immed- 
iate neighborhoods  to  go  to  the  Self- 


Help  Clinic.  Instead  of  purchasing 
tupperware,  women  would  purchase 
speculums  and  learn  how  to  use  them. 

We  are  investigating  the  feasibility 
of  acquiring  county  contracts  for  Wo- 
men's Choice  Clinics  for  treatment  of 
rape  victims,  so  that  women  could 
come  for  examinations  and  medical 
treatment  following  rape.  Presently, 
we  are  only  providing  this  as  a  limited 
service  through  the  gynecological  clinic. 
For  this  program,  we  would  be  work- 
ing in  conjunction  with  women  from 
rape  crisis  centers  in  the  area. 

We  are  looking  into  providing  ser- 
vices for  artificial  insemination  as  well 
as  adoption.  This  would  present  an 
option  for  women  who,  before  this, 
would  not  have  been  able  to  have 
children  independently  of  men  and 
the  state. 

Our  vision  of  future  political  strate- 
gy will  develop  further  as  we  learn 
more  about  the  activities  of  those  who 
are  now  controlling  our  lives.  We  will 
continue  to  do  whatever  we  need  to 
do  to  move  in  the  direction  of  women 
taking  more  control  over  health  care 
and  reproduction  in  order  to  make 
positive,  permanent,  concrete  changes 
in  all  of  our  lives. 


Footnotes 

1  Carol  Downer,  What  Makes  The  Femi- 
nist Women's  Health  Center  Feminist.  (A- 
vailable  from  the  FWHC,  746  So.  Crenshaw 
Blvd.,  Los  Angeles,  Ca.  90005. 

2R>r  a  discussion  of  this  problem  see 
Jo  Freeman,  "The  Tyranny  of  Structure- 
lessness,"  in  Radical  Feminism,  Anne  Koedt, 
Ellen  Levine,  and  Anita  Rapone,  eds.  (New 
York:  Quadrangle  Books,  1973),  pp.  285- 
299. 


36 1  Quest 


THE  REFORM 
TOOL  KIT 


by  Charlotte  Bunch 

In  recent  political  discussions  among 
feminists,  the  question  of  reform  con- 
tinually comes  up.  One  "revolutionary 
veteran"  states  flatly:  "What  is  there  to 
do  today  that  isn't  reformist?"  Another 
woman  who  has  worked  on  women's 
reforms  for  four  years  declares  that 
they  are  a  dead-end  and  that  she  has 
to  get  out,  to  go  beyond.  There  is  a  lot 
of  concern,  confusion  and  rhetoric 
about  reform  and  revolution,  about 
our  survival  as  women,  and  our  fears 
of  co-optation.  Often,  however,  it  is 
hard  to  discern  in  these  discussions 
what  is  really  at  stake,  what  is  essential 
for  feminists.  Some  women  want  to 
abandon  the  old  terms,  "reform,"  "re- 
volution." I  do  welcome  language  that 
clarifies  those  questions.  However,  un- 
til we  create  the  new  language,  we  must 
sort    out   the    old   language,    examine 


what  has  happened,  see  what  the  basic 
issues  in  the  debate  are,  and  determine 
how  we  can  resolve  them. 

In  this  article,  I  begin  with  a  dis- 
cussion of  terms,  explore  the  history 
of  both  reform  and  radical  wings  of 
the  women's  movement,  examine  the 
relationship  between  reform  and  our 
long-term  goals/strategies,  present  some 
criteria  for  evaluating  which  reforms 
are  most  useful,  and,  finally,  discuss 
conditions  necessary  for  feminists  to 
work  on  reforms.  Certainly  there  are 
other  ways  to  approach  these  ques- 
tions. Women  with  different  experi- 
ences will  undoubtedly  continue  this 
debate.  This  paper  is  an  initial  probing 
of  the  topic,  not  the  final  answer.  We 
plan  to  publish  letters,  other  articles 
and  perhaps  an  entire  issue  of  Quest 
on  this  area  in  the  future. 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/37 


Reform  and  Reformism 

What  is  reform?  What  is  reformism? 
What  is  revolutionary?  Stereotypes  for 
these  words  abound.  Common  stereo- 
types of  what  is  reformist  are  white 
middle  class  professionals  and  politi- 
cians working  to  get  a  bigger  piece  of 
the  pie  for  themselves,  organizations 
lobbying  for  new  legislation,  or  univer- 
sity women  creating  a  comfortable 
niche  called  "women's  studies."  Stereo- 
types of  what  is  revolutionary  tend 
toward  one  of  two  extremes:  either 
bombing  and  violent  take-over  of  the 
government  or  complete  withdrawal 
from  the  system  in  order  to  create  a 
totally  separate  feminist  community. 

When  we  probe  these  stereotypes, 
we  find  that  they  primarily  reflect 
style  (how  one  lives  or  the  comparative 
virtues  of  lobbying  vs.  shooting)  and 
surface  content  (how  far  out  or  dif- 
ferent it  sounds  from  the  way  things 
are  now)  rather  than  substantive  con- 
tent (how  the  activity  affects  different 
classes  of  women  and  what  happens  to 
the  women  working  on  it)  or  ultimate 
goals  (where  the  action  leads  in  the 
long-run  and  how  it  will  get  us  there). 
Style  is  not  irrelevant  to  the  processes 
of  change,  but  it  has  become  too  im- 


portant a  factor  in  our  attitudes  to- 
ward reform.  To  get  beyond  these 
initial  stereotypes,  we  must  define  re- 
form and  examine  it  in  terms  of  sub- 
stantive content  and  goals. 

A  reform  is  any  proposed  change 
that  alters  the  conditions  of  life  in  a 
particular  area,  such  as  within  the 
schools  or  throughout  the  legal  system. 
It  re-forms  or  forms  anew  the  ways 
things  are.  It  can  alter  them  in  a  way 
that  is  helpful  or  destructive.  A  reform, 
simply  put,  is  a  change  or  a  program 
for  change.  It  car  be  a  change  that 
alters  existing  male-dominated  institu- 
tions directly,  such  as  Equal  Rights 
Amendment  legislation,  or  a  change 
through  the  creation  of  women's  alter- 
native institutions,  such  as  a  record 
company  or  a  health  clinic.  Reforms 
or  proposed  changes  can  be  part  of  any 
group's  program,  whether  conservative 
or  revolutionary  in  ideology. 

Reformism,  on  the  other  hand,  has 
come  to  mean  a  particular  ideological 
position.  That  position  is  that  women's 
liberation  can  be  achieved  by  a  series 
of  changes  that  bring  us  equality  within 
the  existing  social,  economic  and  poli- 
tical order  of  the  USA.  Reformism 
assumes  that  the  interests  of  women 
are  not  in  fundamental  conflict  with 


Reforms  or  proposed  changes  can 
be  part  of  any  group's  program, 
whether  the  conservative  or  revo- 
lutionary  in  ideology. 


38 /Quest,  vol.  I  no.  1,  summer,  1974 


the  American  system  and  that  there- 
fore, through  a  progression  of  changes 
(reforms),  it  will  grant  us  freedom 
through  equality.  By  contrast,  a  radical 
analysis  sees  American  society  rooted 
in  patriarchy,  capitalism,  and  white 
supremacy  and  therefore  in  fundamen- 
tal conflict  with  the  interests  of  wom- 
en; freedom  for  oppressed  groups  ul- 
timately does  not  come  through  re- 
forms or  equality  in  those  systems, 
but  through  a  total  restructuring  of  the 
ideology  and  institutions  of  the  society. 
I  will  use  this  definition  of  reformism 
as  an  ideological  position  within  the 
women's  movement.  It  is  crucial  to 
separate  the  word  "reform"— a  change 
or  strategy  that  might  be  used  by 
women  of  varying  politics,  from  "re- 
formism"—a  particular  politics.  The 
failure  to  make  this  separation  has 
been  a  problem  in  the  women's  move- 
ment. 

Radicals  and  Reforms 

"I  thought  getting  a  good  job  was 
immoral  until  I  ran  out  of  money," 
remarked  one  middle  class  feminist  as 
we  discussed  reforms,  class,  and  femi- 
nist revolution. 

Generalizations  about  the  history  of 
the  women's  movement  are  always 
controversial.  The  following  observa- 
tions have  been  discussed  with  others 
but  are  based  on  my  own  experiences 
in  the  New  Left,  Women's  Liberation, 
and  Lesbian  Feminist  Movements  in 
the  past  ten  years.  In  the  middle  and 
late  60's,  Women's  Liberation  grew 
from  two  different  directions.  The  Na- 
tional Organization  for  Women  (NOW) 
and  similar  groups  were  explicitly  re- 


formist; NOW  stated  that  its  purpose 
was  "to  bring  women  into  full  partici- 
pation in  the  mainstream  of  American 
society."  Such  organizations  deve- 
loped programs  to  bring  about  this 
equality. 

Meanwhile,  other  small  groups 
began  meeting  to  discuss  female  op- 
pression and  to  define  goals  quite  dif- 
ferent from  equality  in  the  American 
mainstream.  These  groups,  first  called 
"Women's  Liberation,"  sought  a  poli- 
tics that  questioned  the  whole  struc- 
ture of  society.  The  groups  were  gene- 
rally composed  of  socialists  who  fo- 
cused on  capitalism,  or  radical  femi- 
nists who  focused  on  patriarchy,  and 
sometimes  those  who  tried  to  combine 
these  two  approaches. 

Over  the  past  six  or  seven  years, 
both  the  reformist  and  radical  trends 
have  developed  and  changed  in  many 
ways,  altering  and  sometimes  confusing 
both  their  ideologies  and  their  pro- 
grams. NOW  and  some  reformist  groups 
were  forced  by  the  radicals'  analysis, 
by  women  joining  their  groups,  and  by 
women  leaving  their  groups  to  deal 
with  more  than  just  "equality."  They 
were  challenged  to  take  up  issues  that 
had  originally  been  avoided  as  too  con- 
troversial, such  as  abortion  and  les- 
bianism. They  adopted  some  radical 
rhetoric  (including  the  term  women's 
liberation)  and  a  broader  program  of 
reforms.  But,  generally,  they  continued 
to  operate  with  an  ideology  of  reform- 
ism, not  challenging  the  premises  or 
the  whole  society  and  only  occassion- 
ally  moving  away  from  their  initial 
goal  of  equality  within  the  American 
mainstream.  More  conservative  wom- 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/39 


en's  groups,  such  as  the  Business  and 
Professional  Women's  Club,  have  work- 
ed for  reforms  that  would  explicitly 
bring  privilege  within  existing  systems 
to  some  women,  usually  white,  hetero- 
sexual, middle  class  professionals.  Such 
reformist  groups  aim  to  get  a  few 
women  integrated  into  higher  echelons 
of  society;  groups  such  as  NOW,  be- 
cause they  are  more  diverse  and  some- 
times responsive  to  radical  ideas,  are 
more  ambivalent. 

Meanwhile,  those  feminists  who 
challenged  the  whole  system,  with 
visions  of  a  very  different  society, 
splintered  in  many  directions  in  search 
of  an  elusive  political  clarity.  (I  am 
using  the  term  "radicals"  for  all  those, 


struggles  over  ideological,  organiza- 
tional and  internal  issues  fundamental 
to  the  future  of  feminism:  collectivity, 
leadership,  lesbianism,  class,  power  re- 
lationships, etc.  With  few  exceptions, 
however,  these  struggles  did  not  lead 
to  organizational  or  ideological  co- 
herence or  to  programs  that  involved 
large  numbers  of  women. 

One  reason  radicals  have  difficulty 
developing  programs  is  our  fear  that 
reforms  will  co-opt  us  or  pacify  too 
many  women  without  overthrowing 
male  supremacy.  The  American  system 
co-opts  our  visions  by  incorporating 
radical  rhetoric  while  distorting  the 
original  meaning  of  the  words  and 
ideas;  it  co-opts  our  leaders  by  offering 


Enter  "Reformism."  Where 
radicals  have  failed  , 
reformists  have  flourished. 


including  myself,  who  have  rejected  a 
reformist  ideology  and  who  share  a 
belief  that  more  basic  changes  in  soci- 
ety are  necessary.  Obviously,  such 
groups  as  socialist  feminists,  radical 
feminists,  lesbian  feminists  or  cultural 
feminists  differ  from  each  other  and 
have  divergent  strategies,  but  they  usu- 
ally share  the  desire  to  go  beyond  re- 
formism. Most  of  the  following  obser- 
vations apply  to  all  these  groups  in 
varying  degrees). 

Radicals  found  ourselves  caught  up 
in  an  effort  to  develop  a  new  kind  of 
politics  that  could  not  be  co-opted  by 
the   system.   This   involved  numerous 


token  prestige,  power,  or  money  if  we 
co-operate,  and  by  isolating  and  des- 
troying those  who  won't  be  bought.  It 
co-opts  our  people  by  adopting  some 
reforms  that  improve  our  lives  but 
leave  intact,  and  often  even  improve, 
the  structures  of  patriarchy,  capitalism, 
and  white  supremacy.  Some  women 
also  fear  reform  because  it  means  in- 
volvement with  power  (seen  as  male) 
within  the  slimy  institutions  we  want 
to  destroy:  they  ask  whether  we  can 
keep  our  souls  and  not  be  corrupted 
by  such  involvement. 

Such  fears  of  co-optation  are  justi- 
fied, but  sometimes  they  have  resulted 


40/Quest 


in  the  attempt  by  many  to  remain 
pure,  to  be  uncorrupted  by  association 
with  any  reforms.  For  example,  radi- 
cals who  consider  working  on  the  ERA, 
in  women's  studies  or  women's  trade 
unions  can  become  immobilized  by  un- 
certainty about  whether  or  not  we 
can  keep  our  politics  and  souls  alive. 
As  a  result,  we  often  neglect  the  crea- 
tion of  conditions  that  could  make 
these  actions  more  progressive,  as  well 
as  keep  us  honest.  Purism  taken  to  its 
extreme  results  in  immobilism  and 
cynicism;  if  we  can't  achieve  the  final 
good  now,  then  we  feel  we  can't  do 
anything  at  all  because  it  might  be 
co-optable. 

Radicals  of  various  ideologies  push 


the  hard  political  questions  and  project 
visions  of  what  we  could  do  and  what 
we  could  be.  This  process  is  a  source  of 
vital  ideas  and  changes.  But  we  have 
failed  to  create  the  tangible  programs 
or  organizations  that  could  show  wom- 
en our  potential  for  power  or  that 
could  provide  concrete  steps  for  in- 
volvement in  change.  For  example, 
some  have  accurately  challenged  the 
white,  middle  class  bias  of  most  wom- 
en's reforms,  but  too  often  the  alterna- 
tive has  not  been  a  better  program  but 
no  program  at  all.  Our  strength  has 
been  the  willingness  to  raise  basic  ques- 
tions but  it  has  also  led  to  our  weak- 


ness. Our  questions  often  are  so  basic, 
such  as  those  examining  power  relations 
in  all  parts  of  our  lives,  that  we  are 
unable  to  move  far  on  them.  Not 
knowing  what  to  do  with  the  immen- 
sity  of  what  we   question,   we   often 


become  isolated,  discouraged  and  im- 
mobilized. 

Enter  "Reformism."  Where  radicals 
have  failed,  reformists  have  flourished. 
Reformist  groups  and  activities  attract 
many  women  primarily  because  such 
groups  are  well  organized  and  provide 
involvement  in  programs  of  action  that 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/41 


can  produce  immediate  results  and  tan- 
gible—though limited— successes.  Wom- 
en working  on  reformist  programs  of- 
ten have  a  radical  analysis  of  society 
but  find  few  places  to  work  concretely 
on  that  analysis.  For  example,  a  les- 
bian may  be,  ideologically,  a  lesbian- 
feminist,  but  if  she  wants  job  security 
in  order  to  "come  out,"  she  may  well 
put  her  energy  into  the  organization 
working  on  the  reform  that  will  guaran- 
tee that  security,  no  matter  what  its 
overall  ideology.  Most  radical  groups 
fail  to  develop  concrete  reforms  as  a 
part  of  our  program  and  direction, 
because  we  have  not  realized  that  such 
reforms  need  not  be  tied  to  a  reformist 
ideology. 

Other  problems  have  grown  out  of 
our  focus  on  internal  change— the  effort 
to  make  our  lives  and  groups  reflect 
the  same  changes  that  we  advocate 
outside,  such  as  collectivity,  equality, 
etc.  Again,  this  is  important,  but  it 
cannot  be  achieved  quickly  or  be  sep- 
arated from  the  struggle  to  change  the 
structures  of  the  whole  society.  The 
failure  to  transform  ourselves  and  oth- 
ers more  completely  has  left  some 
women  feeling  defeated  and  cynical,  or 
consumed  by  efforts  to  achieve  that 
change.  Similarly,  many  service  and 
cultural  activities,  while  providing  con- 
crete activity,  have  come  to  a  dead-end 
because  they  do  not  confront  society 
directly  and  are  not  integrated  into  an 
overall  ideology  or  program  for  liber- 
ating women. 

Presently  at  a  crossroads  in  the 
question  of  reform,  large  numbers  of 
women  who  call  themselves  radicals 
are  asking,  "What  is  the  role  of  reform 


in  our  movement?"  Simultaneously, 
women  who  work  on  reforms  or  in  ser- 
vice projects  are  asking,  "What  is  the 
political  framework  for  the  future  that 
goes  beyond  reformism  and  can  be 
used  to  evaluate  our  work?"  From  our 
different  places,  we  can  look  anew  at 
women's  reforms  and  political  ideology. 

Reform  and  Long-Term  Goals 

Between  social  reforms  and  revolu- 
tion there  exists  for  the  social  demo- 
cracy an  indissoluble  tie.  The  struggle 
for  reforms  is  its  means;  the  social 
revolution,  its  aim.  .  .Formerly,  the  ac- 
tivity of  the  Social  Democratic  Party 
consisted  of  trade-union  work,  of  agi- 
tation for  social  reforms  and  the  de- 
mocratization of  existing  political  in- 
stitutions. The  difference  is  not  in  the 
what  but  in  the  how.  At  present,  the 
trade-union  struggle  and  parliamentary 
practice  are  considered  to  be  the  means 
of  guiding  and  educating  the  prole- 
tariat in  preparation  for  the  task  of 
taking  over  power. " 

Rosa  Luxemburg-^ 

Those  interested  in  fundamental 
social  change  or  in  revolution  have  long 
debated  the  role  of  reforms.  As  Rosa 
Luxemburg  put  it  above,  the  point  is 
not  the  opposition  of  one  to  the  other, 
but  the  relationship  between  them. 
The  primary  issues  are:  What  is  our 
long-range  goal?  How  does  a  specific 
reform  aid  or  detract  from  that  goal? 
How  should  the  reform  be  carried  out 
to  advance  our  goal  best?  To  state  it 
another  way,  reform  is  not  a  solution 
but  a  strategy  toward  a  larger  goal. 

In  using  these  points  to  evaluate 
reforms  in  the  women's  movement,  we 


42/Quest 


must  first  ask,  what  is  our  goal?  We 
want  an  end  to  the  oppression  of  all 
women.  What  does  that  mean?  What  is 
our  analysis  of  why  and  how  women 
are  oppressed?  Women's  oppression  is 
rooted  both  in  the  structures  of  our 
society  which  are  patriarchal,  and  in 
the  sons  of  patriarchy:  capitalism  and 
white  supremacy.  Patriarchy  includes 
not  only  male  rule  but  also  hetero- 
sexual imperialism  and  sexism;  patriar- 
chy led  to  the  development  of  white 
supremacy  and  capitalism.  For  me,  the 
term  patriarchy  refers  to  all  these  forms 
of  oppression  and  domination,  all  of 
which  must  be  ended  before  all  women 
will  be  free. 

Stated  positively,  we  need  a  new 
social  order  based  on  equitable  distri- 
bution of  resources  and  access  to  them 
in  the  future;  upon  equal  justice  and 
rights  for  all;  and  upon  maximum  free- 
dom for  each  person  to  determine  her 
own  life.  How  will  we  bring  about 
these  changes?  What  is  our  long-term 
strategy?  What  kind  of  process  does 
this  involve?  What  types  of  power 
must  women  have  to  make  these 
changes?  These  must  be  our  questions. 

The  socialist  tenet  that  the  first 
phase  of  revolution  required  the  taking 
of  state  power  by  the  proletariat  and 
the  destruction  of  capitalism  guided 
Luxemburg's  discussion  of  reform.  Fol- 
lowing her  framework,  I  will  sketch 
initial  goals  and  strategies  for  our  dis^ 
cussion  of  reforms.  In  order  to  end 
patriarchy  and  to  create  a  new  society, 
women  must  have  power.  We  must 
have  power  in  all  spheres— political, 
economic,  and  cultural— as  well  as  pow- 
er over  our  own  beings.  Since  we  seek 


power  as  a  means  of  transforming 
society,  we  must  also  transform  power 
or  find  new  ways  of  exercising  power 
that  do  not  duplicate  the  oppressions 
of  today.  We  must  discover  who  wom- 
en can  build  our  own  strengths,  create 
these  new  forms,  prepare  for,  and  gain 
such  power.  Since  all  this  cannot  be 
accomplished  within  American  society 
as  it  now  exists,  my  long-term  goal  is 
not  the  achievement  of  piece-meal  re- 
forms but  a  feminist  revolutionary  pro- 
cess that  alters  the  entire  social  order. 
Reforms,  therefore,  are  not  an  end  in 
themselves  but  an  important  means 
toward  reaching  this  larger  goal.  They 
must  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  it. 

Some  argue  that  a  revolutionary 
women's  goal  is  the  end  of  power— to 
create  a  world  not  based  on  any  power 
dynamics— and  that  association  with 
male  power  will  necessarily  corrupt  us. 
Perhaps,  ultimately,  we  can  dream  of 
an  end  to  power.  But  before  we  can 
accomplish  that,  women  must  first 
gain  enough  control  over  society  today 
to  end  patriarchal  domination  and  des- 
truction of  the  world.  In  that  process, 
hopefully,  we  can  change  the  nature  of 
power,  but  we  cannot  avoid  or  ignore 
it. 

Radicals  often  debate  when  people 
can  be  expected  to  act:  when  the 
situation  is  most  unbearable  (intense 
repression  or  economic  depression)  or 
when  reforms  are  making  things  better 
and  raising  expectations.  I  would  pose 
the  question  differently.  Most  people 
are  willing  to  risk  basic  change  when  a 
movement  (or  party)  has  done  three 
things:  1)  raised  their  hopes  by  pointing 
to  concrete  visions  of  ways  in  which 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/43 


iV  \    :|| 


44/Quest 


life  could  be  better;  2)  provided  organ- 
ization and  strategy  for  how  to  achieve 
those  visions;  and  3)  demonstrated 
that  the  existing  system  is  not  going 
to  make  those  changes  willingly.  As  we 
gain  more  power  both  through  our 
visions  and  our  institutions,  we  will  en- 
counter more  opposition  from  the  sys- 
tem. We  can  mobilize  more  people  to 
fight  with  us  at  that  time  if  they  can 
see  and  believe  in  what  we  have  done. 
I  would  never  favor  making  the  condi- 
tions of  people's  lives  more  difficult 
just  to  "raise  consciousness."  But  if 
repression  comes,  then  we  must  adapt 
our  strategies  to  use  it. 

The  crucial  point  here  is  not  wheth- 
er the  government  is  liberal  or  repres- 
sive. What  is  crucial  is  that  we  are  able 
to  demonstrate  that  we  can  organize 
society  anew  in  a  way  that  is  better 
for  people  and  that  we  have  a  chance 
of  winning  in  a  battle  with  traditional 
forces.  If  women  are  to  achieve  politi- 
cal power,  we  must  convince  large  num- 
bers of  people  that  we  can  do  all  this. 
We  are  far  from  that  point. 

Programs  of  reform,  including  the 
institutions  that  we  build,  are  part  of 
the  means,  the  strategy,  by  which  we 
demonstrate  what  we  can  do.  The  ef- 
fect of  those  reforms  depends  not  only 
on  what  is  done  but  also  upon  how  it 
is  accomplished.  The  "how"  includes 
questions  about  the  ideology,  struc- 
ture, approach,  and  type  of  group 
carrying  out  a  reform.  This  leads  us  to 
a  discussion  of  the  criteria  to  be  used 
in  evaluating  specific  reforms. 

Criteria  for  Evaluating 

Reforms 

We    oppose    the    Utopian   position 


which  argues  against  any  change  until 
the  perfect  solution  is  possible.  On  the 
other  hand,  we  also  are  not  for  working 
on  any  and  every  reform  action  that 
presents  itself  Our  strategy  allows  us 
to  define  priorities  and  timetables  to 
lend  structure  to  issues  in  terms  of  par- 
ticular situations. 

"Socialist  Feminism:  A  Strategy  for 
the  Women  *s  Mo vemen t ' 

To  say  that  radicals  should  re-evalu- 
ate the  importance  of  reforms  does  not 
mean  that  we  should  rush  out  and 
accept  every  women's  reform  as  pro- 
gressive. Criteria  depend  on  goals  and 
strategy.  To  say  that  we  must  evaluate 
reform  in  terms  of  goals  and  strategy 
does  not  mean  that  our  analysis  is  com- 
plete and  our  direction  is  set.  We  begin 
with  what  we  do  have.  Those  who  dif- 
fer with  my  questions  and  goals  out- 
lined above  will  differ  some  on  criteria, 
but  the  following  framework  should 
still  be  useful. 

The  primary  goal  is  women  gaining 
power  in  order  to  eliminate  patriarchy 
and  to  create  a  more  humane  society. 
We  must  determine  what  is  necessary 
in  order  for  women  to  obtain  power 
and  to  use  it  for  these  purposes.  We 
must  also  look  at  the  class,  race,  and 
sexual  preference  base  of  that  power, 
if  we  are  to  create  real  change  and  not 
just  acquire  power  for  a  few  privileged 
women.  I  have  outlined  five  criteria  for 
evaluating  reform  that  correspond  to 
these  goals.  The  criteria  often  overlap 
and  are  ordered  somewhat  arbitrarily, 
according  to  process  more  than  priori- 
ty: 1)  Does  this  reform  materially  im- 
prove the  lives  of  women,  and  if  so, 
which  women,  and  how  many?  2)  Does 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/45 


it  build  an  individual  woman's  self- 
respect,  strength,  and  confidence?  3) 
Does  it  give  women  a  sense  of  power, 
strength,  and  imagination  as  a  group 
and  help  build  structures  for  further 
change?  4)  Does  it  educate  women 
politically,  enhancing  our  ability  to 
criticize  and  challenge  the  system  in 
the  future?  5)  Does  it  weaken  patriar- 
chal control  of  society's  institutions 
and  help  women  gain  power  over  them? 

1.)  Does  it  materially  improve 
the  lives  of  women  and  if  so,  which 
women,  and  how  many?  Reforms  that 
alleviate  immediate  pain  and  econo- 
mically improve  our  lives  are  impor- 
tant because  they  give  us  space  to 
breathe,  work,  and  plan;  they  make  it 
possible  for  more  women  to  act  politi- 
cally. This  is  particularly  true  where 
reforms  center  on  daily  problems  like 
childcare,  job  and  housing  discrimina- 
tion, or  sexual  abuse.  Many  working 
class  women  of  all  races  have  not  sup- 
ported women's  actions  because  these 
did  not  directly  improve  their  lives. 
Some  women's  reforms  even  appear  to 
worsen  their  situation,  for  example, 
when  middle  class  women  are  given 
jobs  ahead  of  the  working  class  men 
whose  income  supports  the  working 
class  woman.  When  we  can  show  that 
our  programs  meet  women's  survival 
needs,  not  just  advance  the  position  of 
a  few,  then  more  women  will  join  us. 

All  women  are  oppressed  but  some 
have  more  privilege  than  others.  Re- 
forms that  focus  on  enhancing  the 
status  of  white,  heterosexual,  middle- 
class  women  with  the  most  privilege 
often  divide  us  further.  To  give  an  ex- 
ample, working  to  move  women  into 


oppressive  executive  positions  supports 
the  structures  of  patriarchy  and  exa- 
cerbates class  differences  among  wom- 
en. Reforms  that  aid  the  least  privi- 
leged, that  is  force  distribution  of 
resources  to  women  at  the  "bottom," 
such  as  a  decent  income  for  welfare 
mothers,  begin  to  close  some  of  those 
gaps.  Reforms  that  benefit  a  wide  spec- 
trum of  women,  such  as  the  Equal 
Rights  Amendment  (even  with  its  dan- 
gers), also  have  potential  for  bringing 
women  together.  Women  are  all  vul- 
nerable and  each  of  us  is  only  as  secure 
as  those  women  that  society  puts  on 
the  "bottom,"  not  as  powerful  as  the 
token  top.  Material  reforms  should  aid 
as  many  women  as  possible  and  should 
particularly  seek  to  redistribute  income 
and  status  so  that  the  class,  race,  and 
heterosexual  privileges  that  divide  wom- 
en are  eliminated. 

2.)  Does  the  reform  build  an  indivi- 
dual woman's  self-respect,  strength,  and 
confidence?  A  movement  is  only  as 
strong  as  the  women  in  it.  Self-respect 
is  basic  co  the  success  of  our  own  work, 
to  respecting  other  women,  and  to  be- 
lieving in  the  power  of  women.  Reform 
activities  that  help  women  find  a  sense 
of  themselves  apart  from  their  op- 
pressed functions  and  which  are  not 
based  on  the  false  sense  of  race,  class, 
or  heterosexual  superiority  are  impor- 
tant. This  is  not  to  encourage  indivi- 
dualism or  tokens  who  are  personally 
liberated.  It  is  to  encourage  women 
who  see  their  strength  and  future  tied 
to  the  liberation  of  all  women. 

Consciousness-raising,  feminist  coun- 
seling, and  women's  skills  programs  can 
help  build  self-respect;  so  too,  success- 


46/Quest 


ful  work  on  reform  activities  can  build 
self-conlidence.  But  it  is  vital  that 
these  activities  not  be  done  in  isolation 
from  a  political  perspective.  By  helping 
women  understand  why  we  lack  res- 
pect in  this  society  and  how  the  socie- 
ty will  continue  to  destroy  our  confi- 
dence until  we  gain  power  as  a  group, 
these  activities  can  build  women's  poli- 
tical as  well  as  personal  motivation. 

3.)  Does  working  for  the  reform 
give  women  a  sense  of  power,  strength, 
and  imagination  as  a  group  and  help 
build  structures  for  further  change? 
Women  need  to  win;  We  need  to  strug- 
gle for  reforms  that  are  attainable.  We 
need  to  act  where  it  is  clear  that  the 
changes  achieved  are  the  results  of  our 
efforts— not  a  gift  from  the  system— 
but  victories  won  by  our  pressure,  our 
organization,  and  our  strength.  The 
greater  variety  and  larger  numbers  of 
women  who  benefit  from  this  victory— 
and  who  participate  in  its  accomplish- 
ment—the better. 

To  take  one  example,  we  need  to 
make  clear  to  people  that  changes  in 
abortion  laws  were  won  by  the  com- 
bined efforts  of  many  women,  not 
given  to  us  by  the  government.  Still, 
we  can't  stop  with  any  one  reform. 
Changes  in  abortion  laws,  while  impor- 
tant, did  not  bring  us  control  over  our 
bodies.  That  victory  should  be  used  to 
spur  us  on  to  fighting  for  more  changes, 
such  as  an  end  to  forced  sterilization, 
better  and  free  health  care  for  all,  etc. 
These  specific  reforms  should  also  help 
us  build  structures  and  organizations 
that  can  work  for  more  changes  and 
use  each  separate  reform  to  gain  power. 
Victories  and  programs,  especially  when 


linked  to  specific  organizations,  give  us 
a  clearer  sense  of  what  we  can  win  and 
illustrate  the  plans,  imagination,  and 
changes  that  women  will  bring  as  we 
gain  power. 

4.)  Does  the  struggle  for  reform 
educate  women  politically,  enhancing 
our  ability  to  criticize  and  challenge 
the  system  in  the  future?  Working  on 
reforms  can  teach  us  about  our  enemies 
and  about  the  systems  we  oppose.  Win- 
ning a  reform  such  as  the  right  to  enter 
"men  only"  accomodations  shows  wo- 
men that  ending  superficial  signs  of 
our  oppression  changes  little.  Even  re- 
forms that  fail,  such  as  the  efforts  to 
ordain  women  in  the  Episcopal  Church, 
can  reveal  the  limits  of  the  system  and 
raise  the  consciousness  of  those  who 
once  believed  in  reformism.  I  do  not 
propose  working  on  unattainable  de- 
mands or  superficial  issues  just  to  edu- 
cate. Rather,  when  many  women  are 
interested  in  any  issue,  we  can  enhance 
its  educational  possibilities  through 
political  discussion.  Since  winning  one 
reform  is  not  our  final  goal,  we  should 
ask  if  working  on  that  issue  will  teach 
us  new  and  important  things  about 
ourselves  and  society.  Particularly  when 
a  reform  fails,  political  education  is  im- 
portant to  motivate  women  to  conti- 
nue, rather  than  to  become  cynical 
about  change. 

5.)  Does  the  reform  Weaken  patri- 
archal control  of  society's  institutions 
and  help  women  gain  power  over  them? 
As  women,  we  want  to  improve  the 
conditions  of  our  daily  lives.  In  order 
to  do  this,  we  must  have  power  over 
the  institutions— the  family,  schools, 
factories,    laws,    etc.— that    determine 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/47 


those  conditions.  One  way  to  build  po- 
wer is  through  creating  our  own  alter- 
natives, such  as  health  clinics  that  give 
us  more  control  over  our  bodies,  or 
women's  media  that  control  our  com- 
munications with  the  public.  Alterna- 
tive institutions  should  not  be  havens 
of  retreat,  but  challenges  that  weaken 
male  power  over  our  lives. 

Some  reforms  directly  challenge  the 
power  of  existing  institutions,  such  as 


Have  you  been 

looking  for 

some  really  good 

women's  music? 

Olivia  Records  was  created  to  bring 
women's  music  to  you  —  using  the 
skills  and  talents  of  women  right 
down  the  line.  Our  first  record  is  a  45 
featuring  Meg  Christian  and  Cris 
Williamson  in  two  fine  performances. 
It  was  produced,  engineered, 
performed,  promoted  and  distributed 
by  women  —  to  raise  money  for  our 
first  LP.  Help  get  a  good  thing  going 
—  and  get  turned  on  to  two 
outstanding  artists  and  two  great 
songs.  Those  who  can  are  welcome  to 
send  an  extra  contribution  to  help  us 
get  rolling.  (We  are  a  non-profit 
corporation  and  have  applied  for  tax- 
exempt  status.) 

CUT  OUT  AND  MAIL  TO: 

OLIVIA  RECORDS,  Box  1784,  Main  City 

Station,  Washington  DC  20013 


I  enclose  $1.50  per  record  for records,  plus 

30  c  per  record  to  cover  mailing  costs  (50c  in 
Canada.) 

I  enclose  $ extra  to  help  you  get  rolling. 


hospitals,  welfare  systems,  schools,  etc. 
In  confrontations  with  such  established 
powers,  we  seek  to  change  what  they 
do;  but  above  all,  we  should  demand 
that  those  most  affected  by  each  insti- 
tution have  the  power  to  determine 
its  nature  and  direction.  Initially,  these 
challenges  and  reforms  help  to  under- 
mine the  power  of  patriarchy,  capita- 
lism, and  white  supremacy.  Ultimately, 
these  actions  must  lead  to  the  people's 
control  of  all  institutions  so  that  we 
can  determine  how  our  society  will 
function. 

Conditions  for 
Reform  Actions 

Every  reform  will  not  necessarily 
advance  all  five  criteria,  but  no  reform 
that  we  undertake  should  be  in  opposi- 
tion to  any  of  these  points.  If  we  seek 
power  for  a  feminist  revolution,  we 
must  develop  an  overall  program  and 
organization  that  links  these  reforms 
together,  that  goes  beyond  them,  and 
builds  women's  power  more  coherent- 
ly. Until  that  coherence  is  developed, 
the  initial  criteria  help  us  evaluate  our 
present  activities  and  potential  reforms. 
However,  once  we  are  working  on  a  re- 
form, we  need  not  only  criteria  but 
also  conditions  that  will  prevent  its  co- 
optation  or  dilution,  that  keep  the  re- 
form consistent  with  our  long-term 
goals,  and  that  help  us  know  when  to 
move  on.  Otherwise  any  reform  activi- 
ty can  become  an  end  in  itself. 

In  discussing  conditions  for  working 
on  reforms,  it  is  helpful  to  summarize 
some  of  the  problems  and  pitfalls  of 
reforms.  Unless  we  are  determined  to 
prevent  it,  reforms  most  often  enhance 


48/ Quest 


the  privilege  of  a  few  at  the  expense  of 
the  many.  Unless  good  political  educa- 
tion accompanies  work  on  a  reform, 
success  can  lead  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  system  works  or  failure  can  lead  to 
cynicism    about    women's    ability    to 


bring  about  change.  Reforms  should  be 
judged  by  how  they  actually  affect  wo- 
men; some  sound  good  in  theory  but 
work  against  women's  material  needs. 
For  example,  "no-fault  divorce  laws" 
sound  like  equality  but  since  male  and 
female  incomes  are  not  equal  and  many 
women  have  worked  for  husbands  for 
years,  they  cut  off  some  women's  badly 
needed  and  justified  rights  to  alimony. 
If  too  much  is  staked  on  any  one  re- 
form, as  happened  with  getting  the 
vote,  we  are  cut  off  from  other  vital 
areas  for  change.  Finally,  if  we  do  not 
make  it  clear  that  women  made  a  re- 
form happen,  it  can  look  like  the  result 
of  a  benevolent  establishment.  There- 
fore, we  should  maximize  women's  di- 
rect  participation  in  bringing  change, 


emphasize  the  power  of  our  combined 
efforts,  and  avoid  backroom  styles  that 
tend  to  obscure  where  ideas  came  from 
and  who  forced  them  into  reality. 
Otherwise  devious  politicians  can  take 
over  our  reforms  in  ways  that  disperse 
our  momentum  and  pacify  rather  than 
politicize  masses  of  women. 

There  are  many  types  of  reforms 
and  ways  to  work  on  them— through 
women's  reformist  groups,  inside  male- 
dominated  institutions,  by  building  al- 
ternate institutions,  through  mass  ac- 
tions or  coalitions,  etc.  The  conditions 
required  to  keep  a  perspective  on  the 
reform  will  vary  in  each.  Let  us  take 
one  situation  as  an  example. 

Sally  Gearhart  once  described  how 
a  feminist  might  evaluate  whether  or 
not  to  work  for  reforms  in  the  church. 
First,  she  outlined  reasons  to  leave  the 
church:  it  is  totally  patriarchal  in  atti- 
tude and  structure;  remaining  may 
falsely  inspire  others  to  believe  that  it 
can  be  changed  within  itself  and  within 
the  existing  system;  it  can  separate  you 
from  your  sisters,  especially  if  you 
move  into  a  higher  position  that  makes 
you  more  a  part  of  the  system;  you 
and  your  support  group  waste  lots  of 
energy.  She  then  outlined  reasons  why 
one  might  stay  there:  it  is  a  job  provi- 
ding some  economic  stability  for  a 
woman;  it  can  be  a  place  to  focus  on 
the  spiritual  questions  and  needs  of 
women;  you  can  gain  certain  skills, 
contacts,  experiences  and  make  similar 
resources  available  to  other  women; 
you  can  make  room  for  and  help  to 
politicize  large  numbers  of  women  who 
are  presently  in  the  church,  giving 
them  a  sense  of  their  power  and  out- 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/49 


lining  possibilities  for  women  to  make 
change.  Finally,  she  emphasized  the 
minimum  conditions  that  would  be 
essential  if  you  chose  to  stay:  1.)  a 
feminist  community  outside  the  church 
to  whom  you  are  accountable  and 
which  helps  you  to  stay  in  touch  with 
why  you  are  working  in  the  institution; 
2.)  a  feminist  group  for  support  and 
strategy  inside  the  church  with  whom 
you  work  regularly  to  build  something 


off  our  backs 

the  feminist  news  journal 
■published  monthly 

we  have  it: 

neWS    in  depth  coverage  of  the 
stories  that  most  papers  ignore. 

dfldlySlS  from  a  feminist  point 
of  view. 

health  practical  information  on 
the  inadequacies  of  health  care  and 
what  you  can  do  about  it. 

Survival       a  how-to  column  with 
everything  from  buying  a  used  car 
to  baking  bread. 

Ctllture     with  coverage,   reviews 
and  thought  pieces  on  an  emerging 
womens 's  culture 

SpOrtS      and  the  women  who 
participate  in  them. 

and  more 

you  can  get  it! 

12  issues-  $6  Canada-$7 

institutions-  $15     sample  copy-45<£ 

send  to: 

off  our  backs,   1724  20th  St.   N.W. 

Washington  D.C.   20009 


there;  and  3.)  a  clear  personal  sense  of 
how  necessary  it  is  to  risk  and  what 
the  strategies  and  motives  are  and  must 
be  behind  each  risk.  Similar  condi- 
tions could  be  described  for  women 
working  in  women's  studies/universi- 
ties, business,  politics,  law,  trade  unions 
or  any  other  established  institution. 

A  radical  who  works  on  reforms 
within  a  women's  reformist  group  faces 
similar  questions.  She  must  also  work 
out  the  relationship  between  her  own 
ideology  and  the  dominant  reformism 
of  the  group.  She  must  define  clear 
objectives  for  what  she  does  and  does 
not  expect  to  change  about  the  group 
and  what  she  hopes  to  accomplish  by 
working  there.  She  would  also  need 
feminists  who  share  her  politics  outside 
the  group  to  provide  ongoing  support 
and  criticism  of  her  work. 

Feminists  in  groups  who  share  a 
common  radical  analysis  may  also  work 
on  reforms,  either  on  their  own  or  in 
coalition  with  other  groups.  In  deter- 
mining what  to  do,  the  group  should 
consider  the  five  criteria,  the  particular 
skills  and  interests  of  their  group,  and 
the  needs  and  interests  of  their  com- 
munity. Ongoing  criticism  must  be 
built  into  the  group  so  that  the  reforms 
can  be  kept  moving  in  a  progressive 
direction  and  so  that  improvements 
can  be  made  or  a  project  ended  if  it  is 
not  serving  its  purpose.  Feedback  from 
feminists  who  share  their  goals  but  are 
not  working  on  the  same  activities 
would  also  be  useful. 

Most  feminsits  are,  or  will  be,  in- 
volved in  various  reform  activities,  no 
matter  what  their  ideology.  The  ques- 
tions we  face  are  "which  ones?"  and 


50/Quest 


"how?"  and  "with  whom?"  Since  I 
believe  that  women  must  work  toward 
gaining  power  to  end  patriarchy,  capi- 
talism, and  white  supremacy  and  to 
create  a  new  society,  I  have  outlined 
criteria  and  conditions  for  determining 
which  reforms  to  work  on  and  how  to 
approach  them  that  correspond  to  that 
goal.  The  next  evaluations  of  reform 
will  come  out  of  our  on-going  experi- 
ences as  feminists. 

Charlotte  Bunch,  a  co-founder  of 
the  DC  Women's  Liberation  Movement 
and  of  The  Furies,  a  lesbian /feminist 
collective,  is  presently  a  fellow  at  the 
Institute  for  Policy  Studies. 


Footnotes 

1  National  Organization  for  Women, 
Statement  of  Purpose,  Washington  D.C., 
1966. 

2These  issues  were  considered  illegal  or 
outlaw  in  1968;  NOW  was  primarily  in- 
volved with  job  equality  and  legal  issues 
at  that  time. 

3Rosa  Luxemburg,"  Reform  and  Revo- 
lution," 1900,  in  Rosa  Luxemburg  Speaks, 
ed.  by  Mary- Alice  Waters  (New  York:  Path- 
finder Press,  1970),  p.  36. 

4"Socialist  Feminism:  A  Strategy  for 
the  Women's  Movement,"  by  Hyde  Park 
Chapter,  Chicago  Women's  Liberation  Union, 
1972,  p.  11.  I  have  taken  ideas  from  this 
paper,  which  is  the  most  useful  discussion  of 
criteria  for  evaluating  reforms  that  I  have 
seen. 

5Sally  Gearhart,  "The  Miracle  of  Les- 
bianism," in  Loving  Women /Loving  Men. 
ed.  by  Sally  Gearhart  and  William  R.  John- 
son (San  Francisco:  Glide  Publications,  1974). 


W^h%rJm>i 


The  Reform  Tool  Kit/51 


POETRY       DATE  BOOK        ESSAYS 


THESE  DAYS 

Lee  Lally 

A  woman's  experiences  of 
family,    marriage,    children 
and  love  for  other  women. 
36  pages;  center-stitched 

$1.00 


SONGS  TO 
A  HANDSOME 
WOMAN 

Rita  Mae  Brown 

A  second  poetry  book  by 
the  well-known  lesbian/fem- 
inist. 

40  pages,  perfect  bound, 
drawings  $2.00 

THE  HAND 
THAT  CRADLES 
THE  ROCK 

Rita  Mae  Brown 

A  paperback  edition  of  one 
of  the  first  books  of  poetry 
by  a  lesbian/feminist  to  be 
published  in  America. 
80  pages,  perfect-bound, 
drawings  $3.00 


FORTY  ACRES 
AND  A  MULE 

E.  Sharon  Gomillion 

The  experience  of  being 
black  and  a  woman  in  to- 
day's world. 

28  pages,  center-stitched, 
drawings  $1.00 


THE  DAY  BEFORE 

Casey    Czarnik 

&  Coletta  Reid 

Contains  53  washes  and  ink 
sketches  of  ancient  female 
symbols  and  artifacts. 
120  pp.,  spiral-bound,  two- 
color  drawings  $3.50 


POSTERS 

Girl  In  a  Cornfield 

Nancy  McHale 

Reproduction  of  a  woodcut. 

Purple    on    confetti    pink, 

7"  x  14"  $.50 

African  Woman 

Nancy  McHale 

Reproduction  of  a  woodcut. 

Blue    on   slate,    7"   x    14" 
S.50 


WOMEN 

REMEMBERED 

Nancy  Myron  and 
Charlotte  Buncn,  eds. 

Short  biographies  of  wom- 
en ranging  from  the  Trojan 
Women  to  Gertrude  Stein. 
89    pages,    perfect   bound, 
graphics  $2.25 


CLASS  AND 
FEMINISM 

Nancy  Myron  and 
Charlotte  Bunch,  eds. 

How  class  differences  affect 

women     in    the     women's 

movement. 

100  pages,  perfect  bound, 

photographs  $2.25 


LESBIANISM 

AND  THE  WOMEN'S 

MOVEMENT 

Nancy  Myron  and 
Charlotte  Buncn,  eds. 

The  essence  of  lesbian/fem- 
inist politics  and  how  the 
women's  movement  has  res- 
ponded to  it. 

92  pages,  perfect  bound, 
photographs  $2.25 


Please  include  an  additional  15%  for  postage  and  handling. 
Send  orders  to: 

12  w  25th  st  baltimore  md  21218 


52/Quest 


MOVING 
MEDIA 


by  Dolores  Bargowski 

There  is  one  Academy  Award  The  Exorcist  deserved  but  didn't  get:  one 
from  the  Pope  himself.  The  film  is  pure  political  propaganda  reinforcing  tra- 
ditional Christian  ideas  and  assumptions  about  women.  Women  are  used  in 
the  traditional  sense  as  vessels  to  serve  men's  needs.  Women's  bodies  are  linked 
with  evil  sources,  thus  confirming  them  as  objects  to  be  feared.  At  the  same 
time,  women  are  redeemed  and  judged  according  to  the  Catholic  church's 
ideal  of  virgin  purity  and  motherhood. 

By  saying  women  are  vessels  for  men's  needs,  it  is  implied  that  women  are 
empty  and  passive.  And  until  men  come  along  and  fill  them  with  "x"  quanti- 
ty, women  remain  meaningless,  without  value,  and  lacking  in  identity— face- 
less creatures  in  female  form. 

In  The  Exorcist,  Regan,  a  12  year-old  girl,  serves  as  the  empty  vessel 
through  whom  Father  Karras  (a  Jesuit  priest)  regains  his  faith.  In  the  midst  of 
a  "crisis  of  faith,"  he  is  caught  between  old  traditional  values  in  conflict  with 
new  ideas  sprouting  from  the  more  modern,  materialistic  world.  As  a  psychia- 
trist who  counsels  students  at  a  university,  he  feels  inadequate  to  cope  with 
spiritual  questions  for  which  he  himself  has  no  answers. 

The  "x"  quantity  put  into  Regan,  the  empty  vessel,  is  a  devil.  Through 
her,  Father  Karras  is  shocked  into  the  realization  that  the  old  faith  is  based 
on  truth,  on  fact.  During  the  final  exorcism  scene,  Father  Karras  grabs  Regan 
in  a  fit  of  rage  and  beats  her  with  his  fists.  He  is  justified  in  his  action  be- 
cause it  is  assumed  that  Regan  is  only  a  "casing"  encompassing  a  devil  who  is 
the  real  fact.  Again,  Regan  exists  here  only  as  a  vessel,  defined  by  that"x" 
quantity  which  provides  a  battlefield  for  the  struggle  between  Father 
Karras  and  the  devil. 

The  devil  in  Regan  has  the  physical  strength  of  a  gorilla,  moves  objects  by 
will  alone,  reads  minds,  and  speaks  in  tongues.  He  has  a  trigger-hot  temper, 
that  erupts  repeatedly  into  violent  verbal  outbursts  that  sound  like  direct 


Moving  Media,  The  Exorcist/ 53 


quotations  from  a  porno  magazine.  His  overall  characterization  is  presented  as 
one  dominated  by  uncontrolled  passion  and  violent  sexuality. 

There  is  a  reason  for  emphasizing  the  devil's  violent  sexual  character:  it 
mirrors  the  traditional  image  of  women.  The  most  common  and  entrenched 
male  supremacist  idea  of  women  is  that  they  are  totally  sexual  creatures.  To 
put  a  sexual  devil  inside  a  woman  is  therefore  to  reinforce  the  traditional  be- 
lief that  women's  basic  identity  is  sexual. 

This  is  further  supported  by  the  fact  that  sex  and  the  devil  are  traditionally 
related.  This  idea  has  its  source  in  the  division  of  sexual  functions  assigned  to 
women  by  the  Christian  church.  As  sexual  vessels,  women  are  used  both  for 
childbearing  and  for  pleasure.  The  value  attached  to  each  function  has  been 
that  childbearing  is  morally  good,  whereas  sexual  pleasure  is  sinful,  and  as 
such,  it  is  relegated  to  the  category  of  evil. 

Thus,  women  by  definition  are  sexual— pleasurable,  but  sinful,  and  there- 
fore  inherently  evil.  The  underlying  fear  perpetuated  here  is  that  women, 
already  partially  evil,  are  more  susceptible  to  the  devil's  working  through 
them.  Hence  we  have  a  portrait  of  women,  defined  by  Christian  ideas  and 
assumptions,  which  forms  a  foundation  for  fear  and  distrust  of  women's 
bodies  and  sexuality. 

To  enhance  the  film  and  make  it  more  popularly  appealing  and  saleable, 
violence  and  destructiveness  were  added— not  that  these  features  are  not  also 
included  in  the  Christian  ideology.  They  are,  but  not  so  blantantly  as  they  are 
in  mass-media-produced  films.  There  is  a  long  tradition  in  American  films 
linking  women's  sexuality  with  violence  and  destructiveness  which  spells 
Instant  money.  The  Exorcist,  as  a  cardinal  example  of  this  tradition,  is 
currently  pulling  in  millions. 

This  combined  Christian  and  capitalist  view  of  women  is  most  assaultingly 
presented  in  one  scene  in  which  Regan,  now  fully  possessed,  is  seen  standing 
on  her  bed,  "gleefully"  stabbing  herself  up  the  vagina  with  a  crucifix.  Blood 
is  gushing  forth  from  her  vagina,  splattering  her  hands  and  face,  and  the  effect 
of  this  scene  is  literally  to  burn  these  images  into  the  mind  and  cause  physical 
shock  and  horror,  fear  and  disgust  of  women. 

The  popular  press  calls  this  a  "masturbation"  scene.  Either  men  are  igno- 
rant of  how  women  really  masturbate  or  the  press  is  choosing  to  ignore  the 
factual  content  in  favor  of  supporting  the  popular  image  of  women  as 
masochistic  and  self-destructive. 

This  scene  is  a  slap  in  the  face  to  women.  It  seeks  to  counteract  and  under- 
mine gains  women  have  made  in  the  last  several  years  first  in  redefining  and 
and  then  affirming  a  positive  sexuality.  It  reinforces  old  prejudicial  fears 
and  sexist  ideas  about  female  sexuality  and  exploits  a  time  of  change  and 


54/Quest,   vol.  I  no.  1,  summer,  1974 


period  of  redefinition.  To  call  this  a  "masturbation"  scene  is  like  calling  the 
"Valentine's  Day  Massacre"  a  birthday  party. 

If  women  were  only  repositories  of  evil  to  be  feared  and  distrusted  they 
wouldn't  be  much  use  to  men;  but  since  they  also  serve  as  childbearers,  they 
are  necessary,  and  therefore  the  "negative"  side  must  be  tolerated,  controlled 
and  somehow  transformed.  The  trick  is  to  turn  the  evil  to  good  and  set  up 
controlled  situations  in  which  the  evil  sexuality  of  women  can  be  redeemed 
and  then  judged  according  to  those  parameters. 

This  trick  is  accomplished  by  setting  up  a  Christian  ideal  of  womanhood. 
This  ideal  is  represented  in  the  Catholic  church  through  the  Virgin  Mary.  She 
stands  for  sexual  purity  before  marriage,  and  for  sexual  redemption  through 
the  institution  of  motherhood.  It  is  through  this  ideal  that  women  are 
redeemed  and  judged. 

A  sequence  in  the  film  revealing  this  ideology  is  a  shot  of  a  mutilated  Vir- 
gin Mary  statue,  followed  by  a  scene  between  Regan  and  her  mother  which 
suggests  that  the  mother  is  to  blame  for  Regan's  possession. 

In  the  local  Catholic  church,  a  white  stone  statue  of  the  Virgin  Mary  has 
been  desecrated.  Blood  has  been  dumped  over  her,  a  penis  added,  and  her 
breasts  painted  red  to  accentuate  her  sexuality. 

In  the  following  scene  between  Regan  and  her  mother,  these  ideas  are 
brought  out  and  the  blame  for  possession  subtly  directed  to  the  mother's 
failure. 

Regan,  a  12  year-old  who  has  not  started  to  menstruate  (therefore  not  yet 
marriageable),  is  defined  as  a  pure  (sexless)  virgin.  Her  mother,  sexually  de- 
fined as  evil  but  redeemed  because  she  is  a  mother,  can  still  be  judged  accor- 
ding to  how  well  she  fulfills  that  role. 

Just  before  the  actual  possession,  Regan  is  shown  working  in  her  play- 
room. It  is  a  very  large  room  filled  with  objects  she  has  made.  They  are  of 
two  types,  small  clay  animals  and  papier-mache  birds  (symbols  representing 
sexuality  and  freedom).  Her  mother,  a  movie  actress,  comes  home  from  work 
and  finds  Regan  in  her  playroom.  Regan  asks  if  her  mother  wnats  to  see  her 
new  ouija  board;  when  mother  asks  if  she  can  play,  Regan  says  no.  As  her 
mother  reaches  for  it  anyway,  the  pointer  in  Regan's  hands  jumps  abruptly 
away.  Startled,  her  mother  asks  where  she  got  the  board  and  Regan  says,  an 
imaginary  friend  of  her's,  a  "Captain  Howdie,"  found  it  for  her.  Mother  asks 
more  about  this  "new  friend,"  but  Regan  brushes  her  questions  aside. 

This  "Captain  Howdie"  eventually  becomes  the  full-fledged  devil.  Regan, 
the  innocent  virgin,  and  therefore  sexually  blameless,  somehow  gets  the  devil 
implanted  in  her.  Since  Regan  is  innocent  by  definition,  the  blame  must  be 
directed  to  her  mother,  who  failed  as  a  mother  (in  some  unexplained  way). 


Moving  Media,  The  Exorcist/ 55 


Did  she  ultimately  fail  as  a  mother  by  not  channeling  her  life  traditionally 
and  thus  not  providing  adequate  guidance  for  her  daughter's  activities?  By  not 
being  the  ever-present,  attentive  mother  did  she  allow  Regan  too  much  free 
time  and  too  much  opportunity  in  which  to  exercise  her  mind  and  imagina- 
tion? (After  all,  all  manner  of  devils  could  be  conjured  up  if  one  just  allowed 
the  mind  and  imagination  some  freedom).  Did  she  also  fail  by  not  instilling  in 
Regan  the  right  religious  ideas?  Did  she  give  her  too  many  material  privileges 
bound  to  corrupt  (again  in  some  unexplained  way)  the  "naturally  innocent" 
mind  of  her  child?  Was  she  setting  the  stage  for  the  devil  by  not  preparing  her 
daughter  for  her  "proper  role"  in  life? 

All  these  doubts  and  fears  are  subtly  intertwined,  in  this  scene  especially, 
and  throughout  the  film.  All  are  there  to  effect  the  purposeful  message  that 
mothers  should  closely  police  the  actions  and  thoughts  of  their  daughters  in 
order  that  they  will  not  violate  the  ideals  of  the  church  regarding  women. 
And  their  redemption  and  judgement  depends  on  how  well  they  succeed  in 
these  roles. 

Most  people  will  say  The  Exorcist  is  a  film  about  the  devil.  They  are  right 
and  wrong.  True,  the  film  is  about  the  devil,  but  the  devil  could  not  exist  as 
presented  without  the  ideological  foundations  embodying  the  belief  that 
women  are  sexual  beings,  both  good  and  evil,  through  which  he  operates. 

The  author  of  the  novel  and  the  screenplay  based  both  on  a  factual  inci- 
dent—with one  significant  exception.  The  possessed  child  was  a  boy.  Why 
didn't  he  use  the  boy  as  the  lead  character?  Because  the  devil  was  presented  as 
a  violent  sexual  figure.  Inside  a  boy  he  would  come  off  as  a  kind  of  punk 
juvenile  delinquent.  And  men  are  not  vessels  but  active  agents  with  self-de- 
fined content.  Inside  the  girl,  all  the  sexist  ideas  and  assumptions  about  wom- 
en find  their  home. 

The  moviegoing  public  is  so  accustomed  to  seeing  women  in  these  roles 
that  the  sexist  is  taken  as  natural.  And  that  is  why  the  film  is  not  seen  for  its 
exploitative  treatment  of  women,  and  also  why  it  appears  to  be  only  about 
the  devil. 

In  order  to  believe  in  this  particular  devil,  we  first  have  to  assent  to  the 
sexist  definition  of  women  as  presented.  To  assent  to  the  belief  in  this  devil  is 
by  implication  to  assent  to  and  reinforce  the  traditional  sexist  ideas  and  as- 
sumptions about  women— the  same  harmful  definitions  that  we've  suffered 
with  for  centuries. 

Now,  I  hope  it's  clear  why- 1  said  in  the  beginning  that  the  Pope  should 
give  an  Academy  Award  to  the  men  responsible  for  The  Exorcist. 

I  doubt  the  Christian  motives  of  the  filmmakers,  but  am  certain  of  their 
capitalist  motive  for  presenting  such  a  view:  pure  greed.  The  by-product  of 


56/Quest 


their  commercial  venture  is  to  restate  and  strengthen  a  harmful  view  of 
women  and  thereby  set  up  an  opposition  to  the  process  of  change  and  redefi- 
nition women  are  presently  struggling  toward. 

As  women,  we  are  in  the  process  of  positively  affirming  our  bodies,  our 
sexuality,  and  redefining  ourselves  as  whole  people  with  body,  mind  and  soul— 
rather  than  only  specialized  sexual  vessels. 

We  are  in  the  process  of  "exorcising"  definitions  we  never  originated  and 
creating  a  synthesis  of  previous  experience  with  new  knowledge  about  our- 
selves. 

We  are  in  the  process  of  reformulating  a  new  woman,  a  new  sense  of  self, 
a  new  and  different  vision.  A  vision  that  will  present  a  new  way  of  seeing, 
feeling,  thinking,  and  being  a  woman— a  new  aesthetic  sensibility  that  speaks 
of  strong  women,  with  independent  selves. 

Someday  soon,  I  hope  women  will  form  film  production  companies 
that  embody  this  vision,  making  movies  for  large  audiences.  Meanwhile,  as 
long  as  men  control  and  define  visual  art  mediums  such  as  filmmaking,  we 
need  to  learn  how  to  see  and  identify  their  products  for  the  kinds  of  propa- 
ganda they're  pushing.  I  wouldn't  push  The  Exorcist  on  my  mother. 
Would  you? 


Dolores  Bargowski  is  a  lesbian  I  fem- 
inist working  on  new  concepts  of  film 
and  photography  for  women.  She  was 
a  member  of  the  film  crew  for  "The 
Women's  Happy  Time  Commune." 


UU 


A  Journal  of  Liberation 

3028  GREENMOUNT  AVE. 
BALTIMORE,  MD.   21218 


name 


address 


zip 


$4/volume 
$6  canada 


$7  overseas 
$10  institutions 


bulk  rates 
available 


Moving  Media,  The  Exorcist/ 57 


THE  CiOOP 

by  Rita  Mae  Bro 


x  "emember  the  Good  Fairy? 
She  sprinkled  dust  on  you  and,  poof, 
you  changed  into  a  beautiful  princess 
or  if  you  were  bad,  poof,  you  changed 
into  a  toad  in  need  of  weight  watchers. 
Unfortunately,  the  Women's  Libera- 
tion Movement  can't  locate  the  Good 
Fairy.  If  only  we  could  find  her,  things 
would  be  so  much  easier.  Rumor  has  it 
that  she's  shacked  up  with  Santa  Claus. 
My  guess  is  she's  off  in  Never-Never 
Land  with  Tinker  Bell. 

Both  the  Good  Fairy  and  Santa 
Claus  represent  an  attitude  toward 
change  which  is  disturbing  in  its  impli- 
cations. Each  rewards  you  for  being 
"good"  or  "bad".  Santa,  the  old  capi- 
talist (or  is  he  a  Bolshevik  in  all  that 
red?),  dumps  material  goodies  on  you. 
The  Good  Fairy,  on  the  other  hand, 
transforms  your  body  or  transports 
you  to  another  land.  Change  is  instan- 
taneous.   You   can't   really   work   for 


change  as  there  is  a  strong  element  of 
luck  attached  to  it.  Process  is  never 
mentioned,  all  we  see  is  the  end  result— 
a  princess,  a  fat  toad  or  a  Christmas 
tree  surrounded  by  glittering  packages. 
The  Good  Fairy's  not  really  to 
blame  for  the  fact  that  we  don't  un- 
derstand change.  Over  the  centuries, 
women's  lives  have  been  peculiarly 
timeless,  unchanged.  We  married,  gave 
birth,  raised  our  children,  bolstered 
our  husbands.  The  few  renegades  from 
this  unchanged  and  unchallenged  con- 
dition usually  were  driven  out  of 
society,  killed  outright  or  lived  double 
lives  for  fear  of  the  above.  Change  as  a 
personal  and  political  reality  is  a  daz- 
zling new  concept  for  women.  We 
know  we  are  changing.  We  don't  al- 
ways know  how  we  are  changing  and 
we  don't  often  know  how  to  commu- 
nicate that  change  and  foster  it  in 
others.  We  face  resistance  not  just  from 


58/ Quest,  vol.  I  no.l,  summer,  1974 


men,  which  we  expect,  but  from 
other  women,  women  frightened  by  us 
because  we  are  so  changed  and  because 
we  can't  tell  them  exactly  how  those 
changes  came  about.  No  wonder  the 
Good  Fairy  would  be  such  a  help.  A 
little  dust  and,  poof,  changed  women 
and  changed  men:  sisterhood  and 
brotherhood. 

Without  such  a  magic  wand,  we 
need  to  come  to  grips  with  some 
tough  problems.  For  one  thing,  history 
is  not  linear.  Male  supremacy  does  not 
stop  and  feminism  begin.  Feminism 
does  not  instantly  change  a  woman 
into  Sheena,  Queen  of  the  Jungle. 

We  can't  blame  ourselves  too  hea- 
vily for  our  surprise  when  the  world 
didn't  turn  upside-down  the  day  we 
became  feminists.  As  Americans,  we 
were  taught  peculiar  ideas  regarding 
change.  The  Good  Fairy  and  Santa 
Claus,  while  being  fun  to  consider,  are 
serious  symbols  of  those  simplistic 
teachings.  For  instance,  change  is  for 
better  or  for  worse,  it  is  emotional  and 
moral,  good  or  bad.  We  are  not  taught 
the  concept  of  substitution,  lateral 
motion,  putting  B  in  place  of  A  with 
little  substantive  difference.  For  rea- 
sons worthy  of  an  entire  book  on  the 
subject,  Americans  have  tremendous 
difficulty  with  gradations  in  quality, 
subtlety,  complexity.  An  event,  a  per- 
son, a  change  is  good  or  bad.  Period. 

We  are  largely  unaware  of  process. 
While  most  feminists,  compared  to 
other  Americans,  are  sensitive  to  pro- 
cess, we  too  rarely  comprehend  how 
complex  change  is  and  how  much  time 
it  takes.  As  American  women,  we  re- 
flect the  very  culture  we  seek  to  change. 


We  need  to  examine  American  atti- 
tudes toward  change  and  examine  our- 
selves for  such  cultural  hangovers  as 
we  investigate  how  we  think  we're 
changed  as  a  result  of  feminism. 

For  most  Americans  the  concept  of 
change  remains  rooted  in  the  material. 
Any  deviation  from  that  acquisitive 
pattern  is  met  with  retaliatory  action: 
gossip,  ostracism,  even  murder.  I  am 
not  suggesting  that  feminists  share  this 
attitude.  We  do  share,  in  part,  the 
Good  Fairy/Santa  Claus  syndrome. 
The  fact  that  it  isn't  centered  around 
money  doesn't  lessen  the  underlying 
dynamics.  Americans  have  little  under- 
standing of  cause  and  effect.  We  often 
want  results  before  we've  taken  appro- 
priate action  and  few  people  under- 
stand the  time  and  effort  it  takes  for 
people  to  change  and  to  develop  pro- 
grams. 

The  tremendous  jolt  of  feminism  is 
that,  at  its  best,  it  tries  to  unite  the 
concept  of  material  change  with  the 
concept  of  emotional/ spiritual  change. 
Material  change  focuses  on  such  issues 
as  child  care,  abortion  and  equal  pay 
for  equal  work.  To  date,  the  issue 
which  exemplifies  emotional/spiritual 
change  is  lesbianism  or  woman-identi- 
fication. 

Typically,  the  material  issues  draw 
support  while  the  lesbian  issue  creates 
outrageous  reactions  from  non-femi- 
nists and  some  feminists  alike.  Care 
should  be  taken,  however,  to  distin- 
guish between  the  two.  While  material 
changes  in  child  care,  abortion,  etc. 
would  provide  breathing  space  for 
women,  we  must  recognize  that  they 
will  not  seriously  alter  the  class  divi- 


The  Good  Fairy/ 59 


sions  among  women.  These  changes,  if 
they  came  to  pass,  would  not  seriously 
challenge  upper-class  and  middle-class 
women's  control  over  lower-class  wom- 
en. Just  because  the  control  may  be 
indirect— through  husbands,  fathers, 
brothers— does  not  lessen  its  sting  if 
you  happen  to  be  on  the  receiving  end. 
Getting  stung  by  other  women  is 
also  an  unfortunate  side  effect  of  les- 
bianism. The  inevitability  of  lesbianism 

I 
! 


•Si 


is  obvious  to  anyone  who  follows  the 
logic  of  feminism.  But,  blind  to  cause 
and  effect,  many  women  in  the  move- 
ment refuse  to  draw  the  conclusions  of 
their  own  theories.  It's  as  though  they 
plant  a  seed  and  repudiate  the  tree. 

We  reflect  American  attitudes  to- 
ward change  even  within  a  movement 
dedicated  to  change.  We  also  fear  those 
changes  which  are  the  greatest  and  we 
fear  difference:  our  difference  from  the 
rest  of  society  and  difference  among 
ourselves  on  many  levels,  not  just  the 
obvious  ones  of  class,  race  and  lesbian- 
ism. Thanks  to  our  Puritan  heritage, 
difference  is  sin.  Change  embodies  dif- 
ference. Many  of  us,  internalizing  that 
attitude,  turn  around  and  have  con 
tempt  for  women  who  are  where  wt 
ourselves  were  yesterday,  forgetting 
how  much  oppression  we  had  readily 


accepted.  There  is  such  pressure,  inter- 
nally and  externally,  to  explain  our- 
selves, to  explain  the  changes  we  are 
going  through,  that  we  are  constantly 
on  the  defensive  and  we  take  offense 
if  a  woman  can't  see  it  our  way. 

Change  shouldn't  mean  that  you 
have  *o  justify  yourself  to  anyone, 
even  when  they  bait  you.  Nor  should 
it  mean  you  renounce  your  past  and 
turn  into  a  one-dimensional  missionary. 
Change  means  you  use  your  past  and 
transform  it.  Whoever  we  were,  where- 
ver we  came  from,  we  did  take  the 
risk,  and  we  did  change. 

The  Body  Politic 

How  do  feminism  and  lesbian-femi- 
nism change  women?  Since  the  physi- 
cal is  the  easiest  to  see  but  the  last  to 
be  observed,  let's  look  at  how  a  wom- 
an's body  is  deformed  by  patriarchy 
and  how  feminism  corrects  that.  I  es- 
pecially call  your  attention  to  women's 
bodies  because  the  Women's  Move- 
ment, due  to  its  largely  white,  middle- 
class  composition,  leans  heavily  on 
words  at  the  expense  of  other  forms 
of  communication.  As  a  child  raised  in 
a  poor,  white  community  I  was  taught, 
"Don't  listen  to  what  people  say, 
watch  what  they  do."  After  watching 
women  change  as  a  result  of  feminism, 
I'd  like  to  pass  on  those  observations 
and  encourage  the  reader  to  become 
more  aware  of  the  non-verbal  as  one 
area  of  that  change. 

Corsets,  bras  and  the  like  are  super- 
icial  devices  for  molding  female  flesh 
to  fit  male  desires.  The  initial  actions 
of  the  Women's  Movement  around 
these  devices  appeared  superficial  and, 


60/Quest 


thanks  to  a  hostile  media,  were  used 
to  make  the  women  appear  superficial. 
However,  the  shedding  of  external  re- 
strictions doesn't  automatically  remove 
learned  physical  restriction. 

Women  and  men  are  taught  to  use 
space  quite  differently  and  we  need  an 
in-depth  study  of  this  by  feminists. 
Until  that  study,  I  offer  the  following 
observations. 

Lowering  a  shoulder  in  the  pres- 
ence of  a  man,  pulling  the  body  in 
(literally,  to  take  up  less  space  so  he 
can  have  more),  turning  the  head  up- 
ward or  tilting  it  to  the  side,  often  with 


tension  on  the  part  of  both  parties, 
men  exhibit  different  strains  in  keeping 
with  their  separate  training  as  the 
aggressor. 

When  around  men,  many  women 
cross  and  uncross  their  legs  incessantly, 
modify  their  voices,  open  their  eyes 
dramatically,  signifying  animated  inte- 
rest in  the  male,  and  play  with  their 
hair.  As  hair  is  so  important  to  femini- 
nity in  America,  I  take  this  to  be  some 
sort  of  request  for  sexual  affirmation. 
Another  basic  pose  of  non-feminism  is 
casting  the  hip  slightly  forward  in  male 
company.  Even  while  being  seductive, 


| 


£ 


\ 


-3 


■- 


---». 


> 


persistent  eyebrow  signals,  are  motions 
most  non-feminists  perform  automati- 
cally. Such  gestures  elicit  favorable 
male  response.  Muscles  tighten  around 
a  woman's  jaw  and  upper  back  in  the 
presence  of  a  male.  Notice  in  situations 
of  hostility  or  fear,  any  human  will 
tighten.  Although  the  meeting  of  the 
sexes    is    accompanied    by   protective 


\  -  *, 


the  non-feminist  is  careful  never  to 
diminish  the  male's  authority.  For  ex- 
ample, a  woman  walking  with  her  arm 
around  a  man's  shoulder  would  look 
ridiculous,  his  waist  yes— but  only  if 
they  are  lovers,  around  his  shoulders, 
never.  But  a  man  may  put  his  arm 
around  a  woman's  shoulders  after  a 
brief  acquaintance,  as  he  may  put  his 


The  Good  Fairy/61 


arm  around  a  subordinate  male's  shoul- 
ders. .  .employee,  son,  etc. 

Eye  contact  is  a  sure  indication  of 
status.  Most  non-feminists  lower  the 
eyes  or  look  to  the  side,  returning  a 
gaze  furtively,  even  more  furtively  with 
men.  Feminists  use  more  eye  level 
contact  than  non-feminists  and  lesbian- 
feminists  sometimes  hold  their  eyes  so 
level  in  a  conversation  that  it  unnerves 
other  non-lesbian  women,  since  this 
sort  of  eye  contact  is  considered  preda- 
tory among  heterosexuals. 

Voice,  much  neglected  in  our  visual 
culture,  is  as  trained  for  sexist  behavior 
as  are  other  parts  of  the  body.  Listen 
to  women  and  men  conversing.  A 
woman  usually  ends  her  sentence  on  a 
higher  note  than  the  rest  of  the  sen- 
tence. She  clips  along  at  one  tone  and, 
at  the  end,  raises  her  voice  almost  to 
the  question  tone.  This  rise  in  tone  is 
a  bid  for  affirmative  response.  A  man 
does  not  use  this  tone-shift  when 
speaking  unless  asking  a  direct  ques- 
tion. He  is  taught  to  end  his  sentences 
definitively.  It  makes  him  sound  as 
though  he  knows  what  he's  talking 
about  and  a  question  on  your  part  puts 
you  on  the  defensive.  Feminists  hang 
on  to  speech  patterns,  tone  and  pitch, 
far  longer  than  to  their  other  oppressed 
body  mannerisms. 

Layered  on  top  of  these  ritualized, 
learned  body  movements  and  patterns 
are  the  infinite  variety  of  poses  arising 
from  race,  class  and  individual  temper- 
ament. Feminism  alters  or  destroys 
postures  indicative  of  second-class  sta- 
tus (shuffling)  and  it  is  this  loss  that 
men  bemoan  when  they  claim  femi- 
nists   aren't    feminine.    Do    feminists 


*  <:A 


\5  v 


;£&gV 


always  stand  straight,  throw  their 
shoulders  back,  keep  their  heads  up 
and  look  dynamic?  Not  quite.  Bad 
posture  is  as  American  as  apple  pie. 
But  a  feminist's  body  carries  more 
energy  because  she  drops  the  oppressed 
gestures  designed  to  minimize  the 
body's  power. 

The  disappearance  of  poses  result- 
ing from  oppression  is  partly  because 
women  in  the  process  of  becoming 
feminists  spend  more  time  with  other 
women  and  those  postures  look  absurd 
when  we're  all  together.  Affecting  such 
postures  indicates  power  relationships 
and  since  no  woman  has  the  same 
power  over  another  woman  that  a  man 
does,  the  protective  gestures  are  wildly 
out  of  place.  Few  women  seem  con- 
scious of  body  changes  in  this  fashion. 
Even  fewer  have  analyzed  this  aspect  of 
feminism  but  everyone  feels  it.  I've 
seen  women  tell  each  other  they  are 
acting  "too  feminine"  when  what  they 
really  were  responding  to  was  body 
gestures. 


62/Quest 


The  first  flush  of  feminism  pro- 
duces a  fascinating  effect  on  women. 
Some  undergo  a  period  of  heightened 
tension  and  awkwardness,  almost  like 
adolescence,  wherein  they  unconscious- 
ly try  to  establish  a  physical  identity 
free  of  sexist  posture.  Others  lapse 
into  physical  apathy.  When  the  wo- 
man's identity  is  established  to  her 
own  satisfaction,  she  relaxes  and  her 
energy  shines  through.  As  you  might 
expect,  women  studying  the  martial 
arts  or  some  athletic  pursuit  are  the 
most  free  from  oppressed  mannerisms 
and  thus  radiate  an  engaging  sense  of 
well-being. 

As  a  feminist  changes  her  body,  so 
does  the  lesbian-feminist.  Lesbians  use 
space  differently  than  non-feminists 
or  even  most  feminists.  They  project 
more,  use  more  space  and  the  use  is 
usually  forward,  i.e.,  pushing  out  in 
front  of  the  body.  This  is  a  response  to 
their  new  physical  sense  of  power.  It's 
a  non-verbal  demand  on  the  world: 
Give  me  room  or  I'll  take  it.  Because 
of  this,  "new"  lesbians,  lesbians  who 
have  come  out  as  a  result  of  the 
Women's  Movement,  get  into  fights 
with  men  more  quickly  than  other 
women.  What  kindles  these  incidents 
is,  for  the  most  part,  non-verbal.  The 
man  assumes  a  great  deal  of  space 
(even  property  right)  over  a  woman 
who  is  a  stranger  to  him,  intruding  into 
her  already  narrowed  domain,  e.g.,  at  a 
party  or  on  the  bus.  The  two  collide 
because  it  doesn't  occur  to  him  to 
give  way  or  that  he's  done  something 
offensive  (any  woman  who  is  not  the 
private  property  of  one  man  is  the 
public    property    of   all    men).    Since 


she's  had  a  lifetime  of  giving  way  and 
withdrawing  spatially,  any  retreat 
would  be  a  compromise  of  her  new 
strength.  On  the  other  hand,  in  situa- 
tions where  the  lesbian  is  not  being 
pushed  by  men,  I  have  observed  less 
tension  in  the  face  and  in  the  back 
than  in  most  women.  She  either  is 
less  threatened,  or  more  comfortable 
with  men,  than  the  non-feminist  and 
feminist.  For  some,  their  relaxation 
could  be  that  they  don't  care  or  are 
quite  unaffected  by  men. 

The  woman  becoming  a  lesbian 
reclaims  her  sexual  power.  In  discover- 
ing her  body's  power  in  sexual  terms, 
she  eventually  experiences  multiple 
orgasms.  (Men's  reticence  in  mention- 
ing multiple  orgasms  is  a  sign  of  how 
that  sexual  power  terrifies  them.)  A 
woman  with  an  unusually  competent 
and  sensitive  man,  may  experience  this 
phenomenon  with  him.  However,  if 
she's  with  another  woman,  she  has  not 
only  her  own  power  to  enjoy  but  also 
the  limitless  possibility  of  another 
multiple-orgasmic  human.  Reclaiming 
sexual  power  also  helps  a  woman  re- 
claim her  aggressiveness.  This  is  one 
of  the  reasons  even  the  "loveliest"  of 
lesbians  will  be  called  down  for  "acting 
like  a  man."  The  painful  truth  is  that 
only  men  are  allowed  to  have  powerful 
bodies.  It's  damned  if  you  do  and 
damned  if  you  don't.  If  a  woman  keeps 
oppressed  mannerisms,  she  is  called 
into  question  by  her  sisters  and  if  she 
becomes  too  strong,  she  gets  censured, 
again  by  her  sisters. 

I  have  concentrated  on  the  physi- 
cal because  we  miss  what  is  right  under 
our    noses.   Edward   T.    Hall,   in    The 


The  Good  Fairy/63 


Silent  Language,  estimates  that  well 
over  half  of  human  communication  is 
non-verbal,  therefore,  bodies  are  tre- 
mendously important.  If  we  are  to 
understand  how  feminism  and  lesbian- 
feminism  change  women  then  we  need 
to  begin  with  the  non-verbal.  We  must 
pay  as  much  attention  to  what  we  do 
as  to  what  we  say-in  fact,  more. 

The  external  reflects  the  internal. 
As  the  feminist  demands  more  physical 
space  and  reclaims  her  strength,  so  too, 
she  seeks  increased  political  space.  She 
is  no  longer  willing  to  be  defined  by 
men,  sexually  or  politically.  Our  move 
outward  takes  aback  those  accustomed 
to  women  "staying  in  their  place,"  a 
spatial  definition  of  oppression.  We 
desire  and  seek  participation  in  the 
world  and  we  do  so  without  apology. 
Such  a  basic  change  terrifies  those 
unwilling  to  recognize  us  as  full  human 
beings  and  irritates  those  who  don't 
want  to  share  power  with  us  or  any  o- 
ther  oppressed  group.  In  a  world  condi- 
tioned to  viewing  us  as  passive,  recep- 
tive, supportive  and  self-effacing,  even 
mild  self-assertion  seems  hot  and  bold. 
In  an  effort  to  stem  the  feminist  tide, 
they  question  our  political  motives, 
our  establishment  credentials,  our  per- 
sonal psyches  and  our  physical  endow- 
ments, desperately  looking  for  any 
feeble  excuse  to  discredit  us.  Never 
have  creatures  who  pretend  to  mea- 
sure all  reality  against  Aristotelian 
paradigms  so  abandoned  logic  in  their 
frantic  effort  to  halt  change. 

While  their  questions  concerning 
us  are  hostile  and  superficial,  our  own 
questions  concernmg  ourselves  are 
deeper  and  more  disturbing  than  those 


of  our  detractors.  As  a  woman  begins 
to  question  woman-oppression,  politi- 
cal power  is  called  into  question.  As 
she  begins  to  question  male  supremacy, 
patriarchy,  all  of  society  is  called  into 
question.  And  once  she  begins  to  ques- 
tion heterosexuality,  the  means  of 
male  supremacy,  she  is  called  into 
question. 

Together  as  we  answer  each  other 
and  ourselves,  we  must  become  aggres- 
sive without  becoming  belligerent.  We 
must  take  more  risks  without  being 
foolish.  We  must  harden  our  bodies 
and  soften  our  hearts,  becoming 
stronger  as  we  grow  more  flexible.  We 
cannot  repudiate  the  past  nor  dare 
we  repeat  it.  We  must  challenge  our 
sisters  and  brothers  to  change  without 
driving  them  or  belittling  them  for 
where  they  are.  We  must  become  more 
individual  as  we  become  one.  The  more 
we  change  the  more  we  realize  we  must 
change.  There  is  no  end  product  for 
us,  there  is  continual  process,  continual 
change.  I  wouldn't  want  it  any  other 
way,  would  you? 


Footnotes 

1  Space  is  seriously  examined  by  Edward 
T.  Hall  in  The  Silent  Language  (New  York: 
Anchor,  1959)  and  in  The  Hidden  Dimen- 
sion (New  York:  Anchor,  1969).  Unfor- 
tunately, the  books  are  laced  with  genteel 
sexism  but  still  they  offer  more  than 
cheap  exploitative  books  such  as  Body 
Language. 


Rita  Mae  Brown  is  a  novelist,  poet, 
theorist,  activist  and  all  around  Good 
Fairy. 


64/Quest 


LIBERATION  of  \YOA\l]X 

TO   CHANGE  THE    WORLD 
AND  RE-MNVENT   LIFE 


by  Rosiska  Darcy  de  Oliveira 
and  Mi  re  Me  Calame 


This  article  is  excerpted  from  one 
of  a  series  of  documents  published  by 
The  Institute  of  Cultural  Action  (IDA 
C),  located  in  Geneva,  Switzerland. 
IDAC  is  an  interdisciplinary  team  con- 
cerned with  "conscientisation"  as  a 
liberating  tool  in  the  processes  of  edu- 
cation, development  and  social  change. 

This  document,  No.  3,  is  available 
in  its  entirety  from  IDAC,  27,  chemin 
des  Crets,  1218  Grand  Saconnex,  Ge- 
neva, Switzerland,  for  $1.30  a  copy.  A 
one  year  subscription  to  IDAC  Quarter- 
ly documents  is  $5  or  $8  airmail,  to 
the  USA. 

I.  Introduction 

"Transform  the  world, "  said  Marx; 
"Change  life,"  said  Rimbaud;  These 
two  orders  of  the  day  are,  for  us,  but 
one.  —Breton 

We  have  taken  as  the  subject  of  this 
IDAC  Document  3,  the  women's  libera- 
tion movement.  We  shall  call  this  re- 
ality a  movement,  knowing  quite  well 
that  it  has  different  faces  according  to 
the  country  where  it  is  found,  how 
long  it  has  been  there,  and  its  socio- 
cultural  context.  We  are,  nevertheless, 
convinced  that  the  present  divisions— 
which  we  shall  describe  and  interpret— 


are  but  a  moment,  perhaps  historically 
necessary,  in  the  development  of  a 
common  struggle  which  will  find  its 
way  to  unity. 

The  women's  rebellion  already  re- 
presents one  of  the  most  radical  cri- 
tiques of  our  present  society,  a  sort  of 
Utopian  announcement  of  another 
world  where  present  patterns  of  human 
relationships,  the  most  intimate  and 
profound,  will  be  overthrown.  The  wo- 
men's movement  also  represents  a 
warning  to  all  revolutionary  program 
and  project  plans  which  treat  social  re- 
lationships as  abstracts  or  which  me- 
chanically determine  human  relations. 
The  women's  rebellion  puts  at  the  very 
center  of  revolutionary  debate  the 
need  for  radically  calling  into  question 
all  interpersonal  relationships— the  raw 
material  of  social  structures.  Our  in- 
volvement in  this  movement  has  given 
us  a  whole  series  of  questions  posed  by 
the  movement's  practice  and  theory. 
We  shall  try  in  this  document  to  find  a 
scientific  approach  to  the  social  reality 
in  which  the  movement  is  inserted. 
Our  reflection  rests  on  the  need  for 
understanding  the  social  subject  matter 
on  which  we  shall  work,  an  under- 
standing necessary  for  going  beyond 


The  Liberation  of  Women/65 


the  stumbling  blocks  that  fill  the  road 
and  seeing  more  clearly  the  potentials 
which  the  movement  offers.  Answers 
to  our  questions  will  depend  on  the 
discovery  of  a  valid  working  method 
which  will  be  of  service  to  those  who, 
in  their  daily  experience,  fight  oppres- 
sion and  struggle  to  "reinvent"  life. 

All  action  aimed  at  transforming  re- 
ality is  doomed  to  failure  if  it  is  not 
based  on  an  understanding  of  reality. 
All  attempt  at  understanding  reality 
without  involvement  in  it  is  illusory.  If 
one  accepts,  with  us,  these  two  pre- 
mises, how  then  does  one  move  for- 
ward to  break  the  vicious  circle  be- 
tween understanding  and  action,  or,  in 
other  words,  between  theory  and 
practice? 

Some  feel  that  participation  in  a 
process  of  social  change  is  sufficient  to 
give  an  understanding  of  the  total 
reality  of  the  process.  Often,  however, 
the  activist  dives  into  moving  reality  to 
be  carried  along  by  the  stream  rather 
than  being  able  to  move  against  the 
current.  The  reason  for  this  is  simple. 
Although  social  action  is  the  funda- 
mental source  of  understanding,  that 
understanding  which  comes  simply 
from  a  direct  involvement  in  action 
risks  being  limited  to  the  elementary 
perception  of  reality.  .  .The  perspec- 
tive gained  through  our  insertion  into 
society,  the  view-point  which  comes  of 
our  daily  problematic,  can  become  the 
privileged  view-point  for  making  judge- 
ments. Daily,  ever  present  problems 
have  a  way  of  becoming  the  funda- 
mental problems. 

It  is  this  alienation  of  daily  ex- 
perience which  is  at  the  base  of  the 


partial  world-views  often  found  among 
activists.  Since  they  apply  all  of  their 
forces  to  combat  the  ever  present  ob- 
tacles  of  daily  involvement,  little 
energy  is  left  for  grasping  the  complex- 
ity of  the  social  phenomena  or  for 
acquiring  a  larger  vision  of  the  situa- 
tion. Consequently,  they  often  attack 
secondary  problems,  superficial  phe- 
nomena, exterior  manifestations  of  the 
problem's  heart. 

We  can  conclude  that  practice  is  the 
beginning  point,  the  necessary  but  in- 
sufficient condition  for  grasping  the 
causes  of  an  oppressive  situation  and 
its  reason  for  being  and  its  complex 
structure.  All  this  demands  a  more 
refined  machinery  for  moving  beyond 
elementary  perception.  It  calls  for 
theoretical  instruments  for  reading 
one's  reality. 

It  is  essential  to  understand  our  use 
of  the  word  theory.  It  does  not  mean 
a  grouping  together  of  concepts  which 
one  can  paste  onto  reality.  Such  a  pro- 
cess, too  frequently  used  among  intel- 
lectuals, tries  to  place  living  reality 
into  pre-fabricated  moulds  of  abstract 
concepts.  Thus,  one  holds  to  an  idea  of 
social  reality;  practice  serves  only  to 
transform  thought  into  event,  to  bend 
reality  to  one's  own  concepts.  .  .Acti- 
vism is  born  of  action  without  reflec- 
tion. Theory  which  precedes  practice 
can,  obviously,  lead  only  to  volun- 
tarism, which  is  at  the  root  of  many 
deceptions.  .  .Clear  theory,  then,  is  in- 
dispensable. But,  it  is  never  neutral, 
and  it  cannot  be  separated  from  prac- 
tice, which  remains  the  fundamental 
source  of  understanding. 


************** 


66/Quest,  vol.  I  no.  1,  summer,  1974 


II.  Description 

In  the  industrialized  countries,  we 
have  heard  about  women's  liberation 
for  at  least  the  last  ten  years.  Women 
have  begun  to  see  themselves  as  op- 
pressed and  have  organized  to  fight 
against  their  oppression. 

In  almost  all  of  the  so-called  high- 
ly industrialized  countries,  one  can 
find  today  one  or  more  women's  liber- 
ation movements.  Treated  from  the  be- 
ginning with  the  kindly  distrust  that 
is  usually  reserved  for  children's  pranks, 
the  movement  has  survived  all  the 
ironies  and  today  constitutes  a  social 
phenomenon  which  cannot  be  ignored. 
Nevertheless,  the  more  the  movement 
becomes  a  social  reality,  the  more  the 
critics  take  a  hard  line.  The  smiles  and 
jokes  give  way  to  destructive  agressions. 
************** 

In  spite  of  the  criticism  from  two 
directions  (the  "left"  and  the  "right"), 
the  movement  continues  to  grow.  It 
draws  to  it  women  who  have  never  be- 
fore experienced  political  participation 
or  interest.  Confronted  with  their  ten- 
sions and  contradictions  and  ambigui- 
ties and  limitations,  the  movement  is 
forced  to  define  itself,  for  itself,  and  to 
define  its  goals  at  the  risk  of  wasting  a 
potential  for  originality  and  creativity. 
It  is  with  the  objective  of  contributing 
to  those  efforts  of  definition,  (which 
must  begin  with  an  identification  and 
interpretation  of  the  points  which 
strangle  the  movement),  that  we  pro- 
cede  here  to  analyzing  its  practice.  We 
procede  with  an  attempt  to  understand 
the  limitations  and  bring  into  focus 
the  potential. 

In   every  effort  to  discuss  the  wo- 


men's movement,  one  of  the  first 
questions  that  gets  raised  has  to  do 
with  the  class  composition  of  the 
movement.  One  cannot  deny  that  the 
great  majority  of  women  who  join  the 
movement  come  from  the  middle  class, 
and,  moreover,  from  the  upper  intel- 
lectual layer  of  that  class.  Up  to  the 
present,  with  only  a  few  exceptions, 
the  movement  has  not  been  able  to 
take  root  among  worker  women.  .  . 
This  situation  of  fact  is  often  raised  as 
the  proof  positive  that  the  movement 
is  one  of  privileged  women  cut  off 
from  the  basic  problems  because  they 
are  not  subjected  to  the  most  direct 
and  brutal  forms  of  exploitation,  (so- 
cio-economic and  racial).  In  a  word: 
They  are  "frustrated  women." 

In  part  this  is  true.  The  frustration 
is  also  a  given  of  reality.  However,  it  is 
not  a  question  of  frustration  caused  by 
personal  failure,  bad  luck,  or  individual 
inability.  This  frustration  is,  rather,  a 
social  phenomenon,  directly  related  to 
woman's    condition    in    the     present 

society. 

************** 

It  is  precisely  around  these  first 
hand  experiences  that  unity  and  com- 
mon questioning  are  established  in  the 
movement.  The  difficulties  arise,  how- 
ever, when  the  movement  reaches  the 
point  of  trying  to  translate  the  revolt 
into  an  interpretation  of  the  proposi- 
tion of  social  change  based  on  adequate 
strategy  and  tactics. 

From  an  examination  of  practice 
inside  the  movement  one  can  recognize 
a  diversity  of  forms  of  action  which 
indicates  the  existence  of  three  princi- 
pal   tendencies.    One   group   sees   the 


The  Liberation  of  Women/67 


movement  as  a  framework  for  a  kind  of 
personal  expansion  or  blossoming,  as 
the  social  context  for  moving  beyond 
the  inferiority  feelings  which  women 
have  interiorised.  They  see  the  move- 
ment as  the  place  where  women  can 
experiment  with  new,  non-authoritarian 
relationships.  This  faction  feels  that 
the  process  of  personal  change  and  the 
affirmation  of  relations  which  are  ne- 
gated by  a  repressive  society  is  already 
a  revolutionary  process  in  itself. 

Yet  another  faction  in  the  move- 
ment accuses  the  first  of  reducing  the 
movement  to  an  "existential"  experi- 
ment. This  second  group  hopes  for  an 
impact  which  is  more  specifically  "po- 
litical" in  nature.  And  by  that  they 
mean  that  the  movement,  rather  than 
turning  its  energy  inward  on  itself, 
must  look  outside  to  find  an  involve- 
ment for  social  change.  This  faction 
gets  divided  within  itself  along  the  lines 
of  the  scope  and  depth  of  the  neces- 
sary social  change.  Among  these  "po- 
liticals" we  can  identify  two  major 
tendencies  or  factions: 

—One  which  attacks  the  various  spe- 
cific and  concrete  manifestations  of 
woman's  exploitation  in  social  life. 
This  group  tries  to  make  the  journey 
beyond  discrimination  to  a  position  of 
equality  with  men. 

—One  which  feels  that  the  inferior 
status  of  women  is  the  consequence  of 
economic  and  social  structures  imposed 
by  the  capitalist  system.  This  group 
feels,  therefore,  that  it  is  useless  to  ever 
seek  equality  within  that  system.  For 
them,  women's  liberation  will  be  found 
only  after  the  radical  overthrow  of 
existing  social  patterns.  Consequently, 


this  group  expresses  its  solidarity  with 
the  most  exploited  social  classes,  whose 
actions,  they  feel,  will  be  the  tool  for 
that  radical  overthrow. 

It  is  clear  that  these  three  groups, 
which  express  themselves  in  differing 
actions,  have  a  corresponding  theoret- 
ical analysis  of  the  nature  of  exploita- 
tion of  women  and  of  the  strategy  to 
be  used  in  the  fight  for  liberation. 
These  analyses  we  can  also  group  into 
three  categories: 

1.  The  group  which  we  have  called 
"existentialist"  (taking  up  the  term 
used  by  the  "politicals"  as  a  pejorative 
name),  begins  with  the  conviction  that 
the  invention  of  new  human  relation- 
ships is  a  revolutionary  activity.  In  that 
sense,  they  feel  that  the  revolution  is 
not  a  future  project  but  is  undertaken 
each  day  in  direct  liaison  with  each  in- 
dividual's personal  development.  They 
point  out  that  historically,  the  social 
revolutions  which  we  can  examine  up 
to  the  present,  have  not  automatically 
given  rise  to  a  change  in  interpersonal 
relationships.  This  groups  says  that  the 
creation  of  a  "new  woman"  is  a  task 
which  must  be  initiated  here  and  now. 
Moreover,  these  women  feel  that  the 
very  act  of  clearly  affirming  values, 
which  are  the  antithesis  of  those  under- 
girding  capitalist  society,  is  a  subver- 
sive act.  That  affirmation  can  already 
play  a  role  in  the  fight  to  overthrow 
the  old  society  since  it  weakens  the 
value  system  on  which  that  old  society 
has  been  built.  It  is  a  question,  here,  of 
becoming  aware  of  the  potentiality  of 
an  authentically  free  and  creative  new 
life,  the  realization  of  which  obstructed 
by  the  heavy  hand  of  a  repressive  soci- 


68/ Quest 


ety,  would  demand  the  bypassing  of 
that  society,  so  that  the  potentiality 
experienced  now  by  a  minority  could 
become  an  historical  real  experience 
for  all  women. 

2.  The  beginning  point  for  the  "pol- 
itical" faction  is  obviously  not  the 
same.  The  "egalitarian"  tendency  be- 
gins with  the  statement  that  woman  is 
socially  exploited  and  subjected  to  an 
inferior  status  over  against  man.  These 
are  the  different  manifestations  of  dis- 
crimination that  must  be  fought  so  as 
to  set  in  balance  the  now  inequal  man- 
woman  relationship.  The  way  to  go 
about  this  is  the  organization  of  wom- 
en into  pressure  groups  capable  of  es- 
tablishing the  rights  of  women  at  each 
point  where  those  rights  are  presently 
scoffed  at.  Out  of  this  position  comes 
the  struggles  for  educational  equality, 
working  rights,  equal  salary,  rights  to 
determining  questions  concerning  then- 
bodies,  the  liberalisation  of  abortion 
laws,  the  creation  of  nurseries,  the 
questioning  of  non-salaried  work  in  the 
home,  etc. 

3.  For  the  "anti-capitalist"  faction 
the  question  is  posed  differently.  As  a 
beginning  point  there  is  the  vision  of 
women  in  oppressive  situations  as  a 
consequence  of  capitalist  society.  This 
means  that  the  struggle  against  oppres- 
sion is  only  an  aspect  of  the  class 
struggle  for  the  overthrow  of  the  pre- 
sent repressive  society.  The  housewife 
is  seen  as  a  member  of  the  sub-prolet- 
ariat whose  historical  future  is  tied  to 
that  of  the  working  class.  Working 
women  must,  therefore,  assume  their 
role. in  the  avant  garde  of  the  women's 
liberation  movement,  which  is  tied  to 


the  movement  for  the  liberation  of 
workers.  In  spite  of  this  analysis,  which 
makes  women's  liberation  subordinate 
to  the  destruction  of  the  capitalist 
infra-structure,  the  existence  of  a 
movement  composed  exclusively  of 
women  is  justified  by  the  fact  that, 
often,  at  the  very  center  of  groups 
that  work  for  radical  change,  women 
are  discriminated  against  and  handed 
inferior  tasks  to  do.  The  existence  of  a 
movement,  autonomous  for  women, 
will,  thus,  serve  as  a  guarantee  against 
the  repetition  of  what  has  been  seen  in 
so  many  other  social  revolutions:  wom- 
en struggled  equally  with  men  for  a 
revolutionary  triumph  and  the  econo- 
mic and  social  bases  were  not  over- 
thrown in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  about 
real  equality. 


if:**:*:*******;)!:** 


III.  Interpretation 

The  debate  around  these  different 
currents  brings  together  the  contradic- 
tion and  limitation  and  potential  of 
the  movement.  If  we  want  to  under- 
stand all  their  interactions,  we  must 
move  beyond  the  descriptive  stage  to 
an  interpretation  of  what  each  of  these 
positions  represents. 

************** 

The  "existentialist"  faction— which 
we  have  already  described— can  be  seen 
as  the  bearer  of  the  movement's  most 
radical  demands.  But  here  we  need  to 
raise  a  caution  sign.  Even  within  the 
group  of  intellectual  women  (therefore, 
privileged  women),  who  state  their  de- 
mands for  the  re-invention  of  relation- 
ships, there  is  only  a  small  minority 
which  understands  the  contradiction 
between  their  program  and  the  capit- 


The  Liberation  of  Women/69 


alist  system.  .  .For  the  women  who,  in 
most  cases,  had  never  had  any  sort  of 
political  involvement  or  interest,  the 
beginning  of  awareness  is  this  ques- 
tioning of  the  man-woman  relationship, 
which  gets  extended  into  a  criticism  of 
the  repressive  society's  under-girding 
values.  Another  positive  element  of  the 
re-creation  of  life  styles  and  interper- 
sonal relations  within  the  movement 
consists  in  the  effort  to  re-unite  the 
liberated  individual  with  the  process  of 
social  change.  It  consists,  also,  in  assign- 
ing new  values  to  the  rapport  between 
the  HERE  AND  NOW  experience  of  a 
fully  human  life  and  the  long  term 
fight  to  create  a  new  society. 

Before  examining  the  limitations 
and  dangers  of  this  faction,  let  us  look 
more  closely  at  the  assets  which  we 
have  just  mentioned.  A  mechanistic 
reading  of  Marxism  has  given  rise  to 
the  idea  that  human  relationships  are 
unilaterally  determined  by  the  socio- 
economic relationships,  and  that  only 
a  radical  transformation  of  the  econo- 
mic and  social  infrastructure  will  give 
birth  to  (automatically),  the  new  wom- 
an and  the  new  man.  This  existentialist 
faction  in  the  women's  movement  re- 
introduces interaction  and  reciprocal 
conditioning  into  the  human/social  re- 
lationship. And  it  conceives  of  the 
revolution,  not  as  an  event  that  will 
change  in  a  day  the  social  structure, 
but  as  a  long  process  which  will  deve- 
lop in  the  experiences  and  experiments 
of  each  day. 

So  we  have  seen  how  this  group  in 
the  woman's  movement,  beginning  by 
questioning  the  capitalist  society's  man- 
woman  relationships,  (and  by  doing  a 


critique  of  those  relationships),  im- 
plicitly places  in  question  the  essential 
repression  of  capitalist  maintenance.  It 
moves,  then,  to  an  affirmation  of  a 
new  consciousness  which  demands  the 
establishment  of  a  freed  society.  These 
potentials  and  originalities,  however, 
must  not  keep  us  from  seeing  the 
stumbling  blocks  and  limitations  of 
the  "existentialists!" 

A  key  question  consists  in  knowing 
whether  this  re-invention  of  relation- 
ships will  continue  to  be  an  individual- 
istic project,  that  of  a  small  privileged 
minority,  or  whether  it  can  be  enriched 
by  the  demands  and  concrete  struggles 
of  those  who  suffer  most  directly  from 
the  clearest  forms  of  oppression.  Can 
it  be  joined  to  the  struggle  of  those 
who,  subjected  to  intolerable  exploita- 
tion and  oppression,  have  immediate 
material  demands  as  a  chief  concern 
and  are,  therefore,  unable  to  catch  the 
sense  of  questioning  the  "psycho- 
sexual"  behavior  patterns? 

In  other  words,  we  must  see  how 
this  new  consciousness,  represented  by 
the  refusal  of  repressions  inherent  in 
capitalism,  can  move  beyond  the  indi- 
vidual experience  to  become  a  social 
program.  How  can  the  new  conscious- 
ness become  struggle  and  action  of 
transformation?.  .  . 

Limiting  the  movement  to  a  labora- 
tory of  existential  experiments  signifies 
emptying  it  of  all  political  content. 
Such  little  communities  cut  off  from 
the  outside,  become  islands  of  joy,  un- 
related to  what  is  real  and  without  any 
social  impact.  In  like  manner,  all  or- 
ganizational form  is  refused,  for  that 
would  be  to  reproduce  within  what  is 


70/Quest 


criticized  outside  the  movement— auth- 
oritarianism, hierarchy,  and  specializa- 
tion. The  identification  of  organization 
with  bureaucracy  leads  to  the  forma- 
tion of  spontaneous  groups  called  toge- 
ther around  the  idea  of  consciousness. 
The  interpretation  of  this  "existen- 
tialist" theory  and  practice  is  difficult, 
given  the  group's  originality,  potential, 
and  limitations.  The  analysis  of  the 
"political"  faction  is  a  bit  easier.  In 
them  we  recognize  forms  of  action 
which  are  more  familiar. 

Let  us  go  back  long  enough  to  rem- 
ember that  within  the  "political"  fac- 
tion of  the  women's  movement,  we 
identified  the  more  radical  "anti-cap- 
italists" and  the  more  moderate  "ega- 
litarians." 

It  is  precisely  at  the  point  of  the 
contradiction  between  the  ancient, 
(the  patriarchal  hangover)  and  the  pre- 
sent, (the  industrialized  capitalist  soci- 
ety), that  the  struggle  of  the  "egalita- 
rians" is  found.  They  begin,  always, 
with  the  concrete  claims  and  demands 
of  women,  the  fight  for  the  abolition 
of  the  patriarchal  past,  such  as  unsa- 
laried work  in  the  home,  and  the 
specific  discriminations  which  women 
suffer  at  the  hands  of  the  capitalist 
social  structure,  inequality  in  educa- 
tion, access  to  work,  etc.  A  third 
dimension  of  their  combat  strikes  at 
certain  material  constraints,  (such  as 
the  necessity  to  reduce  creative  activity 
when  caring  for  children  becomes  time 
consuming— thus,  the  demand  for  pub- 
lic nurseries),  and  the  acquiring  of 
self-determination  for  their  own  bo- 
dies, (thus  the  demand  for  contracep- 
tions and  the  liberalisation  of  abortion, 


so  that  maternity  can  be  a  choice 
rather  than  a  natural  law). 

Obviously,  the  trump  card  of  this 
group  within  the  movement  is  its 
ability  to  touch  immediately  what  is 
real  for  many  women,  and  the  fact  that 
actions  introduce  concrete  improve- 
ments into  women's  situations.  These 
actions  are  easily  endorsed  by  a  large 
number  of  women,  and  the  movement 
becomes  an  efficient  instrument  for 
social  change.  In  certain  countries  one 
can  speak,  at  this  point,  of  a  movement 
with  a  mass  following. 

But  two  basic  questions  must  be 
put  before  this  faction: 

—What  is  the  scope  of  their  series 
of  material  demands?  Does  it  actually 
touch  the  essence  of  the  capitalist  sys- 
tem or  does  it  simply  put  the  woman 
into  the  system  as  an  equal  to  the  man, 
suppressing  only  the  backward  and 
discriminatory  aspects  of  the  system? 

—What  is  the  impact  of  the  diverse 
actions  on  the  political  consciousness 
of  the  women  who  participate? 

These  two  questions  can  help  us 
grasp  the  limitations  of  the  group.  In 
so  far  as  the  essential .  aim  is  equality 
with  man  inside  the  established  society, 
there  is  no  questioning  of  that  capital- 
ist structure.  .  .That  means  it  is  open 
to  a  separate  solution  and  not  neces- 
sarily linked,  in  its  very  essence,  to  the 
existence  of  a  class  society. 

Too  rarely  we  find  these  specific 
actions,  (which  demand  change),  being 
linked  to  a  process  of  political  educa- 
tion for  those  who  participate  in  the 
actions,  even  though  such  an  educa- 
tional process  is  the  only  way  to  insure 
that  the  fight  for  these  demands  will 


The  Liberation  of  Women/71 


be  seen  as  a  step  rather  than  an  end  in 
itself.  The  absence  of  such  political 
education  blocks  the  development  of 
women's  consciousness.  The  lack  of 
critical  reflection  permits  the  power 
structure  to  continue  behind  its  mask. 
That  structure,  which  has  held  up  the 
satisfaction  of  women's  demands  con- 
tinues veiled,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
comprehend  the  relationships  and  lines 
between  each  specific  problem  and  an 
over-all-view  of  society. 

The  egalitarian  faction's  logic  leads 
one  to  believe  that  the  satisfaction  of  a 
long  list  of  material  or  quantitative  re- 
quirements can  result,  one  day,  in  the 
reformation  of  society.  This  is  seen  as 
possible  without  a  qualitative  transfor- 
mation on  the  level  of  either  social  or 
human  relationships. 

If  the  "egalitarians"  begin  with 
specific  demands  of  women  without 
trying  to  insert  those  demands  into  a 
total  social  framework,  the  "anti-cap- 
italists" start  at  the  opposite  pole.  They 
subordinate,  from  the  beginning,  the 
liberation  of  women  to  the  overthrow 
of  the  capitalist  system. 

Most  of  the  women  who  make  up 
this  "radical"  faction  have  rallied  to 
the  movement  after  experiences  in 
other  political  groups.  In  those  other 
groups  they  learned  that  even  within 
the  bosom  of  organizations  fighting 
against  the  established  order,  a  repro- 
duction of  inferior  status  is  imposed 
upon  women.  Such  a  concrete  experi- 
ence of  discrimination  justifies,  in  their 
eyes,  the  creation  of  an  autonomous 
movement  composed  exclusively  of 
women.  They  realize  that  even  victory 
in   revolution   which   can    change  the 


economic  and  social  basis  of  society 
have  not  succeeded  in  eliminating  the 
oppression  of  women.  .  . 

These  women  have,  in  their  previous 
political  experience,  already  acquired 
the  theoretical  instruments  for  a  criti- 
cal reading  of  reality.  However,  they 
often  transpose,  in  a  mechanistic  way, 
the  class  analysis  onto  the  problem  of 
women,  trying  to  resolve  specific  pro- 
blems by  way  of  the  simplistic  applica- 
tion of  general  formulas.  And  they 
ignore,  also,  the  actual  consciousness- 
level  of  women  who  participate  in  the 
movement,  women  for  whom  their 
general  theories  are  usually  without 
meaning  or  clarity. 

Hence,  while  starting  with  a  valid 
premise  that  there  will  be  no  women's 
liberation,  (and  no  other  group's  lib- 
eration), as  long  as  a  structure  like 
capitalist  society,  based  on  oppression, 
continues  to  exist,  this  faction  draws 
conclusions  which  do  not  correspond 
to  either  the  present  reality  of  the 
movement  nor  to  the  consciousness  of 
the  women  who  participate  in  it.  On 
the  one  hand,  they  believe  that  the 
women's  movement  must  be  subordi- 
nated to  the  anti-capitalist  struggle. 
Women  can  play  only  a  helpful  role. 
On  the  other  hand,  they  conclude  that 
political  work  among  the  women  must 
be  concentrated  on  working  women, 
so  ignoring  the  class  composition  of 
the  movement  and  the  distinctive  na- 
ture of  the  movement's  demands. 

IV.  Conclusion 

We  began  this  work  by  raising  up 
for  examination  some  of  the  "vices" 
or  the  "faults"  which  can  be  found  in 


121  Quest 


the  political  practice  of  movements 
that  are  working  in  processes  of  social 
change. 

************** 

In  this  final  section  we  have  a  view 
toward  moving  beyond  the  drawbacks 
or  stumbling  blocks  and  making  more 
concrete  the  potentials  discussed 
above.  .  .Our  conviction  is  that  these 
three  "factions"  are  not  at  all  mutually 
exclusive.  Not  only  is  there  no  basic 
antagonism  between  them,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  each  has  original  elements 
which  can  become  constituent  parts  of 
a  new  systhesis. 

At  the  same  time,  we  recognized  in 
the  early  part  of  this  paper  that  in- 
volvement in  a  fight  against  oppression 
usually  begins  at  a  level  which  we  called 
"elementary  perception."  That  is  to 
say,  it  begins  with  a  difused  and  poorly 
developed  consciousness  born  rather  of 
oppression's  immediate  and  solid  mani- 
festations than  of  its  deepest  causes. 
Having  such  an  elementary  perception 
is  the  situation  for  most  of  the  women 
who  have  attached  themselves  to  the 
movement.  They  realized  in  their  daily 
personal  experiences  that  they  were 
victims  of  oppression.  However,  this 
first  perception,  which  can  come  from 
all  sorts  of  different  avenues,  must  be 
overcome  so  as  to  give  way  to  a  broad- 
er comprehension  of  social  reality's 
complexity.  This  must  be  done  if  one 
wants  to  arrive  at  touching  the  essence 
of  phenomena  rather  than  just  appear- 
ances. Otherwise  said,  if  one  wants  to 
eliminate  oppression's  causes  and  not 
just  fight  against  the  consequences, 
one  must  understand  the  reason  for 
being,  the  basic  structure,  the  expres- 


sions, and  the  multiple  manifestations 
of  that  oppression. 

If  we  apply  this  to  the  three  factions 
which  the  women's  movement  em- 
braces, we  recognize  that  the  "exist- 
entialist" group,  (attacking  psycho- 
sexual  domination),  the  "egalitarian" 
group,  (speaking  of  sexual  discrimina- 
tion), and  the  "anti-capitalist"  group, 
(referring  to  economic  exploitation), 
put  us  directly  in  front  of  different 
expressions  of  "elementary  percep- 
tion." This  perception  is,  therefore, 
partial  and  insufficient.  If  the  inter- 
pretation of  women's  oppression  made 
by  each  faction  stays  at  the  elementary 
level,  their  practice  of  struggle  and 
their  programs  of  liberation  suffer  the 
consequences  of  the  partial,  incom- 
plete analysis. 

So,  the  "existentialists"  propose  the 
re -invention  of  human  relationships. 
But  they  are  not  yet  capable  of  joining 
this  project  to  the  transformation  of  a 
repressive  society  which  is  the  root  of 
the  deteriorisation  in  those  relation- 
ships. The  consciousness  of  the  need  of 
new  relationships  is  not  translated  into 
organized  actions  for  social  change. 
While  making  the  most  revolutionary 
demands,  the  here  and  now  re-inven- 
tion of  human  relationships,  this  group 
fails  to  surmount  the  rupture  between 
consciousness  and  action  and  risks 
being  limited  to  a  happy  little  island, 
isolated  from  the  social  reality  and 
inaccesible  to  most  women. 

At  the  same  time,  the  "egalitarians" 
combat  sexist  discrimination  and  ask 
for  integration  into  capitalist  society 
on  an  equal  footing  with  men.  Yet 
again,  the  rupture  between  conscious- 


The  Liberation  of  Women/73 


ness  and  action  is  visible.  But  here  it 
takes  a  form  inverse  to  that  of  the  pre- 
ceding group.  In  the  rush  to  fight  dis- 
crimination, a  total  analysis  of  the  so- 
cial mechanism  which  gives  rise  to 
discrimination  gets  pushed  to  a  secon- 
dary concern,  at  best.  Sexism,  whcih 
is  just  one  aspect  of  the  global  prob- 
lem, cannot  ever  be  put  out  of  the  way 
as  long  as  the  heart  of  the  repressive 
social  structure  is  left  intact. 


For  both  groups,  then,  the  level  of 
elementary  perception  is  not  overcome. 
The  breakdown  of  human  relation- 
ships and  sexist  discrimination  are  two 
different  examples  of  the  same  oppres- 
sion which  our  society  imposes  on 
women.  Try  to  imagine  the  re-inven- 
tion of  interpersonal  relationships  and 
an  end  to  discrimination  without  cal- 
ling into  question  the  basic  structure 
which  causes  them  both. 


THE 

TREASURE    A„   ,  f,    d   d   t 

•  •         A    chilling    tale   of    love   and   murder  and 

SELM A  LAGERLOF  :Ksr,hood  bv ' Nob" p,i"  w'nr" 


i  been  too  long  out  of  print. 


MAW  IE  M.M1* 

"Diane  is  the  strength  we  all  have  in  adoles- 
cence and  the  fear  we  felt  of  growing  up 
female  and  defeated.  It  is  rare  to  find  a  book 
that  explores  the  tension  this  creates  be- 
tween mother  and  daughter. "-Marilyn  Webb 

t(i&  Coo(L  cm<C 
tfier  Carpenter 

a  nevci  6u  tfier  carpenter 

A  radical  story  of  love  and  illegality,  set  in 
Texas.  The  author  uses  a  neuter  pronoun, 
trusting  the  reader  to  know  which  character 
is  female  and  which  male. 


Rubyfruit 
Jungle 

RITA  MAE  BROWN 

"A  good  and  true  account  of  growing  up  un- 
American  in  America.  For  once,  a  woman 
has  been  honest  and  vulgar  and  political  and 
funny  enough  to  write  about  her  real  life." 
-Gloria  Steinem 

Eariy  Losses 

RVTBURCH 

"A   beautifully-written   novel  of  self-indul- 
gence of  epic  proportions." 

-Mary  Perot  Nichols 


DAUGHTERS,   INC.,   Plainfield,  Vt.   05667 

Please  send  me  Nerves  _,  Rubyfruit  Jungle  _, 
The  Treasure  _,  Early  Losses  _,  The  Cook  & 
the  Carpenter  _,  ALL  FIVE  _. 


I  enclose  $3.3S/book  or  $16.00  for  all  five. 

Name 

Address 

City,  Sute,  Z  ip 


lAlQuest 


If  the  struggle,  then  of  these  two 
factions  does  not  move  beyond  the 
elementary  perception  level,  all  of 
their  efforts  fall  into  the  trap  of  acti- 
vism,  as  we  defined  it  in  the  beginning 
of  this  document,  rather  than  being 
conscious  and  organized  action  turned 
toward  liberation. 

We  put  these  two  factions  into  the 
same  camp,  saying  that  they  have  an 
absence  of  theoretical  analysis,  which 
makes  impossible  a  fight  for  new  re- 
lationships or  the  satisfaction  of  ma- 
terial demands  of  social  change.  We 
must  say,  at  the  same  time,  that  the 
"anti-capitalist"  faction  possesses  the 
theoretical  instruments  which  confirm 
the  impossibility  of  all  liberating  change 
as  long  as  society  is  founded  on  repres- 
sion. The  error  of  the  "anti-capitalists" 
is  that  they  have  wanted  to  mechani- 
cally apply  a  ready-made  theory  of 
social  change,  without  taking  into  ac- 
count the  specific  character  of  the 
women's  movement.  In  spite  of  their 
theoretical  instruments,  the  "anti-capi- 
talists" fall  into  voluntarism  in  so  far 
as  they  try  to  get  all  women  to  en- 
dorse a  theory  which  is  not  realized  in 
their  daily  practice  or  in  the  daily  ex- 
perience of  the  other  two  groups  as 
they  fight  against  oppression. 

So  then,  how  does  one  put  into 
operation,  within  the  framework  of  the 
women's  liberation  movement,  this 
unity  between  theory  and  practice  or 
study  and  action,  which,  alone,  per- 
mits moving  into  a  realm  of  conscious 
and  creative  transforming  action? 

The  simple  fact  that  the  movement 
raises  these  questions,  represents  in 
itself,  a  considerable  advance,  and  it  is 


the  proof  that  the  action/reflection/ac- 
tion march  is  already  under  way.  For 
this  question  is  not  posed  easily  or 
abstractly.  It  reflects  a  real  difficulty 
with  which  the  militants  of  the  move- 
ment are  faced  in  their  daily  situations. 

Faithful  to  the  scheme  which  we 
proposed  at  the  beginning  of  the  docu- 
ment, that  we  begin  with  practice,  to 
be  sent  back  to  practice,  we  can  only 
suggest  here  certain  directions  for  ans- 
wers. They  will  have  to  be  tested  in 
the  women's  reality.  Our  indications 
or  directions  are  tentative.  They  must 
necessarily  be  corrected  and  enriched 
by  the  movement's  practice. 

Some  indications  or  directions,  then: 

1.  If  we  accept  the  premise  with 
which  we  began,  namely  that  the  most 
important  base  for  a  process  of  learn- 
ing and  becoming  aware  is  practice, 
the  action  of  transforming  reality,  we 
have  to  conclude  that  both  the  "egali- 
tarian" and  the  "existential"  factions 
have  their  fingers  on  what  is  real  in  so 
far  as  they  are  questioning  specific 
examples  of  feminine  oppressions.  Even 
if  their  beginning  points  are  different, 
both  groups  attack  enemies  which 
women  can  immediately  identify. 

2.  However,  this  simple  involvement 
in  action  is  not  sufficient  in  and  of 
itself,  nor  can  it  give  understanding  of 
the  repressive  social  structure  which  is 
the  base  of  both  the  human  relation- 
ships and  the  socio-economic  relation- 
ships which  oppress  women.  Nor  is  it 
sufficient  for  clarifying  the  whole  rea- 
lity in  which  the  struggle  for  women's 
liberation  must  take  place.  Since  this 
understanding,  or  this  consciousness  is 
not  spontaneously  "given",  it  must  be 


The  Liberation  of  Women/75 


aroused,  or  awakened,  in  the  group.  A 
key  question  to  ask  is  who  can  do  this, 
and  how. 

3.  In  our  opinion,  this  job  can  be 
done  only  by  the  movement  itself,  and 
that,  only  in  so  far  as  it  functions  as  a 
context  for  theoretical  reflection,  this 
reflection  being  always  applied  to  pre- 
vious practice,  and  having  in  view  a 
future  practice  which  will  be  more 
conscious  and  more  creative.  It  is  a 
question  of  creating  an  authentic  pro- 
cess of  POLITICAL  EDUCATION 
which  will  always  have— 

a.)  the  reality  of  women's  oppres- 
sion as  its  subject  matter, 
b.)  the  movement  itself  as  the  set- 
ting for  the  learning  process,  and, 
c.)  a  common  practice  of  struggle 
or  an  experience  of  liberation  as  the 
most  favourable  of  moments. 

4.  The  goal  of  the  political  educa- 
tion process  must  be  the  formulation 
of  a  theory  capable  of  guiding  the 
movement  in  its  fight  for  social  change 
and  liberation.  Such  a  theory  does  not 
appear  automatically  or  all  of  a  sudden, 
and  it  cannot  be  imported  from  out- 
side. A  theory  related  to  practice  is, 
precisely,  the  unfinished,  unpackaged, 
and  untransmittable  knowledge  that 
we  mentioned  earlier.  It  is  made  and 
re-made  each  day  in  so  far  as  the  prac- 
tice of  liberation  advances.  In  the  same 
way,  it  is  during  the  process  of  struggle 
that  the  program  of  a  new  society  is 
defined  and  put  into  experiment— that 
means  here  and  now! 

5.  In  so  far  as  such  a  theory  is  for- 
mulated, elementary  perception  can  be 
left  behind.  Then  one  can  see  taht 
there    is   no    possible    re-invention    of 


life— or  human  relationships— until  the 
repressive  society  is  put  into  question. 
And,  in  like  manner,  no  equality  is 
possible  for  women— on  the  economic 
or  social  level— so  long  as  there  persists 
a  society  which  is  based  on  class  and 
the  division  of  class.  Moreover,  one  will 
see  that  the  two  fronts,  (the  human 
relations  front  and  the  socio-economic 
relations  front),  are  two  parts  of  the 
same  battle.  The  common  source  of 
these  two  manifestations  of  oppression 
is  a  class  society,  and  repression  at  all 
levels  is  its  essential  characteristic. 

6.  Having  identified  the  strategic 
objective— the  overthrow  of  the  class 
society— the  movement  can  then,  in  its 
daily  practice,  which  begins  at  different 
specific  points,  define  the  steps  to  be 
taken  toward  the  long  term  objective. 
Then,  also,  the  movement  can  find  its 
natural  allies,  which  are  all  other  op- 
pressed groups,  and  do,  with  them,  the 
long  march  to  liberation. 


Rosisca  Darcy  de  Oliveira,  a  staff 
member  of  ID  AC,  is  a  Brazilian,  ex- 
iled in  Geneva  since  1969,  a  journalist 
and  teaching  assistant  to  Paulo  Freire 
at  the  University  of  Geneva. 

Mireille  Calame  is  associated  with 
IDAC.  She  is  Swiss  and  has  a  masters 
degree  in  political  science. 

Both  authors  are  active  in  the  Wo- 
men's Liberation  movement. 


76/Quest 


future    issues 
$$,  FAME  and  POWER      Fall,  1974 

Money,  fame  and  power  are  promises  of  capitalism  that  keep  people 
divided  and  help  maintain  women's  economic  dependence  on  men.  Areas 
for  articles  include:  how  money  and  power  operate  in  America;  wom- 
en's search  for  power  through  elections,  businesses,  unions,  etc;  the 
class-feminism  controversy;  class,  power  and  leadership  in  the  women's 
movement.  Copy  Deadline:  June  30,  1974 


The  SELFHOOD  of  WOMEN 

Winter,  1974-75 

The  women's  movement  is  only  as  strong  as  the  selves  upon  which  it 
is  built,  a  selfhood  largely  determined  by  our  sex,  our  class,  our  sexual- 
ity, our  race,  our  ethnic  or  geographic  background.  Areas  for  articles 
include:  ways  to  change  the  image  of  women  in  our  society;  how  self- 
hood relates  to  building  a  political  movement  in  terms  of  leadership, 
committment,  risk,  strength  and  power.    Copy  Deadline:  September  1,  1974 


WOMEN  and  SPIRITUALITY 

Spring,   1975 

The  spiritualism  of  women  has  to  do  with  a  commonality  of  spirit, 
the  affirmation  of  life,  joy,  a  new  world  vision,  and  a  new  self,  a  spiritu- 
ality that  increases  our  power  to  fundamentally  change  human  relation- 
ships and  society's  institutions.  Areas  for  articles  include:  feminist 
theology  and  philosophy;  feminist  visionaries  and  mystics;  religious 
forms  for  women  in  music,  art,  dance,  sports,  witchcraft,  and  astrology. 

Copy  Deadline:  December  1,  1974 


FUTURE  VISIONS  and  FANTASIES 

Summer,  1975 

"What  do  we  want?"— what  are  women's  visions  of  a  new  society, 
what  are  our  projections  for  new  ways  of  living  and  working  that  meet 
our  needs  for  love,  friendship,  security,  growth,  freedom  and  fulfill- 
ment. Areas  for  articles  include:  what  kind  of  political  system  do  we 
want;  what  kind  of  economic  system;  what  cultural  and  spiritual  forms; 
how  should  society  be  reorganized?  Copy  Deadline:  February  1,  1975 


