QUEST     ; 

a  xeniinist  quarterly 


WOMEN  and  SPIRITUALITY 


I^UJDO   1  Spring,  1975 

a  feminist  quarterly 
WOMEN  and  SPIRITUALITY 

contents 

DIMENSIONS  of  SPIRITUALITY 

Judy  Davis  and  Juanita  Weaver  2 

NEW  VISIONS  of  SPIRITUAL  POWER 

Dorothy  Riddle  7 

CRITIQUE  and  COMMENTARY 

Marilyn  Murphy  17 

The  QUALITATIVE  LEAP 

beyond  PATRIARCHAL  RELIGION 
Mary  Daly  20 

WITCHCRAFT:  The  Art  of  Remembering 
Morgan  McFarland  41 

SPIRITUAL  EXPLORATIONS  CROSS-COUNTRY 
Kirsten  Grimstad  and  Susan  Rennie  49 

On  the  PREVALENCE  of  STILPS 

Peggy  Cleveland  and  Sally  Gearhart  52 

CHART  YOUR  SELF 

Minerva  66 

THE  BEGUINES:  A  Medieval  Women's  Community 

Gracia  Clark  72 


Copyright  (c)  1975  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All 
rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  pro- 
hibited. Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in 
January,  April,  July,  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly, 
Inc.,  1909  Que  St.,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S. A  Applica- 
tion to  mail  at  second-class  postage  rates  is  pending  at  Washington 
D.C. 

Printed  by  Diana  Press,  Baltimore,  Maryland,  U.S.A.  Subscrip- 
tion rates  are  $7.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals;  $8.00/year  in 
Canada  and  Mexico;  $10.00/year  overseas;  $12.00/year  to  institu- 
tions; $2.00/sample  copy.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003.  Bulk 
rates  available  upon  request.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available 
upon  request. 


staff 


Copy  Editor 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Managing  Editor 
Beverly  Fisher 

Design  Editor 
Alexa  Freeman 

Promotion  Editor 
Karen  Kollias 

Editors 

Jane  Dolkart 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Mary-Helen  Mautner 
Emily  Medvec 
Gerri  Traina 


advisory 
committee 

Rita  Mae  Brown 
Jean  O'Leary 
Sidney  Oliver 

production 
assistant 

Lee  Schwing 

theme 
development 

Dolores  Bargowski 
Judy  Davis 
Juanita  Weaver 

Cover  design  by 
Casey  Czarnik 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua14wash 


u 


o    0 


'^wdjj 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth 
feminist  political  analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is 
not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the 
women's  movement  possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as 
regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization  or  a  poli- 
tical party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the 
movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached  a  point  where  each 
answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been  through  various 
ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle 
brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power 
for  women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence 
against  women?  Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do 
not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across 
the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


Special  Notice 


If  you  have  not  received  a  previous  issue  of  Quest,  it 
may  be  because  you've  moved  and  never  sent  us  a  change  of 
address.  The  post  office  does  not  forward  second  class 
mail  unless  you  specifically  request  it  and  also  indicate 
that  you  will  pay  for  it.  The  post  office  does  not  return 
the  undelivered  copies  to  Quest.  We,  therefore,  cannot  be 
responsible  for  these  lost  issues.  As  neither  of  us  can 
afford  the  loss,  please  notify  us  of  a  change  of  address 
immediately.  If  possible,  provide  us  with  the  number 
which  appears  above  your  name  on  your  address  label. 


graphic  by  Carol  Clement 


XtattENQQWft  OT  & 


SuW§ie  Benton,  1975 


We  dare  to  raise  the  issue  of 
spirituality  for  women,  to  begin  to 
redefine  it,  and  to  say  it  is  of  vital 
importance  to  the  women's  movement. 

Spirituality 

Feminist  spirituality  has  taken  form 
in  Sisterhood-in  our  solidarity  based 
on  a  vision  of  personal  freedom,  self- 
definition,  and  in  our  struggle  together 
for  social  and  political  change.  The 
contemporary  women's  movement  has 
created  space  for  women  to  begin  to 
perceive  reality  with  a  clarity  that 
seeks  to  encompass  many  complexities. 
This  perception  has  been  trivialized  by 
male  dominated  cultures  that  present 
the  world  in  primarily  rational  terms. 
Reality  is  not  only  rational,  linear,  and 
categorized  into  either/or-it  is  also 
irrational  and  superrational.  Because 
we  do  not  have  a  new  word  for  this 
struggle  to  comprehend  this  totality 
and  incorporate  that  understanding 
into  our  action,  we  are  calling  it 
spirituality.  We  choose  the  word 
spirituality    because    this    vision     pre- 


21  Quest,   vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


IQIJWIXIITO 

by  Judy  Davis 

and 

Juanita  Weaver 

sculptures  by  Suzanne  Benton 

supposes  a  reverence  for  life,  a  will- 
ingness to  deal  with  more  than  just 
rational  forces,  and  a  commitment  to 
positive  life-generating  forces  that  his- 
torically have  been  associated  with  a 
more  limited  definition  of  spirituality. 
Women's  new  experience  with 
spirituality  has  erupted  after  several 
thousand  years  during  which  western 
history  was  defined  basically  by  men 
in  the  Jewish  and  Christian  traditions. 
Today,  we  have  hints  of  a  time  when 
men  did  not  hold  the  power  and  con- 
trol over  women  that  they  do  now, 
a  time  when  women  were  held  in  high- 
est esteem  because  they  possessed 
the  power  to  create  life.  Today  there 
is  a  new  reality  arising  from  the  self 
meeting  self  and  a  freedom  of  imagi- 
nation and  strength  building  through 
life-sharing.  This  vision  is  present  in 
feminist  art,  in  the  re-examination  of 
matriarchal  cultures,  and  the  develop- 
ment of  new  political  insights  and 
forms  working  toward  a  synthesis  of 
the  "old  theologies".  All  of  these  ex- 
pressions point  to  a  new  possibility  of 
something    special    and    extraordinary 


that  all  women  can  share  collectively. 
They  promise  renewed  hope  in  life 
and  growth.  Our  vision  strives  for  fun- 
damental change  in  cultural  beliefs, 
society's  institutions,  and  human  rela- 
tionships-beginning with  the  rejoining 
of  women  to  women.  Women  conscious 
of  this   spirituality   are   on   the  move. 

This  awareness  in  the  women's 
movement  is  not  happening  in  a  vacu- 
um. A  mechanistic  world  view  and 
faith  in  pure  rationality  is  breaking 
down  throughout  the  society.  The  fact 
that  our  rational  conclusions  are  heav- 
ily influenced  by  our  class,  race,  sex 
and  our  particular  unconscious,  has 
become  common  knowledge  over  the 
past  fifty  years.  Even  scientists-sup- 
posedly  the  most  rational  of  human 
beings— are  listening  to  plants  com- 
municate their  pain  and  anxiety  over 
the  possibility  of  outside  forces  causing 
them  harm.  Scientists  have  been  study- 
ing psychic  phenomena  and  astral  pro- 
jection for  years  and  recently  have  be- 
gun to  study  Kirlian  photography— the 
photographing  of  a  person's  aura  or 
force  field.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
a  multi-dimensional  reality  exists  for 
people  today. 

In  its  broadest  context,  spirituality 
is  being  open  to  reality  in  all  of  its 
dimensions-in  its  rational,  irrational 
and  superrational  complexity,  and  act- 
ing on  that  understanding.  This  re- 
quires a  radical  departure  from  the 
present  compartmentalized  ways  of 
perceiving  and  determining  action.  The 
body/mind  dichotomy,  the  separation 
of  spiritual  from  secular,  technical  and 
instrumental  knowledge  from  the  emo- 


Dimensions  of  Spirituality/3 


tional  and  artistic,  one  class,  race,  and 
sex  from  another,  has  resulted  in  a 
a  world  filled  with  starving,  alienated 
and  warring  people.  We  cannot,  for 
very  real  practical  reasons,  continue 
in  this  way.  What  we  mean  by 
spirituality  is  this  radical  change  in  the 
way  we  think,  perceive,  experience  and 
act.  It  is  an  inclusive  way  of  looking  at 
and  moving  in  the  world.  Spirituality 
is  central  to  the  women's  movement 
because  it  is  a  struggle  to  deal  with 
reality  as  it  is,  without  imposed  limit- 
ations. 


the  use  of  discrete  categories,  we  are 
determined  not  to  lose  sight  of  a  deep- 
er reality  while  searching  for  new 
forms. 

Our  movement  is  not  only  about 
gaining  more  political  and  economic 
power  from  our  opponents.  Women 
have  suffered  from  power-over  politics 
and  can  use  that  knowledge  in  the 
struggle  to  develop  new  power  relation- 
ships. Ours  is  a  fight  in  which  the 
means  are   as  important   as   the  ends. 


Politics 

What  is  the  relationship  between 
spirituality,  as  we  have  defined  it,  and 
politics?  Politics,  by  its  very  nature,  is 
partisan;  spirituality  affirms  the  inter- 
relatedness  of  all  things.  An  awareness 
of  this  inter-relatedness  must  inform 
our  sense  of  revolutionary  urgency,  as 
expressed  in  political  ideologies,  stra- 
tegies and  lifestyles.  Our  spirituality- 
the  awareness  of  oneness  and  openness 
to  new  sources  of  power—should  help 
us  deal  with  the  inevitable  tensions  bet- 
ween goals  and  process,  compromise 
and  ideology,  survival  and  revolution- 
ary integrity. 

It  is  the  recognition  of  this  intimate 
relationship  between  spirituality  and 
politics  that  makes  the  women's  move- 
ment different  from  other  movements. 
We  recognize  that  the  function  of  ra- 
tional categories  is  to  divide  and  sepa- 
rate so  analysis  and  thought  can  take 
place.  However,  while  conceptualiza- 
tion, as  we  now  know  it,  still  requires 


4/Quest 


This  understanding  of  the  processing 
nature  of  our  revolution  can  make  us 
freer  to  create  new  possibilities  in  the 
relationships  between  ourselves  and  our 
sisters  in  the  movement  who  have  dif- 
ferent beliefs,  and  our  old  school 
chums  who  are  still  dim  as  to  what  all 
the  fuss  is  about.  We  are  in  the  pro- 
cess of  re-evaluating  power,  recogni- 
zing the  many  kinds  of  power  that 
exist. 

Concern  for  spirituality  does  not 
mean  false  innocence,  fear  of  power, 
or  the  avoidance  of  compromise  often 
necessary  for  life.  The  attainment  of 
power  is  necessary  to  change  the  posi- 
tion of  women.  What  we  are  calling  for 
is  a  new  perspective  on  power,  an  effort 
to  use  power  differently,  and  an  open- 
ness to  new  sources  of  power  and 
energy. 

One  of  the  places  within  which 
women  are  organizing  and  fighting  for 
power  and  change  is  within  the 
institutional  Jewish  and  Christian  pa- 
triarchal traditions.  Special  task  forces, 
caucuses,  women's  centers,  conscious- 
ness-raising groups,  and  commissions 
on  women  and  religion  exist  in  all 
major  Protestant  denominations.  Rom- 
an Catholic  women  are  similarly  active. 
Jewish  women  in  the  counter-cultural 
chavurot  movement  are  connected  na- 
tionally by  the  Jewish  Feminist  Orga- 
nization. There  are  similar  groups  in 
"secular"  organizations,  such  as  the 
National  Organization  for  Women,  and 
the  American  Academy  of  Religion. 
These  women  seek  to  feminize  male 
dominated  systems  and  to  gain  equality 
of  work,  pay  and  representation.  The 


struggle  to  legitimate  the  ordination 
of  eleven  Episcopal  women  is  the  most 
publicized  of  these  efforts. 

Some  "political  feminists"  have  seen 
spirituality  as  identified  only  with  what 
patriarchy  has  said  it  to  be-that  is,  a 
lot  of  male  words,  doctrines,  laws,  de- 
crees and  female  suffering,  poverty, 
chastity  and  obedience.  They  have  fear- 
ed that  women's  traditional  preoccupa- 
tion with  spiritual  matters-if  repeated 
in  the  women's  movement-will  divert 
us  from  political  and  economic  strug- 
gles. Their  political  analysis  has  shown 
how  religion  has  kept  people  from 
dealing  with  the  social  structures  that 
oppress  them.  Many  have  decided  that 
religion  is  but  a  reflection  and  expres- 
sion of  a  particular  culture,  and  that 
therefore  religion,  as  we  know  it, 
oppresses  only  because  it  reflects  a 
patriarchal  culture.  Questions  of  spir- 
ituality usually  are  considered  unre- 
solvable  until  better  social  conditions 
are  realized. 

Other  "cultural  feminists"  have  been 
rediscovering  a  spirit  perhaps  inherent 
in  women  and  present  in  pre-patriarchal 
cultures.  Some  have  said  that  our  abil- 
ity to  give  birth  points  to  feminine 
creativity  prior  to  the  Biblical  male 
creation  story  symbolized  in  Adam's 
giving  birth  to  Eve.  They  have  said 
women  were  the  first  inventors  of  agri- 
culture and  healing,  that  there  is  a  bur- 
ied subconscious  inherently  female  ca- 
pable of  great  power  and  understand- 
ing which  women  artists  are  expressing 
in  art,  music  and  in  new  understanding 
of  our  psyches.  Still  others  have  said 
women  are  intimately  tied  to  the  earth 


Dimensions  of  Spirituality/ 5 


and  the  universal  moon  and  menstrual 
cycles,  and  have  practiced  herbal  med- 
icines, read  astrology  charts  and  created 
witch  covens. 

Spirituality  and  Politics 

The  so-called  division  between  cul- 
tural feminism  and  political  feminism 
is  a  debilitating  result  of  our  oppres- 
sion. It  comes  from  the  patriarchal  view 
that  the  spiritual  and  the  intellectual 
operate  in  separate  realms.  To  deny  the 
spiritual  while  doing  political  work,  or 
to  cultivate  the  spiritual  at  the  expense 
of  another's  political  and  economic 
well-being,  is  continuing  the  patriar- 
chal game. 

Both  trends  in  feminism  are  creating 
new  communities  and  traditions  from 
which  to  gain  insight,  strength  and 
friends  to  help  in  changing  society.  Our 
spirituality  must  be  inclusive  of  both 
the  political  and  cultural;  rational  and 
superrational;  union  fighters,  hard- 
working, doing  and  writing  theorists, 
musicians,  herbal  potion  healers  and 
earth  mothers.  It  is  a  Being  together 
that  is  larger  than  the  sum  total  of  our 
individual  parts,  because  together  we 
can  transcend  our  partial  divided  selves. 
It  is  a  wholistic  understanding  of  the 
world,  a  way  of  binding  us  together 
again;  a  way  of  being  in  love  with  our- 
selves and  the  world  while  we  work  to 
change  it.  It  is  not  a  denial  of  the  intel- 
lect but  a  heightened  use  of  the  mind 
to  analyze  economic  and  psychological 
power  in  order  to  strategize  how  to 
change  it.  It  includes  also  the  irra- 
tionality of  the  unconscious  and  psy- 


chic powers,  the  influence  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  on  us  at  the  time  of 
our  birth,  of  fate,  of  luck,  of  sudden 
insight,  of  unexplainable  coinciden- 
ces, and  of  why  love  is  healing.  It  is 
not  a  validation  of  things  as  they  are, 
but  a  constant  questioning  and  restless- 
ness that  is  always  open  to  new  visions. 

Many  questions  are  raised  by  this 
vision  of  spirituality.  Even  though 
many  women,  inside  and  outside 
institutional  religious  structures,  have 
given  up  the  humble,  silent,  guilt-rid- 
den stance  before  a  male  god,  there  is 
wide  exploration  as  to  what  consti- 
tutes a  valid  replacement  for  our  for- 
merly inadequate  religious  lives.  What 
forms  will  our  struggle  take  as  wom- 
en work  simultaneously  inside  and  out- 
side the  crumbling  patriarchal  struc- 
tures? How  will  we  come  to  hold  power 
and  use  it  differently  in  a  new  social 
order?  How  will  we  avoid  the  danger 
that  new  knowledge  and  experience 
gained  won't  be  coopted  and  misused 
by  existing  institutions? 

These  and  other  questions  are  ex- 
plored in  this  issue  on  women  and  spir- 
ituality. It's  part  of  a  new  beginning, 
bringing  us  closer  to  transforming  the 
world  from  what  we  know  it  to  be  to 
what  we  want  it  to  become.  It  is  the 
renaming  of  ourselves  and  the  world- 
trie  rediscovery  of  our  essential  unity. 

Judy  Davis  is  a  witch  with  five 
cats,  and  works  at  the  Institute  for 
Policy  Studies  on  feminism  and  religion. 

Juanita  Weaver  is  a  member  of  the 
Feminist  Radio  Network. 


6/Quest 


New  Visions 


Spiritual 
\  Power 


As  a  political  person,  I  have  not 
been  used  to  thinking  of  my  spiritual- 
ity as  relevant;  in  fact,  spirituality 
seemed  to  be  simply  an  escape  from 
the  realities  of  patriarchal  oppression 
and  class  privilege.  But  every  political 
belief  that  I  hold  comes  from  and  is 
colored  by  how  I  understand  the  pur- 
pose of  my  life.  For  example,  if  I  be- 
lieve that  life  is  basically  meaningless 
or  happens  at  random  without  any 
overall  plan,  then  I  may  feel  perfectly 
justified  in  relating  to  persons  as  ob- 
jects to  be  used.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
I  believe  in  some  continuity  of  con- 
sciousness, then  I  must  deal  with  the 
implications  of  the  fact  that  what  I  do 
to  others  affects  me,  that  I  am  always 
changed  by  my  experience. 

This  article  is  not  a  set  piece  on 
how,  if  you  only  love,  the  world  loves 
with  you  .  .  .  period.  Rather,  it  is  an 
article  on  the  need  for,  and  possibilities 
of,  integrating  political  analysis  and 
spiritual/psychic  awareness.  Our  poli- 
tical analysis  tells  us  what  must  change; 


bv  Dorothy  Riddle 


our  spiritual  awareness  shows  us  how. 
In  the  process  of  living  out  the  "how", 
new  visions  arise  giving  birth  to  new 
political  analysis,  which  in  turn  stretch- 
es our  spiritual  awareness. 

Traditionally,  spirituality  has  had 
to  do  with  loving,  and  politics  has  had 
to  do  with  power.  We  have  seen  them 
as  unrelated  because  we  have  exper- 
ienced our  personal  lives  and  relation- 
ships as  separate  from  our  work  and 
institutional  involvements.  One  impor- 
tant contribution  of  feminism  is  our 
dawning  recognition  that  our  lives  are 
a  whole,  that  the  personal  is  political 
and  the  political  is  personal,  that  how 
we  are  with  ourselves  and  each  other 
is  the  revolution. 

If  we  are  serious  about  equalizing 
power  and  ending  "power-over"  rela- 
tionships or  hierarchies,  we  must  re- 
flect on  our  habits.  We  must  find  a  way 
of  relating  to  power  which  does  not 
lead  us  simply  to  having  more  power 
than  the  persons  in  power  now-and 
so    perpetuating    the    power    struggle. 


New  Visions  of  Spiritual  Power/7 


And  we  must  learn  ways  of  loving 
which  are  not  modelled  on  our  present 
images  of  giving  up  power  ("falling  in 
love";  living  for  .  .  .;  being  totally  vul- 
nerable) or  having  power  over  persons 
("making  her  love  me";  taking  respon- 
sibility for  .  .  .;  protecting). 

Our  spirituality  is  the  process,  the 
texture,  the  essence  of  how  we  relate. 
It  is  the  core  of  our  being  that  defines 
our  world  and  how  we  understand  it. 
Our  spirituality  is  our  understanding 
of,  and  relationship  with,  our  soul,  the 
life  principle  within  us,  what  motivates 
us,  our  ethics.  The  psychic  power  with 
which  our  spiritual  awareness  brings 
us  in  touch  is  the  power  to  generate 
new  visions  and  the  power  to  end  or 


shield  ourselves  from  old  habits  or  old 
ways  of  being. 

Basic  Assumptions 

Our  political  analysis  comes  from 
our  beliefs.  Spiritual  beliefs  shape  our 
understanding  of  what  our  lives  are 
about  and  limit  the  possibilities  that 
we  can  imagine  for  ourselves.  As  long 
as  we  have  ingrained  beliefs  that  re- 
main unexamined  from  a  feminist  per- 
spective, we  can  have  little  hope  for  a 
fundamental  change,  for  a  real  revolu- 
tion in  consciousness.  To  date  the  fem- 
inist movement  has  produced  numer- 
ous critiques  of  the  existing  patriarchal 
reality    and    of  the    reasons    for    that 


8/ Quest,  vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


reality.  But  we  are  just  beginning  to 
analyze  our  basic  spiritual  beliefs  from 
a  perspective  that  can  carry  us  for- 
ward into  a  whole  new  way  of  being. 

Our  Spiritual  Experience 

I  have  come  to  believe  in  some  all- 
encompassing  life  principle  or  intelli- 
gence which  I  call  the  Source.  I  am 
to  the  Source  as  the  cells  of  my  body 
are  to  me.  My  cells  have  an  awareness 
of  their  own,  they  have  a  group  identi- 
ty (like  being  the  liver  or  the  heart), 
and  they  are  part  of  me.  My  cells  are 
constantly  dying  and  being  reborn, 
changing  while  retaining  a  continuity, 
a  gestalt,  which  I  call  myself.  And  even 
while  they  are  changing  and  I  am  re- 
maining myself,  I  am  also  changing 
and  growing. 

I  assume  reincarnation:  I  am  living 
many  lives  at  once,  and  in  each  life  I 
am  working  on  various  aspects  of  the 
challenge  to  experience  being  Source 
in  time  and  space.  I,  as  Source,  am 
like  a  sculptor  trying  to  make  a  like- 
ness of  myself  that  can  express  me 
given  the  particular  set  of  restrictions 
on  the  planet  Earth.  Each  of  my  dif- 
ferent attempts  (different  souls)  has 
different  modifying  stages  (lives,  life 
experience  sequences),  allowing  me  to 
experience  all  the  facets  of  my  creative 
potential.  They  all  go  together  some- 
thing like  this  (if  you  think  of  this 
model  as  many-dimensional,  multicol- 
ored, and  constantly  changing) : 
My  purpose,  as  a  physical  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Source,  is  to  experience  my 
unified,  loving  consciousness,  in  three- 
dimensional    space.    "I    am    a   woman 


giving  birth  to  myself." 

My  soul  is  the  connecting  link  be- 
tween my  psychic/spiritual/Source  a- 
wareness  and  my  physical  plane  exper- 
ience. When  I  am  relating  to  my  soul 
as  integrating,  I  am  able  to  tap  into 
the  dynamic  flow  of  energy  all  around 
me.  At  the  same  time,  my  soul  guides 
and  is  formed  out  of  my  particular 
experience  and  so  gives  me  my  own 
uniqueness.  My  soul  is  my  name,  my 
name  which  both  separates  and  con- 
nects, which  makes  absolutely  distinct 
and  yet  gives  a  place  in  the  whole. 

Perspectives  on  Violence 

Violence  is  the  misuse  of  power,  the 
channeling  of  energy  in  damaging, 
coercive,  manipulative  ways.  Violence 
is  the  focusing  of  energy  with  the 
intent  of  "doing  to"  or  "acting  upon" 
or  "having  power  over".  Violence  is 
doing  harm  to  oneself  or  another-but 
what  is  "harm"?  Where  is  the  line 
between  taking  care  of  myself  and 
harming  another,  when  our  needs  ap- 
pear to  conflict?  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  I  cannot  define  violence  because 
I  cannot  yet  imagine  its  absence.  Vio- 
lence is  possible  only  when  we  exper- 
ience a  "self  and  an  "other"  which 
are  disconnected.  I  can  be  violent  to 
myself  only  when  I  relate  to  myself  as 
"other"  and  don't  trust  myself  or  my 
own  intuitions  about  my  needs.  Being 
integrated  or  centered  within  myself 
means  trusting  my  own  sense  of  pacing 
for  my  growth,  being  loving  with  my- 
self and  thus  knowing  how  to  be  lov- 
ing (non-violent)  with  another.  And 
when  I  am  experiencing  my  centered- 


New  Visions  of  Spiritual  Power/9 


ncss  (soul-as-distinct)  and  oneness  (soul- 
as-connecting),  then  I  will  not  be  vio- 
lent to  another  because  I  will  immed- 
iately feel  their  pain  as  my  own. 

Any  violent  act  affects  us,  whether 
as  agent  or  receiver.  Whatever  we  do, 
in  an  ultimate  sense  we  do  to  ourselves. 
When  we  insist  on  having  our  own  way, 
we  force  both  ourselves  and  others. 
When  we  lash  out  at  another,  verbally 
or  physically,  we  are  reinforcing  cer- 
tain energy  patterns  in  ourselves  as  well 
as  harming  another.  When  we  submit 
passively  to  another's  violence  we  suf- 
fer both  the  immediate  consequences 
of  that  violence  and  the  long-term 
effects  of  prolonging  the  assumption 
that  we  must  be  violent  to  survive. 

Violence  is  never  justified.  If  I  do 
violence  to  another  living  being,  I  do 
violence  to  a  part  of  myself.  The  end 
never  justifies  the  means,  because  the 
means  are  our  lives,  our  experience. 
The  means  always  affect  and  change 
the  person.  The  use  of  free  will  to  have 
power  over  others  has  brought  violence 
into  being  on  the  physical  plane.  By 
fighting  the  existing  violence  with 
violence,  we  simply  intensify  it;  and 
so  we  lose  even  if  we  win. 

The  Illusions  of  Duality  and  Hierarchy 
We  know  as  women  that  "separate 
but  equal"  does  not  work,  that  as  soon 
as  we  begin  responding  in  two  cate- 
gories, one  becomes  better  than  the 
other  (hence  sexism).  Spiritually,  I 
have  realized  that  I  must  not  make  a 
distinction  between  the  Source  and  my- 
self. I  believe  that  this  distinction  came 
from    men's   experience   of  being  sep- 


arated from  the  creative  force  on  a 
concrete  level  and  so  making  for  them- 
selves a  model  of  a  male  creator  that 
"stood  in"  for  them  in  a  cosmic  sense. 
Putting  the  Source  outside  myself  con- 
tinues my  socialization  to  look  out- 
side myself  to  some  external  authority. 
Gradually  I  am  learning  that  I  am  the 
Source,  I  am  one  physical  manifesta- 
tion, one  of  the  many  versions  of  the 
Source  experiencing  Itself  in  time  and 
space.  I  am  the  Source  on  this  physical 
plane. 

Another  aspect  of  dualism  is  the 
assumption  that  there  are  opposites 
which  must  be  balanced  out:  night  and 
day,  left  and  right,  yang  and  yin, 
female  and  male  (hence  heterosexism). 
Recently,  we  have  begun  to  understand 
that  apparent  opposites  can  be  bal- 
anced within  ourselves-the  feminist 
emphasis  on  being  a  whole,  self-suffi- 
cient person.  And  now  we  are  prepar- 
ing to  move  beyond  that  to  some  kind 
of  gestalt,  which  is  hard  even  to  visual- 
ize or  comprehend-experiencing  the 
power  of  our  Oneness. 

The  illusion  of  hierarchy  permeates 
all  spiritual  teachings:  for  example, 
teachings  about  the  "Higher  Self",  or 
the  soul  as  better  than  the  body,  or 
some  persons  as  "higher"  or  "more 
evolved"  than  others.  Soul  conscious- 
ness is  not  an  awareness  that  I  have  in 
a  certain  quantity:  "I  have  8  units  and 
you  have  4  units,  so  I  am  twice  as 
evolved  as  you."  I  use  the  image  of 
tapping  into  soul  threads  like  tapping 
into  telephone  wires  or  tuning  into 
radio  stations.  There  are  times  when  I 
tap    in   more   than   others,   am  "more 


10/Quest 


aware".  We  always  have  the  potential 
to  create  (tap  into)  complete  soul 
consciousness,  though  we  may  choose 
at  certain  times  not  to  do  that. 

Related  to  the  idea  of  spiritual  ev- 
olution is  the  hierarchical  concept  of 
religious  conversion:  "I  will  make  you 
over  into  something  better."  For  my- 
self, I  use  the  image  of  revelation-I  am 
constantly  being  revealed  to  myself,  I 


am  constantly  reaching  new  under- 
standings of  how  to  be  myself-Source 
on  Earth. 

It  is  as  though  my  life  were  a  flower 
and  as  I  live  my  life,  I  turn  back  one 
petal  at  a  time.  Others  may  be  turning 
back  different  petals  (working  on  dif- 
ferent issues)  and  so  may  be  in  a  very 
different  place  from  me.  In  using  this 
image,  it  is  important  to  remember  that 
I  am  the  flower,  the  whole  flower- 
rather  than  slipping  into  a  dualistic 
image  ol  me  acting  on  myself  by  some- 
how being  outside,  turning  back  the 
petal.  It  raises  for  me  questions  about 
how  much  of  my  life  needs  to  be 
separate  from  others.  Do  we  each 
have  to  work  through  our  own  issues, 
turn  back  our  own  petals?  Can  we  co- 
operate/overlap/work through  an  issue 
for  us  all?  Since  each  of  our  lives  is 
different,  we  must  learn  to  trust  our 
intuition  about  our  pacing  and  pur- 
pose. I  am  the  only  one  who  really 
knows  what  this  life  is  about  for  me. 

Implications  for  Our  Lives 

Without  attention  to  the  psychic- 
spiritual  aspects  of  our  lives,  we  can 
easily  get  caught  in  the  game  of  meet- 
ing competition  with  competition,  vio- 
lence with  violence.  And  we  must  not. 
The  only  way  to  win  at  that  game  is 
to  become  more  male  than  the  males: 
a  female  patriarchy.  I  can  think  of 
nothing  more  horrible.  Most  men  sim- 
ply are  not  sensitive  enough  to  do  the 
kind  of  systematic  damage  that  a 
power-hungry,  intuitive  woman  can  do. 
We  have   all  experienced  glimpses  (or 


New  Visions  of  Spiritual  Power/1 1 


more)    of    that   potential   in    ourselves 
and  others. 

We  all  have  access  to  a  tremendous 
amount  of  power,  though  we  may  be 
afraid  of  that  power  or  think  that  it  is 
something  to  be  avoided  because  it  can 
easily  be  abused.  Many  of  us  exert  our 
power  mainly  as  "refusing  to  do  ...  " 
rather  than  "doing  .  .  .  ".  But  power  in 


life,  we  die.  There  are  electromagnetic 
fields  all  around  us,  as  well  as  within 
us,  which  can  be  photographed  by  a 
process  known  as  Kirlian  photography. 
The  energy  fields  of  which  each  of  us 
arc  composed  are  called  our  auras. 
Auras  are  described  as  being  around  a 
person,  though  actually  they  are  that 
person. 


and  of  itself  is  neutral;  it  is  our  intent 
that  makes  our  power  "good"  (taking 
responsibility  for  ourselves)  or  "bad" 
(controlling  someone  else). 

Energy 

In  order  to  understand  the  power 
we  have,  we  need  to  understand  that 
power  is  the  channeling  or  focusing  of 
energy.  All  life  happens  because  of 
being  energized,  and  in  turn  produces 
energy.  When  we  give  up  power  (stop 
producing  energy)  on  all  levels  of  our 


Whenever  I  feel  or  think  something 
strongly,  I  create  a  wave  length  with 
enough  energy  to  leave  my  personal 
magnetic  field.  The  specific  person  I 
direct  that  thought  or  feeling  at  may 
pick  it  up  ("looking  daggers"  is  a 
description  of  this  kind  of  interaction). 
Or  the  person  may  resist  picking  it 
up,  and  it  may  bounce  back  to  me  with 
more  force-like  it  had  hit  a  wall.  Or 
it  may  just  float  around  until  some 
innocent  person  on  the  same  wave 
length  picks  it  up  like  a  magnet.  Ener- 


121  Quest 


gy  is  all  around  us.  When  we  say  that 
we  are  experiencing  an  "energy  crisis", 
what  we  really  mean  is  that  certain 
kinds  of  energy  have  been  used  exclu- 
sively and  others  are  not  being  tapped. 
On  a  personal  level,  for  example,  our 
painful  emotional  states  can  result 
from  too  much  energy  build-up  (speed- 
ing), or  too  little  (feeling  drained). 
We  are  still  learning  to  achieve  some 
kind  of  moderation  of  balance  in  our 
use  of  energy. 

Dealing  With  Violence 

Sometimes  I  feel  that  if  I  hear 
about  one  more  rape,  just  one  more,  I 
will  kill  all  men,  my  rage  and  pain  are 
so  strong.  And  I  will  start  with  the 
smug,  superior-looking  bastard  who 

tells  me  that  women  should  remember 
that  violence  is  not  where  it's  at. 
And  I  know  that  I  cannot  afford  to 
indulge  that  rage,  that  I  must  grit  my 
teeth  and  work  for  a  time  when  that 
violence  cannot  happen,  or  run  scream- 
ing to  my  sisters  until  I  can  grit  my 
teeth  again. 

If  I  want  to  change  what  is  happen- 
ing between  myself  and  another  per- 
son, basically  what  I  can  change  is  my 
own  energy  patterns-how  I  act  and 
how  I  react.  However,  the  usual  inter- 
pretation of  the  principle,  "the  energy 
I  put  out  is  the  energy  I  get  back," 
leaves  out  a  political  analysis  of  inter- 
vening events  and  pressures.  If  I  walk 
down  the  street  smiling,  I  maximize 
the  likelihood  that  I  get  smiles  back: 
but  I  have  no  guarantee.  Simply  being 
loving  as  I  walk  will  not  necessarily 
keep  me  from  getting  raped. 


Dealing  with  violence  is  not  a  simple 
issue  because  we  have  responsibilities 
both  not  to  do  violence  and  not  to  al- 
low another  to  do  violence  to  us.  We 
grow  up  with  two  basic  models  for 
dealing  with  frustration:  the  mascu- 
line mode  of  making  another  person 
hurt  as  much  or  more  than  we  do;  and 
the  feminine  mode  of  either  allowing 
another  to  hurt  us  to  "help  them  feel 
better",  or  more  subtly  harming  our- 
selves by  ignoring  our  own  needs  in 
our  attempts  to  nurture  and  accom- 
modate others  so  that  "no  one  will  get 
hurt." 

How  we  relate  to  our  anger  is  a  good 
example  of  the  need  for  flexibility  in 
response  to  frustration.  How  can  I  be 
angry  least  violently?  For  me,  there 
is  a  difference  between  stating  my 
anger  as  "this  is  who  I  am,  don't  mess 
with  me"  and  "you  damn  well  bet  er 
do  what  I  want."  The  first  is  a  state- 
ment of  my  own  worth  and  is  taking 
responsibility  for  myself.  The  second 
is  attempting  to  get  what  I  want  and 
to   make    myself  feel  good  at  the  ex- 


H°i^ 


■^    ,# 


*  -PO.  BOX  163=^ 

cA  puTNey.v-r.    .^ 

t/,        oSZHb         -XfV 


New  Visions  of  Spiritual  Power/ 13 


pense  of  someone  else  (a  form  of  vio- 
lence) and  that  will  surely  boomerang. 

Just  getting  angry  without  taking 
some  action  will  eventually  make  me 
feel  rubbed  raw,  or  like  I  will  explode 
or  go  totally  insane.  I  begin  feeling 
helpless  because  of  seeing  too  clearly 
the  enormity  of  the  changes  which  are 
necessary.  Part  of  taking  care  of  myself 
is  directing  that  anger  energy  into 
building  the  empowering  culture  I 
want  to  live  in. 

Always  getting  angry  when  another 
tries  to  control  me  means  that  I  am 
allowing  myself  to  be  controlled  by 
that  person,  that  I  am  doing  violence 
to  myself  by  giving  up  the  power  to 
determine  my  own  energy  direction. 
When  I  can  afford  not  to  get  angry 
back,  one  alternative  is  to  imagine  my- 
self holding  up  a  mirror  in  front  of  a 
child  having  a  tantrum  (shielding  with 
silver).  For  a  short  while  the  child's 
rage  will  get  more  intense,  and  then 
the  tantrum  subsides.  Remonstrating 
with  that  child,  any  action  which 
directs  energy  towards  her,  will  simply 
add  fuel  to  the  tantrum.  By  not  re- 
sponding to  another's  violence,  that 
other  person  (rather  than  myself)  is 
left  with  that  experience  and  its  con- 
sequences. 

If  we  want  the  cycle  of  violence  to 
end,  once  and  for  all,  then  eventually 
we  will  have  to  stop  intensifying/rein- 
forcing/responding to  violence  with 
violence.  This  means  refusing  to  abuse 
our  power  by  "doing  to"  others,  seek- 
ing revenge  or  reprisals— arccf  taking 
responsibility  for  not  allowing  power 
to  be  used  over  us.  In  addition,  if  we 


take  our  power  seriously,  this  means 
accepting  responsibility  for  our  violent 
thoughts  and  feelings.  And.  then,  the 
issue  for  us  is  how  we  survive  the 
period  of  increased  violence  without 
becoming  violent  in  turn. 

I  take  the  increase  of  physical  vio- 
lence against  women  very  seriously. 
Whenever  women  begin  to  get  in  touch 
with  their  power,  one  of  three  things 
happens:  we  are  told  we  are  crazy  and 
are  locked  up  if  necessary;  we  are 
ridiculed  ("be  serious";  "you're  not  a 
women's  libber,  are  you?");  or  we  are 
called  witches  or  lesbians,  meaning 
nightmare  women  to  be  destroyed.  An 
essential  part  of  our  survival  is  getting 
back  in  touch  with  our  own  intuitive 
powers.  A  "stiff  upper  lip"  philosophy, 
or  saying  "it  can't  happen  to  me", 
makes  no  sense  and  only  keeps  us 
vulnerable.  If  I  feel  afraid  to  be  alone, 
I'd  better  make  sure  that  I  take  that 
seriously-even  if  it  simply  comes  from 
the  fact  that  I  am  feeling  relatively 
unempowered  and  so  would  be  unable 
to  deal  with  any  threat  to  my  person. 

In  addition  to  learning  both  not  to 
act/respond. violently  and  to  protect  or 
shield  ourselves  from  violence,  it  is 
essential  that  we  work  on  eliminating 
the  conditions  and  assumptions  which 
make  violence  possible.  From  this  per- 
spective, discussions  of  "them  and  us" 
or  "the  enemy"  are  very  dangerous 
because  they  set  the  stage  for  violent 
response  by  creating  the  illusion  of 
duality.  Instead,  we  need  to  talk  about 
what  it  is  that  we  want  to  do  or  be- 
come, and  what  ways  of  being  are  dan- 
gerous to  our  health  (e.g.,  being  open 


14  /Quest 


and  trusting  of  men,  working  closely 
with  men).  We  need  to  create  as  many 
loving,  non-violent  contexts  and  exper- 
iences for  ourselves  as  possible  in  order 
to  explore  and  practice  new  ways  of 
being,  new  awareness,  new  perspectives. 
Non-violence  is  not  the  easiest  or 
most  efficient  way  of  life,  but  it  is  the 
only  effective  way  of  being  whole.  We 
must  act  with  the  consciousness  that 
there  is  an  inner  part  of  everyone  who 
wants  "power  over"  modes  to  end,  but 
never  make  the  assumption  that  that  is 
the  part  of  the  person  with  which  we 
are  interacting.  Until  we  eliminate  all 
reason  for,  and  threat  of,  violence,  the 
oppressor  lives  within  each  of  us— 
potential  or  actual.  None  of  us  is  pure 
and  separate  from  the  struggle. 

Our  Own  Reality 

From  time  immemorial,  women  have 
been  healers.  I  only  recently  under- 
stood that  loving  is  healing  is  loving. 
When  we  channel  energy  with  loving 
intent,  we  facilitate  self-healing  or 
self-loving.  We  all  know  the  joy  and 
power  of  our  collective  woman  energy; 
we  need  the  energy  that  our  loving 
creates,  and  our  whole  planet  needs 
the  healing  that  flows  from  our  loving. 

What  is  our  collective  task?  Within 
patriarchal  reality,  woman  culture  does 
not  exist  in  any  continuous  way.  Just 
as  sounds  get  outside  our  range  of  hear- 
ing, and  light  gets  outside  our  range  of 
vision,  so  too  our  love  energy  becomes 
invisible-which  is  helpful  and  protec- 
tive unless  we  forget  our  potential.  Do 
we  want  to  put  energy  into  becoming 
visible,  however  briefly?  Do  we  build 


New  Visions  of  Spiritual  Power/15 


our  own  culture,  coexistant,  and  hope 
that  it  will  radiate  out?  When  we  push, 
we  get  legal  abortion;  when  we  stop, 
that  right  begins  to  be  questioned. 
Every  job  opening  or  civil  right  that 
we  are  pushing  for  now  has  been  grant- 
ed before  and  then  reversed.  How  do 
we  decide  how  much  push  is  worth 
it? 

Women  encompass  the  life  cycle. 
We  give  birth,  we  sustain  life,  and  we 
die  all  too  frequently  so  that  another 
might  live.  Men  live  through  us-physi- 
cally  through  our  birthing  and  feeding, 
psychologically  through  our  nurtur- 
ance  and  support.  Men  exist  as  oppres- 
sors because  we  have  given  up  power 
to  them,  whether  through  guilt  about 
our  strength,  because  we  enjoy  being 
magnanimous,  or  because  we  have  not 
loved  ourselves  enough  to  take  our  own 
power  seriously.  When  we  give  up 
power,  there  are  always  those  who  will 
take  as  much  as  they  can  get.  Each  of 
us  is  responsible  for  regulating  the 
amount  of  power  we  allow  another  to 
assume  in  relation  to  us. 

We  bring  our  visions  into  being  by 
living  our  beliefs,  in  minutes  and  hours 
and  days  here  and  there,  and  gradually 
that  energy  forms  our  new  reality.  As 
long  as  we  feel  confined  to  the  three- 
dimensional  physical  plane  reality  that 
we  have  been  raised  into-as  long  as  we 
believe  something  only  if  we  can  see  it 
or  touch  it-we  are  limited  to  the  power 
available  on  just  that  plane.  We  are 
limited  to  physical  weapons  for  defense. 


Renew  your  spirit!  Renew  your 
Quest! 


We  are  limited  to  feeling  strength  only 
when  we  are  physically  together.  We 
have  other  options  only  when  we  re- 
late to  other  realities. 

Our  revolution  is  about  process, 
about  doing  it  differently,  understand- 
ing that  how  we  do  it  is  every  bit  as 
important  as  what  it  is  we  do.  Our 
revolution  is  about  how  we  relate  to 
our  love  and  our  power,  and  about 
finally  understanding  that  they  are  the 
same. 

Footnotes 

^This  article  would  not  have  been  pos- 
sible without  the  support  and  questioning 
of  Dandelion,  Deborah,  Eva,  Kittu,  Lavina, 
Leslie,  Sally  G.,  Sally  T.,  Willow,  and  all  my 
sisters    in    Tucson.    iMy    love    and    thanks! 

*I  often  use  spiritual  and  psychic  inter- 
changeably. "Psychic"  adds  to  the  spiritual 
the  dimension  of  being  sensitive  to  forces 
beyond  the  physical  world,  of  knowing 
there  is  more  to  our  lives,  of  trusting  our 
intuition.  "Spiritual"  adds  to  the  psychic 
the  dimension  of  ethics  of  intentionality. 

"Source"  is  capitalized  for  the  sake 
of  clarity,  rather  than  to  imply  some  su- 
preme being. 

What  words  do  we  have  to  convey/ 
dispel  violent  feelings?  I  know  "bastard"  is 
a  patriarchal  concept,  but  what  swear  words 
aren't  patriarchal  or  heterosexist?  Perhaps 
that  is  a  clue  that  swear  words  are  only 
appropriate  in  a  violent  culture. 


Dorothy  Riddle  is  a  co-founder  and 
partner  in  both  Alternatives  for  Wom- 
en (feminist  counseling  I  consulting  ser- 
vice) and  Minerva  (feminist  astrology 
center)  in  Tucson,  Arizona. 


16/ 'Quest 


>q  Critique  &  Commentary  p 


by  Marilyn  Murphy 

"How  Middle-Class  is  the  Middle-Class  Feminist"  Response  to  Quest,  Vol  I., 
No.   2  on  Money,  Fame,  and  Power. 

Within  and  without  the  women's  movement,  the  definition  of  feminist  as 
middle-class  is  popular.  Organizations  like  National  Organization  for  Women 
and  the  National  Women's  Political  Caucus  are  considered  to  be  middle-class 
centered  and  to  represent  white  middle-class  centered  demands. +  Since  the 
majority  of  United  States  citizens  are  classified  as  middle-class,  it  should  sur- 
prise no  one  that  many  feminist  have  middle-class  fathers/husbands;  especially 
since  teacher,  secretary,  file  clerk  are  now  middle-class  in  status  if  not  in 
salary. 

However,  the  implication  of  middle-class  as  a  defining  term  for  feminist  is 
that  their  attitudes  and  values  are  middle-class,  but  what  this  means  needs 
clarification.  Critics  seldom  define  these  terms  adequately,  although  they  seem 
to  include  racist,  anti-labor,  and  pro-capitalism  attitudes  and  values  as 
middle    class. 

I  am  working  on  a  dissertation  on  the  personal  background  and  political 
opinions  of  California  Feminist  Activists.  My  research  is  far  from  complete 
and  is  not  necessarily  representative  of  the  entire  women's  movement.  How- 
ever, I  think  it  is  essential  to  share  my  preliminary  findings  in  the  hope  that 
future  writers  of  women's  movement  theory  will  be  more  precise  in  their  use 
of  middle-class.  Thirty-nine  percent  of  the  women  in  my  sample  are  activists 
in  NOW;  5%  in  NWPC;  25%  in  WEAL  and  other  groups  like  women's  studies, 
feminist  literary  magazines,  associations  of  feminist  psychologists  and  lawyers. 
Only  31%  of  the  women  belong  to  groups  we  once  called  "Women's 
Liberation"  as  opposed  to  "Women's  Rights."  In  other  words,  69%  of  the  acti- 
vists responding  belong  to  those  groups  frequently  defined  as  middle-class. 
Only  10%  of  the  respondents  are  Third  World  Women. 

*These  attitudes  are  expressed  in  Quest,  vol.  I,  no.  2,  particularly  in  Anne  Marie  Troger, 
"Organizing  that  Works,"  p.  25  and  in  Coletta  Reid,  "Taking  Care  of  Business,"  p.  13. 


Critique  and  Commentary/17 


I  asked:  Do  you  think  the  struggle  against  personal  and  institutional  racism 
is  essential  if  the  goals  of  the  movement  are  to  be  achieved  in  this  country? 
A  whopping  95%  answered  yes;  2%  no;  3%  not  sure.  Certainly  the  response 
does  not  mean  that  all  these  women  are  not  racist;  it  could  mean  that  they 
recognize  the  link  between  racism  and  sexism  and  see  the  struggle  for  human 
liberation  to  include  both.  The  1974  state  convention  of  California  NOW 
voted,  with  one  nay,  to  use  the  terms  sexism  and  racism  together  in  all  reso- 
lutions in  which  they  were  appropriate  —in  the  elimination  of  sexism  and  racism 
in  textbooks,  for  example.  If  this  "more  organized"  segment  spoke  for  the 
entire  women's  movement,  would  its  political  position  (if  not  the  behaviour  of 
all  its  7,000  members)  on  racism  be  too  middle-class? 

Another  question:  Do  you  think  the  goals  of  the  movement  can  be  accom- 
plished without  a  radical  change  in  the  economic  structure  of  the  United 
States?  yes-17%;  no-61%;  not  sure-22%.  A  further  breakdown  showed  that 
14%  of  the  NOW  members  answered  yes;  67%-no;  and  19%-not  sure.  Forty- 
three  percent  of  NWPC  members  answered  yes;  57%-no.  The  WEAL  et  al 
group  answered  yes-32%;  no-35%  not  sure-32%.  The  women's  liberation  group 
answered  yes-4%;  no-76%;  not  sure-20%. 

I  left  the  question  vague,  hoping  that  "radical  change"  would  elicit  clari- 
fying comments,  and  52%  did  write  comments.  Do  the  61%  of  the  feminist 
activists  who  answered  "yes"  think  that  a  violent  overthrow  is  what  the 
United  States  needs?  They  do  not  seem  to.  They  write:  Economics  is  the  basis 
of  power. /Human  equality  is  not  possible  within  an  unequal,  devisive,  and 
exploitative  system. /Present  structure  is  anti-life. /I  am  not  a  socialist  though.  I 
I  don't  want  a  piece  of  the  "rotten  pie.  "/Though  I  am  a  socialist,  I  also  am  in 
the  reform  organization  NOW  because  I  think  it  is  important  to  have  some 
movement  towards  goals. 

Some  of  the  comments  linked  socialism  and  the  women's  movement;  some 
were  anti-capitalism  but  suspicious  of  male-oriented  socialist  ideology;  some 
included  US  imperialism  in  their  criticism.  And  some  criticized  middle-class 
feminists    for   their   adherence   to   a   capitalist/imperialist  economic   system. 

Women  who  answered  "not  sure"  about  the  possibility  of  achieving  our 
goal  within  the  present  economic  system  generally  voiced  such  sentiments  as: 
The  whole  policy  toward  people  must  be  changed. /Other  ways  will  have  to  be 
considered  but.  .  .  I  am  opposed  to  violent  change. /Socialism  will  not  get  rid 
of  patriarchy,  but  I  can  see  that  our  system  depends  on  the  exploitation  of 
some  groups  and  if  it  weren't  women,  it  would  be  someone  else. /I  truly  do 
not  understand  economics. 

Of  the  women  who  answered  "yes"  we  can  achieve  our  goals  without  radi- 
cal change,  most  think  the  economic  system  needs  to  be  changed  also,  but 
think  the  presence  of  women  can  change  it.  For  example:  Change  women; 


lS/Quest,   vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


they  in  turn  will  change  the  economic  structure.  1 1  hope  so! /The  mixed  capi- 
talism which  exists  in  the  US  today  is  not  necessarily  incompatible  with  fem- 
inist goals.  II  must  admit  that  I  am  beginning  to  question  the  validity  of  any 
social  or  economic  structure. 

California  feminist  activists  who  are  the  subjects  of  my  research  are  not 
ignoring  the  effect  of  the  economic  structure  on  the  goals  of  the  women's 
movement.  Almost  all  of  them  agree  to  the  necessity  for  change;  the  how-to- 
change-it  and  the  what-to-change-it-to  is  a  source  of  concern  for  most.  That 
very  little  political/economic  theory  has  come  out  of  either  the  more  or  less 
organized  segments  of  the  movement  to  date,  is  more  likely  to  be  the  result  of 
our  lack  of  training  than  a  lack  of  interest  or  felt  need  on  the  part  of  "middle- 
class  American  feminists." 

Of  course,  some  feminists  are  likely  to  be  racist,  pro-capitaligt,  and  anti- 
union in  their  political  positions-some  out  of  ignorance  and  some  out  of  hard- 
ness-of-heart.  Not  much  can  be  done  with  the  latter,  but  the  former  need  our 
support  and  encouragement,  not  more  condemnation.  All  of  us  are  in  desper- 
ate need  of  feminist  political/economic  theory  and  strategy  and  we  need  both 
to  be  grounded  in  fact,  not  myth. 


Southern  Exposure. 


Southern  Exposure  is  a  quarterly  journal 
of  political  and  cultural  affairs  published 
by  the  Institute  for  Southern  Studies. 
Indispensable  for  activists,  scholars,  and 
informed  readers  everywhere.  Future 
issues  range  from  southern  women  to 
land  use,  corporations  to  black  politics. 


"No  More  Moanin'":  a  special 
226-page  issue  on  people's  history 
"born  out  of  stubborn  insistence 
that  there  is  more  to  southern 
history  than  its  mystique  and 
magnolias." 

Feature  articles  ^ased  on  oral  inter- 
views: 

Sharecropper  Organizing 
UAW  Sitdown  Strike,  Atlanta,  1936 
Oral  History  of  Slavery 
East  Tennessee  Coal  Mining  Battles 
Gastonia  Textile  Strike,  1929 
Zora  Neale  Hurston:  A  Profile 
Knoxville  Race  Riot,  1919 
Vincent  Harding:  White.  Negro,  and 
Black  History 

"You're  doing  desperately  needed  work  in  recovering  lost  radical/labor  history 
'from  the  bottom  up'.  The  journal  is  so  good  that  it  serves  as  a  standing  example 


enclosed  is_ 
mail  to  P.O 

Bo> 

_for: 

one-year  subscriptions 

<?>  $8  per  year. 

copies  of  "No  More 

Moanin'"  (s>  $2.75 
230.  Chapel  Hill,  N.C.  27514 

address 

of  what  can  be  done.' 


-Martin  Duberman 


"The  single  most  important  periodical  that  examines  the  regional  and  national 
realities  behind  southern  people  and  southern  power." 

—Julian  Bond 


Critique  and  Commentary/19 


the  qualitative  leap 
beyond 
iriarchal  reli 


pa 


gion 


by  Mary  Daly 

The  writing  of  this  article  presents 
a  minor  dilemma.  I  do  not  wish  simply 
to  rewrite  ideas  which  I  have  presented 
elsewhere.  Yet  there  is  a  background, 
or  frame  of  reference,  or  context,  out 
of  which  the  present  article  is  written. 
To  resolve  this  I  am  setting  forth  in 
very  skeletal  form,  in  the  form  of  twen- 
ty-three statements,  a  context  dis- 
cussed at  length  in  a  number  of  arti- 
cles and  in  two  books.  1 

Prolegomena 

1.  There  exists  a  planetary  sexual 
caste  system,  essentially  the  same  in 
Saudi  Arabia  and  in  New  York,  differ- 
ing only  in  degree. 

2.  This  system  is  masked  by  sex 
role  segregation,  by  the  dual  identity 
of  women,  by  ideologies  and  myths. 

3.  Among  the  primary  loci  of  sexist 
conditioning  is  grammar. 

4.  The  "methods"  of  the  various 
"fields"  are  not  adequate  to  express 
feminist  thought.  Methodolatry  re- 
quires that  women  perform  Methodi- 
cide,  an  act  of  intellectual  bravery. 

5.  All  of  the  major  world  religions 


graphics  by  Leslie  Montgomery 

function  to  legitimate  patriarchy.  This 
is  true  also  of  the  popular  cults  such 
as  the  Krishna  movement  and  the  Jesus 
Freaks. 

6.  The  myths  and  symbols  of  Chris- 
tianity are  essentially  sexist.  Since 
"God"  is  male,  the  male  is  God.  God 
the  Father  legitimates  all  earthly  God- 
fathers, including  Vito  Corleone,  Pope 
Paul,  President  Gerald  Ford,  the  God- 
fathers of  medicine  (e.g.  the  American 
Medical  Association),  of  science  (e.g. 
NASA),  of  the  media,  of  psychiatry, 
of  education,  and  of  all  the  -ologies. 

7.  The  myth  of  feminine  evil,  ex- 
pressed in  the  story  of  the  Fall,  is 
reinforced  by  the  myth  of  salvation/ 
redemption  by  a  single  human  being 
of  the  male  sex.  The  idea  of  a  unique 
divine  incarnation  in  a  male,  the  God- 
man  of  the  "hypostatic  union,"  is 
inherently  sexist  and  oppressive.  Christ- 
olatry  is  idolatry. 

8.  A  significant  and  growing  cogni- 
tive minority  of  women,  radical  femi- 
nists, are  breaking  out  from  under  the 
sacred  shelter  of  patriarchal  religious 
myths. 

9.  This  breaking  out,  facing  anomy 


20/Quest,   vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


©     Mary  Daly  1975 


when  the  meaning  structures  of  patri- 
archy are  seen  through  and  rejected,  is 
a  communal,  political  event.  It  is  a 
revelatory  event,  a  creative,  political 
ontophany. 

10.  The  bonding  of  the  growing 
cognitive  minority  of  women  who 
are  radical  feminists,  commonly  called 
sisterhood,  involves  a  process  of  new 
naming,  in  which  words  are  wrenched 
out  of  their  old  semantic  context  and 
heard  in  a  new  semantic  context.  For 
example,  the  "sisterhoods"  of  patriar- 
chy, such  as  religious  congregations  of 
women,  were  really  mini-brotherhoods. 
Sisterhood  heard  with  new  ears  is  bond- 
ing for  women's  own  liberation. 

11.  There  is  an  inherent  dynamic  in 
the  women's  revolution  in  Judeo-Chris- 
tian  society  which  is  Antichurch,  whe- 
ther or  not  feminists  specifically  con- 
cern ourselves  with  churches.  This  is  so 
because  the  Judeo-Christian  tradition 
legitimates  patriarchy— the  prevailing 
power  structure  and  prevailing  world 
view-which  the  women's  revolution 
leaves  behind. 

12.  The  women's  revolution  is  not 
only  Antichurch.  It  is  a  postchristian 
spiritual  revolution. 

13.  The  ethos  of  Judeo-Christian 
culture  is  dominated  by  The  Most  Un- 
holy Trinity:  Rape,  Genocide,  and 
War.  It  is  rapism  which  spawns  racism. 
It  is  gynocide  which  spawns  genocide, 
for  sexism  (rapism)  is  fundamental 
socialization  to  objectify  "the  other." 

14.  The  women's  revolution  is  con- 
cerned with  transvaluation  of  values, 
beyond  the  ethics  dominated  by  The 
Most  Unholy  Trinity. 


15.  The  women's  revolution  is  not 
merely  about  equality  within  a  patriar- 
chal society  (a  contradiction  in  terms). 
It  is  about  power  and  redefining  pow- 
er. 

16.  Since  Christian  myths  are  inher- 
ently sexist,  and  since  the  women's 
revolution  is  not  about  "equality"  but 
about  power,  there  is  an  intrinsic 
dynamic  in  the  feminist  movement 
which  goes  beyond  efforts  to  reform 
Christian  churches.  Such  efforts  even- 
tually come  to  be  recognized  as  com- 
parable to  a  Black  person's  trying  to 
reform  the  Ku  Klux  Klan. 

17.  Within  patriarchy,  power  is  gen- 
erally understood  as  power  over  peo- 
ple, the  environment,  things.  In  the 
rising  consciousness  of  women,  power 
is  experienced  as  power  of  presence 
to  ourselves  and  to  each  other,  as  we 
affirm  our  own  being  against  and  be- 
yond the  alienated  identity  (non-being) 
bestowed  upon  us  within  patriarchy. 
This  is  experienced  as  power  of  ab- 
sence by  those  who  would  objectify 
women  as  "the  other,"  as  magnifying 
mirrors. 

18.  The  presence  of  women  to  our- 
selves which  is  absence  to  the  oppressor 
is  the  essential  dynamic  opening  up 
the  women's  revolution  to  human 
liberation.  It  is  an  invitation  to  men 
to  confront  non-being  and  hence  af- 
firm their  be-ing. 

19.  It  is  unlikely  that  many  men  will 
accept  this  invitation  willingly,  or  even 
be  able  to  hear  it,  since  they  have 
profound  vested  (though  self-destruc- 
tive) interest  in  the  present  social 
arrangements. 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/21 


20.  The  women's  movement  is  a  new 
mode  of  relating  to  the  self,  to  each 
other,  to  men,  to  the  environment-in 
a  word-to  the  cosmos.  It  is  self-affirm- 
ing, refusing  objectification  of  the  self 
and  of  the  other. 

21.  Entrance  into  new  feminist 
time/space,  which  is  moving  time/ 
space  located  on  the  boundaries  of 
patriarchal  institutions,  is  active  par- 
ticipation in  ultimate  reality,  which 
is  de-reified,  recognized  as  Verb,  as 
intransitive  Verb  with  no  object  to 
block  its  dynamism. 

22.  Entrance  into  radical  feminist 
consciousness  involves  recognition  that 
all  male-dominated  "revolutions," 
which  do  not  reject  the  universally 
oppressive  reality  which  is  patriarchy, 
are  in  reality  only  reforms.  They  are 
"revolutions"  only  in  the  sense  that 
they  are  spinnings  of  the  wheels  of  the 
same  senescent  system. 

23.  Entrance  into  radical  feminist 
consciousness  implies  an  awareness  that 
the  women's  revolution  is  the  "final 
cause"  (pun  intended)  in  the  radical 
sense  that  it  is  the  cause  which  can 
move  the  other  causes.  It  is  the  catalyst 
which  can  bring  about  real  change, 
since  it  is  the  rising  up  of  the  universally 
and  primordially  objectified  "Other," 
discrediting  the  myths  which  legitimate 
rapism.  Rapism  is  by  extension  the 
objectification  and  destruction  of  all 
"others"  and  inherently  tends  to  the 
destruction  of  the  human  species  and 
of  all  life  on  this  planet. 

Radical  feminism,  the  becoming  of 
women,  is  very  much  an  Otherworld 


Journey.  It  is  both  discovery  and  crea- 
tion of  a  world  other  than  patriarchy. 
Some  observation  reveals  that  patriar- 
chy is  "everywhere."  Even  outer  space 
and  the  future  have  been  colonized.  As 
a  rule,  even  the  more  imaginative 
science  fiction  writers  (seemingly  the 
most  foretelling  futurists)  cannot/will 
not  create  a  space  and  time  in  which 
women  get  far  beyond  the  role  of  space 
stewardess.  Nor  does  this  situation 
exist  simply  "outside"  women's  minds, 
securely  fastened  into  institutions 
which  we  can  physically  leave  behind. 
Rather,  it  is  also  internalized,  festering 
inside  women's  heads,  even  feminist 
heads. 

The  journey  of  women  becoming, 
then,  involves  exorcism  of  the  inter- 
nalized Godfather,  in  his  various  mani- 
festations (His  name  is  legion).  It  in- 
volves dangerous  encounters  with  these 
demons.  Within  the  Christian  tradition, 
particularly  in  medieval  times,  evil 
spirits  have  sometimes  been  associated 
with  the  Seven  Deadly  Sins,  both  as 
personifications  and  as  causes.  2  A 
"standard"  and  prevalent  listing  of 
the  Sins  is,  of  course,  the  following: 
pride,  avarice,  anger,  lust,  gluttony, 
envy,  and  sloth. 3  I  am  contending 
that  these  have  all  been  radically  mis- 
named, that  is,  inadequately  and  even 
perversely  "understood"  within  Chris- 
tianity. These  concepts  have  been  used 
to  victimize  the  oppressed,  particularly 
women.  They  are  particularized  expres- 
sions of  the  overall  use  of  "evil"  to 
victimize  women.  The  feminist  journey 
involves  confrontations  with  the  de- 
monic distortions  of  evil. 


22/Quest 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/ 23 


Why  has  it  seemed  "appropriate" 
in  this  culture  that  a  popular  book  and 
film  (The  Exorcist)  center  around  a 
Jesuit  who  "exorcises"  a  girl-child  who 
is  "possessed"?  Why  is  there  no  book 
or  film  about  a  woman  who  exorcises 
a  Jesuit?4  Within  a  culture  possessed 
by  the  myth  of  feminine  evil,  the  nam- 
ing, describing,  and  theorizing  about 
good  and  evil  has  constituted  a  web  of 
deception,  a  Maya.  The  journey  of 
women  becoming  is  breaking  through 
this  web-a  Fall  into  free  space.  It  is 
reassuming  the  role  of  subject,  as  op- 
posed to  object,  and  naming  good  and 
evil  on  the  basis  of  our  own  intuitive 
intellection. 

Breaking  through  the  web  of  the 
Male  Maya  is  both  exorcism  and  ecsta- 
sy. These  are  two  aspects  of  the  same 
journey.  Since  women  have  been  pro- 
hibited from  real  journeying,  that  is, 
from  encountering  the  strange,  the 
unknown,  the  women's  movement  is 
movement  into  uncharted  territory. 
The  process  involves  removal  of  the 
veils  which  prevent  confrontation  with 
the  unknown.  Let  it  be  noted  that 
"journey"  is  a  multidimensional  word 
and  that  the  various  meanings  and 
images  conjured  up  by  the  word  are 
not  sharply  distinguishable.  One  thinks 
of  mystical  journeys,  quests,  adven- 
turous travel,  advancement  in  skills, 
in  sports,  in  intellectual  probing,  in 
psychological  integration  and  trans- 
formation. So  also  the  "veils,"  the 
insulations  against  the  unknown  im- 
posed upon  women  by  male  mediators, 
are  multidimensional  and  intertwined. 
The  veils  are  woven  of  religious  myths 


(for  example,  the  myth  of  the  "good 
woman,"  the  Virgin  Mother  who  has 
only  a  Son,  not  a  Daughter),  legal 
restrictions,  social  customs,  medical 
and  psychoanalytic  ideologies  and  prac- 
tices, academic  restrictions  (with- 
holding of  access  to  "higher"  educa- 
tion, to  certain  professions),  gramma- 
tical conditioning  ("he"  supposedly 
includes  "she"),  economic  limitations. 
The  very  process  of  exorcism,  of  cast- 
ing off  the  blinding  veils,  is  movement 
outside  the  patriarchally  imposed  sense 
of  reality  and  identity.  This  demystifi- 
cation  process,  standing/moving  out- 
side The  Lie,  is  ecstasy. 

The  process  of  encountering  the  un- 
known, of  overcoming  the  "protection" 
racket,  also  involves  a  continual  con- 
version of  the  previously  unknown  into 
the  familiar. 5  This  requires  the  use  of 
tools  and  instruments  now  in  the  pos- 
session of  women's  captors.  Amazon 
expeditions  into  the  male-controlled 
"fields"  such  as  law,  medicine,  psy- 
chology, philosophy,  theology,  litera- 
ture, history,  sociology,  biology,  and 
physics,  are  necessary  in  order  to  leave 
the  Fathers'  cave  and  live  in  the  sun.  A 
crucial  problem  has  been  to  learn  how 
to  plunder  righteously  while  avoiding 
being  caught  too  long  in  the  cave.  In 
universities,  and  in  virtually  all  of  the 
professions,  there  are  poisonous  gases 
which  are  almost  invisible  and  odor- 
less, and  which  gradually  stifle  wom- 
en's minds  and  spirits.  Those  who  car- 
ry out  the  necessary  expeditions  run 
the  risk  of  shrinking  into  the  mold  of 
the  mystified  Athena,  the  twice-born 
who  forgets  and  denies  her  Mother  and 


24/Quest 


Sisters.  "Reborn"  from  the  Father, 
she  becomes  Daddy's  Girl,  the  mutant 
who  serves  the  master's  purposes.  The 
token  woman,  who  in  reality  is  en- 
chained, possessed,  "knows"  that  she 
is  free.  She  is  a  useful  tool  of  the  patri- 
archs, particularly  against  her  sister 
Artemis  who  knows  better,  respects 
her  womanself,  bonds  with  her  sis- 
ters, and  refuses  to  sell  her  freedom, 
her  original  birthright,  for  a  mess  of 
respectability. 

Exorcism,  Processions,  and 
Remythologization 

What  clues  can  we  find  concerning 
the  "nature"  and  direction  of  the 
Other-world  journey  of  radically  femi- 
nist (i.e.  conscious)  women?  Some  im- 
portant hints  can  be  discovered  in 
Three  Guineas,  an  astonishing  book 
published  in  the  1930s  by  a  prophetic 
foremother.  In  that  book  Virginia 
Woolf  links  processions  (e.g.  academic, 
churchly,  military,  judicial)  with  pro- 
fessions and  processions.  She  asks: 
What  are  these  ceremonies  and  why 
should  we  take  part  in  them?  What 
are  these  professions  and  why  should 
we  make  money  out  of  them?  Where, 
in  short,  is  it  leading  us,  the  procession 
of  the  sons  of  educated  men?0 

Clearly,  they  are  leading  us  to  de- 
struction of  the  human  species  and  of 
the  planet.  The  rigid,  stylized,  hier- 
archical, gynocidal  and  genocidal  pro- 
cessions of  male-controlled  professions 
-of  church,  state,  university,  army- 
are  all  intimately  interconnected.  These 
processions  capture  and  reify  process. 


They  are  deadly.  It  is  important  to 
understand  them  in  order  to  under- 
stand what  feminist  process/journey- 
ing is  not. 

Patriarchal  processions  both  gen- 
erate and  reflect  the  archetypal  image 
of  "procession"  from  and  return  to 
God  the  Father.  In  Christian  myth,  this 
is  a  cyclic  pattern:  separation  and  re- 
turn. Christians  participate  in  the  pro- 
cession-they  join  the  parade-through 
Baptism,  which  explicitly  contains  a 
rite  of  exorcism.  This  mythic  symbolic 
procession  toward  "God,"  then,  be- 
gins with  belief  in  possession  by  evil 
forces  ("possession"  technically  in  a 
broad  sense,  of  course),  release  from 
which  requires  captivity  by  the  church. 
What  is  ultimately  sought  is  reconcilia- 
tion with  the  Father. 

Clearly,  the  ultimate  symbol  of 
"procession"  is  the  All  Male  Trinity 
itself.  In  various  abstruse  ways  theolo- 
gians have  elaborated  upon  the  "mys- 
tery," or  as  some  would  say,  the  "sym- 
bol," of  the  Trinity.  What  is  of  great 
significance  here  is  the  fact  that  this  is 
a  myth  of  Father  and  Son  (no  Mother 
or  Daughter  involved)  in  total  unity, 
so  total  that  this  "love"  is  expressed 
by  the  Third  Person,  the  Holy  Spirit. 
This  is  the  epitome  of  male  bonding, 
beyond  the  wildest  dreams  of  Lionel 
Tiger.  It  is  (almost?)  erotic  male  homo- 
sexual mythos,  the  perfect  All  Male 
Marriage,  the  All  Male  Divine  Family. 
It  is  asymmetric  patriarchy  carried  to 
the  sublime  absurdity  of  contradiction, 
christened  "mystery."  To  the  timid  ob- 
jections sometimes  voiced  by  Christian 
women,   the   classic   answer  has  been: 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/25 


"You're  included.  The  Holy  Spirit  is 
feminine."  The  conclusion  of  this  ab- 
surd logic  arrives  quickly  if  one  asks: 
How  then,  did  "he"  impregnate  the 
Virgin  Mary? 

Mere  human  males,  of  course,  can- 
not fully  identify  with  the  divine  Son. 
Perfect  consubstantiality  with  the  Fa- 
ther, therefore,  cannot  be  achieved. 
The  earthly  processions  of  the  sons  of 
men  have  as  their  basic  paradigm  an 
attempted  identification  with  the  Fa- 
ther. (God  the  Father,  the  Godfather, 
the  Oedipal  Father).  The  junior  states- 
man dreams  of  becoming  The  President. 
The  academic  junior  scholar  (disciple) 
dreams  of  becoming  The  Professor 
(Master).  The  acolyte  dreams  of  be- 
coming The  Priest.  And,  as  Woolf  recog- 
nized, the  death-oriented  military  pro- 
cessions reveal  the  real  direction  of 
the  whole  scenario,  which  is  a  funeral 
procession  of  the  human  species.  God 
the  Father  requires  human  sacrifice. 

Women  becoming  must  indeed  recog- 
nize the  fact  of  having  been  possessed 
by  the  structures  of  evil.  However,  the 
solution  is  not  "rebirth"  or  Baptism 
by  the  Father's  surrogates,  for  it  is 
this  socialized  "rebirth"  which  is  the 
captivity  from  which  we  are  trying  to 
escape.  Radical  feminism  is  not  recon- 
ciliation with  the  Father.  It  begins 
with  saying  "No"  to  the  Father,  who 
attempts  to  eradicate  our  Mother  and 
to  transform  us  into  mutants  by  forc- 
ing "rebirth"  (whether  from  the  head 
of  Zeus  or  from  the  rib  of  Adam  or 
from  baptismal  "grace").  More  than 
this:  radical  feminism  means  saying 
"Yes"  to  our  original  birth,  the  original 


movement-surge  toward  life.  This  is 
both  a  remembering  and  a  rediscover- 
ing. Athena  remembers  and  rediscovers 
her  Mother.  That  which  is  generated 
between  us  is  Sisterhood.  We  are  then 
no  longer  confined  by  our  identities 
as  "Mother"  or  "Daughter."  The  Daugh- 
ter is  not  obedient  to  the  Mother  "un- 
to death."  The  Mother  does  not  send 
her  forth  to  be  crucified  for  the  sins 
of  women  or  of  men.  Rather,  they  go 
forth  as  Sisters.  Radical  feminism  re- 
leases the  inherent  dynamic  in  the 
Mother-Daughter  relationship  toward 
Sisterhood,  which  is  thwarted  within 
the  Male-mastered  system.  The  Mother 
does  not  demand  self-sacrifice  of  the 
Daughter.  Rather,  both  demand  of 
each  other  affirmation  of  the  self  and 
of  each  other  in  an  on-going  personal/ 
political  process  which  is  mythic  in  its 
depths-which  is  both  exorcising  and 
remythologizing  process.  The  "sacri- 
fice" that  is  required  is  not  mutilation 
at  the  hands  of  men,  but  rather  the 
discipline  needed  for  action  together, 
for  self-defense  and  self-actualization 
on  a  planet  dominated  by  the  Reign  of 
Terror  which  is  the  Reign  of  the  God- 
fathers. It  is  important  that  we  con- 
sider the  actual  conditions  of  this  ter- 
rain through  which  we  must  make  our 
journey. 

The  Land  of  the  Fathers 

As  Phyllis  Chesler  has  pointed  out, 
the  story  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  impreg- 
nated by  God  to  bring  forth  his  only 
Son,  is  classic  patriarchal  rape-incest 
myth.    The    Madonna    has    no    Divine 


26/Quest 


Daughter.  Moreover,  as  the  same  auth- 
or perceptively  says,  she  foregoes  sex- 
ual pleasure,  physical  prowess,  and 
economic  and  intellectual  power  in 
order  to  become  a  "mother"  for  her 
"divine"  son. '  And  this  is  the  primary 
role-model  for  women  in  our  culture. 
This  is  the  life  that  women  are  con- 
demned to  live  out-an  alienation  which 
is  personal,  social,  mythic-and  which 
is  all  the  deeper  because  unrecognized, 
unacknowledged. 

In  a  society  in  which  women  are  in 

fact    robbed   of   physical   prowess,   of 

economic  and   intellectual   power,  we 

live  in  a  State   of  Siege. 8   As  Jeanne 

Lafferty  and  Evelyn  Clark  wrote: 

Every  female  person  knows  the 

humiliation   of  being  constantly 

harassed  and  solicited  by  males. 


Having    her    person     talked    at, 
whistled    at,    yelled    at,   grunted 
at,  hooted  and  howled  at,  visu- 
ally dismembered  or  stared  and 
winked  at  by  males  everywhere- 
on  the  street,  at  work,  at  school, 
at  home-everywhere.  9 
This  is  the  very  real  condition  of  wom- 
en in  a  rapist  society.  Moreover,   the 
dismemberment    is    not    always    only 
visual.  Male  fetishism  concerning  wom- 
en's bodies,  the  cutting  into  objectified 
parts   which  is   the   prime  material  of 
advertising   and    pornography,    has    as 
its    logical    outcome    the    brutal   rape 
murders  and   actual  physical  dismem- 
berments which   take  place  in  such  a 
society.  In  a  world  ruled  by  God  the 
Father  this  is  not  considered  a  serious 
problem.     A    feminist    author    wrote: 


'48!  > 


.<   V 


l) 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/27 


"Rape  is  too  personal  and  too  terrible 
a  crime  to  be  left  to  the  punishment  of 
indifferent  male  law."10 

In  a  society  possessed  by  the  sexual 
caste  system,  that  is,  in  a  rapist  society, 
there  is  a  deep  struggle  on  the  part  of 
those  designated  "victims"  to  cast  out 
the  deception  that  warps  the  soul.  The 
deception  inflicted  upon  women  is  a 
kind  of  mindbinding  comparable  to 
the  footbinding  procedure  which  muti- 
lated millions  of  Chinese  women  for  a 
thousand  years.  **  Just  as  footbinding 
destroyed  the  capacity  for  physical 
movement-walking,  running,  dancing- 
mindbinding  damages  the  capacity  for 
autonomous  creativity,  action,  think- 
ing, imagining,  willing.  Stripping  away 
the  mindbindings  of  lies  that  reduce 
women  to  the  status  of  physical,  men- 
tal, and  spiritual  rapes  is  the  basic 
loving  act  in  such  a  society. 

The  Qualitative  Leap 

Creative,  living,  political  hope  for 
movement  beyond  the  gynocidal  reign 
of  the  Fathers  will  be  fulfilled  only  if 
women  continue  to  make  qualitative 
leaps  in  living  our  transcendence.  A 
short-circuited  hope  of  transcendence 
has  caused  many  to  remain  inside 
churches,  and  patriarchal  religion  some- 
times has  seemed  to  satisfy  the  hunger 
for  transcendence.  The  problem  has 
been  that  both  the  hunger  and  the  sat- 
isfaction generated  within  such  reli- 
gions have  to  a  great  extent  alienated 
women  from  our  deepest  aspirations. 
Spinning  in  vicious  circles  of  false 
needs  and  false  consciousness,  women 


caught  on  the  patriarchal  wheel  have 
not  been  able  to  experience  women's 
own  experience. 

I  suggest  that  what  is  required  is 
ludic  cerebration,  the  free  play  of  in- 
tuition in  our  own  space,  giving  rise  to 
thinking  that  is  vigorous,  informed, 
multi-dimensional,  independent,  crea- 
tive, tough.  Ludic  cerebration  is  think- 
ing out  of  experience.  I  do  not  mean 
the  experience  of  dredging  out  All 
That  Was  Wrong  with  Mother,  or  of 
instant  intimacy  in  group  encounters, 
or  of  waiting  at  the  doctoral  dispen- 
sary, or  of  self-lobotomization  in  order 
to  publish,  perish,  and  then  be  pro- 
moted. I  mean  the  experience  of  be- 
ing. Be-ing  is  the  verb  that  says  the 
dimensions  of  depth  in  all  verbs,  such 
as  intuiting,  reasoning,  loving,  imaging, 
making,  acting,  as  well  as  the  couraging, 
hoping,  and  playing  that  are  always 
there  when  one  is  really  living. 

It  may  be  that  some  new  things 
happen  within  patriarchy,  but  one 
thing  essentially  stays  the  same:  wom- 
en are  always  marginal  beings.  From 
this  vantage  point  of  the  margin  it  is 
possible  to  look  at  what  is  between 
the  margins  with  the  lucidity  of  The 
Compleat  Outsider.  To  change  meta- 
phors: the  systems  within  the  System 
do  not  appear  so  radically  different 
from  each  other  to  those  excluded  by 
all.  Hope  for  a  qualitative  leap  lies  in 
us  by  reason  of  that  deviance  from 
the  "norm"  which  was  first  imposed 
but  which  can  also  be  chosen  on  our 
own  terms.  This  means  that  there  has 
to  be  a  shift  from  "acceptable"  female 
deviance    (characterized    by    triviality, 


2S/Quest 


diffuseness,  dependence  upon  others 
for  self-definition,  low  self-esteem, 
powerlessness)  to  deviance  which  may 
be  unacceptable  to  others  but  which 
is  acceptable  to  the  self  and  is  self- 
acceptance. 

For  women  concerned  with  philo- 
sophical/theological questions,  it  seems 
to  me,  this  implies  the  necessity  of 
some  sort  of  choice.  One  either  tries 
to  avoid  "acceptable"  deviance  ("nor- 
mal" female  idiocy)  by  becoming  ac- 
cepted as  a  male-identified  profession- 
al, or  else  one  tries  to  make  the  quali- 
tative leap  toward  self-acceptable  devi- 
ance as  ludic  cerebrator,  questioner 
of  everything,  madwoman,  and  witch. 

I  do  mean  witch.  The  heretic  who 
rejects  the  idols  of  patriarchy  is  the 
blasphemous  creatrix  of  her  own 
thoughts.  She  is  finding  her  life  and 
intends  not  to  lose  it.  The  witch  that 
smolders  within  every  woman  who 
cared  and  dared  enough  to  become  a 
philosophically/spiritually  questing  fem- 
inist in  the  first  place  seems  to  be  cry- 
ing out  these  days:  "Light  my  fire!" 
The  qualitative  leap,  the  light  of  those 
flames  of  spiritual  imagination  and 
cerebral  fantasy  can  be  a  new  dawn. 

On  "Androgyny" 

Feminists  have  searched  for  a  word 
to  express  the  concept/reality  of  psy- 
chic wholeness,  of  integration,  which 
we  are  just  beginning  to  glimpse  in- 
tuitively, experientially,  as  realizable. 
In  this  search  for  the  right  word  we 
have  experienced  the  poverty  of  the 
language    bequeathed    to    us,    and    we 


have  recognized  the  manner  in  which 
it  constricts  and  even  distorts  our 
thought.  In  my  book  Beyond  God  the 
Father,  I  frequently  use  the  word 
"androgyny"  to  express  this  intuition 
and  incipient  experience  of  wholeness, 
which  transcends  sex-role  stereotyping 
-the  societally  imposed  "eternal  femi- 
nine" and  "eternal  masculine."  Femi- 
nist ethicist  Janice  Raymond  has  writ- 
ten perceptively  of  an  "intuition  of 
androgyny"  as  identical  with  the  in- 
tuition of  being.  12  Two  young  theolo- 
gians, graduates  of  Harvard  Divinity 
School,  used  the  term  to  convey  a 
feminist  understanding  of  wholeness  in 
a  much  discussed  jointly  published 
article.  13  Feminist  poet  Adrienne  Rich 
used  the  word  in  her  poem  The  Strang- 
er, which  concludes  with  the  following 
lines: 

/  am  the  androgyne 

I  am  the  living  mind  you  fail  to 
describe 

in  your  dead  language 

the  lost  noun,  the  verb  surviving 

only  in  the  infinitive 

the  letters  of  my  name  are  written 
under  the  lids 

of  the  newborn  child.  1 4 

All  of  these  authors  now  experience 
some  hesitancy  about  using  the  word 
"androgyny"  to  express  our  vision(s). 
This  hesitancy  is  at  least  in  part  due  to 
an  increasing  understanding  of  the 
political  use  and  abuse  of  language. 
This  increased  sophistication  has  re- 
sulted from  some  distressing  misinter- 
pretations of  the  word. 

In  speaking  to  audiences,  I  have 
sometimes    had    the    impression    that 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/29 


people  hearing  this  term  vaguely  en- 
visage two  distorted  halves  of  a  human 
being  stuck  together-something  like 
John  Wayne  and  Brigitte  Bardot  scotch- 
taped  together— as  if  two  distorted 
"halves"  could  make  a  whole.  That  is, 
there  is  a  kind  of  reification  of  whole- 
ness, instead  of  recognition  that  what 
is  being  described  is  continual  process. 
This  non-understanding  of  "androgy- 
ny," which  feminists  have  used  when 
attempting  to  describe  the  process  of 
integration,  is  also  reflected  in  the 
assumption  on  the  part  of  some  wom- 
en (and  men)  that  a  woman  who  is 
successful  in  a  career  on  male  terms 
(for  example,  a  successful  business 
executive)  and  at  the  same  time  a  mod- 
el housewife  has  achieved  "androgyny." 
In  fact,  this  career  housewife  as  de- 
scribed fails  to  criticize  radically  either 
the  "masculine"  or  the  "feminine" 
roles/worlds.  She  simply  compartmen- 
talizes h/er  personality  in  order  to  func- 
tion within  both,  instead  of  recog- 
nizing/rejecting/transcending the  in- 
herent oppressiveness  of  such  institu- 
tions as  big  business  and  the  nuclear 
family. 

When  one  becomes  conscious  of 
the  political  usages  of  language,  she 
recognizes  also  that  the  term  "andro- 
gyny" is  adaptable  to  such  mystifying 
usage  as  the  expression  "human  libera- 
tion" has  been  subjected  to.  That  is, 
it  can  easily  be  used  to  deflect  atten- 
tion from  the  fact  that  women  and 
men    at   this   point  in   history   cannot 

Is  this  the  end  of  your  Quest? 
Renew  yourself! 


simply  "get  together  and  work  it  out," 
ignoring  the  profound  differences  in 
socialization  and  situation  within  the 
sexual  caste  system.  Both  "androgyny" 
and  "human  liberation"  function  fre- 
quently to  encourage  false  transcen- 
dence, masking-even  though  uninten- 
tionally-the  specific  content  of  the  op- 
pression of  women,  and  suggesting 
that  wholeness  depends  upon  identifi- 
cation with  men.  Some  of  us  do  still 
use  the  term  "androgyny,"  of  course, 
but  less  frequently,  more  circumspect- 
ly, and  with  some  apprehension  that 
we  will  be  misunderstood. 

Some  feminists  began  to  feel  some- 
what less  comfortable  with  the  word 
"androgyny"  when  the  implications 
of  a  small  terse  fact  surfaced  to  con- 
sciousness. That  fact  is  etymological: 
the  first  part  of  the  word  obviously  is 
derived  from  the  Greek  aner,  andros 
(man),  while  the  second  part  is  from 
gyne  (woman).  This,  of  course,  carries 
its  own  message.  A  first  reaction  was 
to  employ  the  word  "gynandry," 
which,  from  the  perspective  of  wom- 
en's becoming,  is  more  appropriate. 
But  it  soon  became  evident  that  the 
priority  problem  in  the  etymology  of 
the  word  was  really  symptomatic  of 
deeper  problems. 

In  fact,  the  term  "androgyny" 
comes  to  us  heavily  fraught  with  tra- 
ditional associations,  that  is,  associa- 
tions of  male-centered  tradition(s). 
The  image  conveyed  by  the  word  is 
that  of  a  "feminized"  male.  This  fact 
has  been  brought  home  to  me  in  pub- 
lic discussions  with  male  Christian 
theologians  who,  confronted  with  the 


30/Quest 


problem  of  the  inherent  oppressiveness 
of  Christolatry,  have  responded  earnest- 
ly that  there  really  is  no  problem  since 
"Jesus  was  androgynous."  Whatever 
this  may  mean,  it  has  little  relevance  to 
the    problem    of    women's    becoming 


now,  and  in  fact  it  distracts  from  the 
real  issues  confronting  us.  Dressing  up 
old  symbols  just  will  not  work  for  wom- 
en who  are  conscious  of  sexist  re- 
ligiosity. 

"Gynandry"  helps  to  shift  images 
away  from  the  traditional  biases,  but 
only  to  a  limited  degree.  Placing  the 
female  part  of  the  word  first  does  not 
dissolve  the  inherent  dependency  of 
the  word  itself  upon  stereotypes  in 
order  that  there  be  any  meaningful 
content  at  all.  To  put  it  another  way, 
in  an  "androgynous"  or  "gynandrous" 
society  it  would  be  senseless  to  speak 
of  "androgyny"  or  "gynandry"  since 
people  would  have  no  idea  of  the  sex- 
stereotyped  characteristics  and/or  roles 
referred  to  by  the  components  of  the 
terms.  Use  of  these  terms  at  this  point 
in  history  is  dysfunctional  to  the  ex- 
tent that  it  encourages  on  some  level 
a  perpetuation  of  stereotypes  (as  is 
the  case  with  Jungian  ideology  of  the 
"anima"  and  "animus").  "Gynandry" 
or  "androgyny"  can  function  in  a  liber- 
ating way  if  they  are  seen  as  "transi- 
tional" words,  or,  more  precisely,  as 
self-liquidating    words.     They     should 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/31 


be    understood    as    having    a    built-in 
planned  obsolescence.  15 

Wanted:  "God"  or 
"The  Goddess"? 

Feminist  consciousness  is  experienc- 
ed by  a  significant  number  of  women 
as  ontological  becoming,  that  is,  be- 
ing. This  process  requires  existential 
courage,  courage  to  be  and  to  see, 
which  is  both  revolutionary  and  revela- 
tory, revealing  our  participation  in 
ultimate  reality  as  Verb,  as  intransitive 
Verb. 

The  question  obviously  arises  of 
the  need  for  anthropomorphic  sym- 
bols for  this  reality.  There  is  no  inher- 
ent contradiction  between  speaking  of 
ultimate  reality  as  Verb  and  speaking 
of  this  as  personal.  The  Verb  is  more 
personal  than  a  mere  static  noun.  How- 
ever, if  we  choose  to  image  the  Verb  in 
anthropomorphic  symbols,  we  can  run 
into  a  problematic  phenomenon  which 
sociologist  Henri  Desroche  calls  "cross- 
ing." "Crossing"  refers  to  a  notable 
tendency  among  oppressed  groups  to 
attempt  to  change  or  adapt  the  ideo- 
logical tools  of  the  oppressor,  so  that 
they  can  be  used  against  him  and  for 
the  oppressed.  The  problem  here  is 
the  fact  that  the  functioning  of  "cross- 
ing" does  not  generally  move  far  e- 
nough  outside  the  ideological  frame- 
work it  seeks  to  undermine.  In  the 
"Black  theology"  of  James  Cone,  for 
example,  we  find  a  Black  God  and  a 
Black  Messiah,  but  this  pigmentation 
operation  does  not  significantly  alter 
the  behavior  of  Jahweh  &  Son.  Cone's 


Black  God  is  as  revengeful  and  sexist 
as  his  White  prototype.  For  feminist 
eyes  it  is  clear  that  this  God  is  at  least 
as  oppressive  as  the  old  (for  black  wom- 
en as  well  as  for  white  women).  The 
message  in  the  alteration  of  symbol  is 
simply  about  which  male-ruled  racial 
group  will  be  on  top  and  which  will  be 
on  the  bottom.  The  basic  presupposi- 
tion of  hierarchy  remains  unaltered: 
that  is,  the  presupposition  that  there 
must  be  an  "us"  or  a  "them"  on  top, 
and  a  corresponding  "them"  or  "us" 
on  the  bottom. 

Some  women  religious  leaders  with- 
in Western  culture  in  modern  times 
have  performed  something  like  a 
"crossing"  operation,  notably  such  fig- 
ures as  Mary  Baker  Eddy  and  Ann 
Lee,  in  stressing  the  "maternal"  aspect 
of  the  divinity.  The  result  has  been 
mixed.  Eddy's  "Father-Mother  God" 
is,  after  all,  the  Christian  God.  Nor 
does  Ann  Lee  really  move  completely 
outside  the  Christian  framework.  It  is 
interesting  that  their  writings  lack  the 
thirst  for  vengeance  that  characterizes 
Cone's  all  too  Christian  Black  theology, 
which  is  certainly  in  their  favor.  But 
it  is  also  necessary  to  note  that  their 
theologies  lack  explicit  relevance  to 
the  concrete  problems  of  the  oppres- 
sion of  women.  Intellection  and  spirit- 
uality remain  cut  off  from  creative 
political  movement.  In  earlier  periods 
also  there  were  women  within  the 
Christian  tradition  who  tried  to  "cross" 
the  Christian  all-male  God  and  Christ 


/s  your  Quest  at  an  end?  Renew 
yourself! 


32/Quest 


to  some  degree.  An  outstanding  exam- 
ple was  Juliana  of  Norwich,  an  English 
recluse  and  mystic  who  lived  in  the 
last  half  of  the  fourteenth  century.  Ju- 
liana's "God"  and  "Jesus"  were-if 
language  conveys  anything— hermaphro- 
ditic constructs,  with  the  primary  iden- 
tity clearly  male.  While  there  are  many 
levels  on  which  I  could  analyze  Juli- 
iana's  words  about  "our  beloved  Moth- 
er, Jesus,  (who)  feeds  us  with  him- 
self,"! 6  suffice  it  to  say  here  that  this 
hermaphroditic  image  is  somewhat  less 
than  attractive.  The  "androgynous" 
God  and  Jesus  present  problems  anal- 
ogous to  and  related  to  those  problems 
which  occur  in  connection  with  the 
use   of  the   term   "androgyny"  to  de- 


scribe the  direction  of  women's  be- 
coming. There  is  something  like  a 
"liberation  of  the  woman  within"  the 
(primarily  male)  God  and  Jesus. 

Indeed,  it  is  harder  to  perform  a 
transsexual  operation  on  the  Judeo- 
Christian  divinity  than  a  mere  pigmen- 
tation operation.  This  is  one  reason, 
no  doubt,  why  Cone  is  able  to  achieve 
a  purely  Black  God  and  Black  Messiah, 
rather  than  a  Mulatto,  whereas  the 
Christian  women  mentioned  brought 
forth  hermaphrodites,  with  emphasis 
upon  maleness.  Indeed,  they  did  some- 
thing on  the  symbolic  level  which  is 
analogous  to  "liberating  the  woman 
within  the  man."  Since  they  went  only 
this  far,  they  accomplished  little  or 
nothing,  in  social  or  mythic  terms, 
toward  the  genuine  liberation  of  wom- 
en. 

One  fact  that  stands  out  here  is 
that  these  were  women  whose  ima- 
ginations were  still  partially  control- 
led by  Christian  myth.  My  contention 
is  that  they  were  caught  in  a  contradic- 
tion (which  is  not  the  case  in  the 
work  of  Black  male  theologians).  I  am 
saying  that  there  is  a  profound  contra- 
diction between  the  inherent  logic  of 
radical  feminism  and  the  inherent  logic 
of  the  Christian  symbol  system.  I 
would  not  have  said  this  ten  years  ago, 
at  the  time  of  writing  the  original 
edition  of  The  Church  and  the  Second 
Sex,  which  expressed  hope  for  reform 
of  Christianity  in  general  and  Roman 
Catholicism  in  particular.  Nor  would 
some  women  today  say  this-women 
who  still  perceive  their  identity  as 
both  Christian  and  feminist. 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/33 


Both  the  reformers  and  those  who 
leave  Judaism  and  Christianity  behind 
are  contributing  and  will  contribute  in 
different  ways  to  the  process  of  the 
becoming  of  women.  The  point  here  is 
not  to  place  value  judgments  upon  in- 
dividual persons  and  their  efforts— and 
there  are  heroic  efforts  at  all  points  of 
the  feminist  spectrum.  Rather,  it  is  to 
disclose  an  inherent  logic  in  feminism. 
The  courage  which  some  women  have 
in  affirming  this  logic  comes  in  part 
from  having  been  on  the  feminist 
journey  for  quite  awhile.  Encourage- 
ment comes  also  from  knowing  increas- 
ing numbers  of  women  who  have  cho- 
sen the  route  of  the  logical  conclusion. 
Some  of  these  women  have  "graduat- 
ed" from  Christianity  or  religious  Ju- 
daism, and  some  have  never  even  been 
associated  closely  with  church  or  syna- 
gogue, but  have  discovered  spiritual 
and  mythic  depths  in  the  women's 
movement  itself.  What  we  share  is  a 
sense  of  becoming  in  cosmic  process, 
which  I  prefer  to  call  the  Verb,  Be-ing, 
and  which  some  would  still  call  "God." 

For  some  feminists  concerned  with 
the  spiritual  depth  of  the  movement, 
the  word  "God"  is  becoming  increas- 
ingly problematic,  however.  This  by 
no  means  indicates  a  movement  in  the 
direction  of  "atheism"  or  "agnosticism" 
or  "secularism,"  as  these  terms  are 
usually  understood.  Rather,  the  prob- 
lem arises  precisely  because  of  the 
spiritual  and  mythic  quality  perceived 
in  feminist  process  itself.  Some  use 
expressions  such  as  "power  of  being." 
Some  reluctantly  still  use  the  word 
"God"  while  earnestly  trying  to  divest 


the  term  of  its  patriarchal  associations, 
attempting  to  think  perhaps  of  the 
"God  of  the  philosophers"  rather  than 
the  overtly  masculist  and  oppressive 
"God  of  the  theologians."  But  the 
problem  becomes  increasingly  trouble- 
some, the  more  the  "God"  of  the 
various  Western  philosophers  is  sub- 
jected to  feminist  analysis.  "He"— 
"Jahweh"  still  often  hovers  behind  the 
abstractions,  stunting  our  own  thought, 
giving  us  a  sense  of  contrived  double- 
think. The  word  "God"  just  may  be 
inherently  oppressive. 

Indeed,  the  word  "Goddess"  has 
also  been  problematic,  but  for  different 
reasons.  Some  have  been  worried  a- 
bout  the  problem  of  "crossing."  How- 
ever, that  difficulty  appears  more  and 
more  as  a  pseudo-difficulty  when  it  is 
recognized  that  "crossing"  is  likely  to 
occur  only  when  one  is  trying  to  work 
within  a  sexist  tradition.  For  example, 
Christian  women  who  in  their  "femi- 
nist liturgies"  experiment  with  refer- 
ring to  "God"  as  "she"  and  to  the  Trin- 
ity as  "The  Mother,  the  Daughter,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit,"  are  still  working  with- 
in all  the  boundaries  of  the  same  sym- 
bolic framework  and  the  same  power 
structure.  Significantly,  their  services 
are  at  the  same  plc:e  and  time  as  "the 
usual,"  and  are  regarded  by  most  of  the 
constituency  of  the  churches  as  occa- 
sional variations  of  "business  as  usual." 

As  women  who  are  outside  the 
Christian  church  inform  ourselves  of 
evidence  supporting  the  existence  of 
ancient  matriarchy  and  of  evidence 
indicating  that  the  Gods  of  patriarchy 
are   indeed  contrived,  pale  derivatives 


34/Quest 


and  reversals  of  the  Great  Goddess  of 
an  earlier  period,  the  fear  of  mere 
"crossing"  appears  less  appropriate  and 
perhaps  even  absurd.  There  is  also  less 
credibility  allowable  to  the  notion  that 
"Goddess"  would  function  like  "God" 
in  reverse,  that  is,  to  legitimate  an  op- 
pressive "female-dominated"  society, 
if  one  is  inclined  to  look  seriously  at 
evidence  that  matriarchal  society  was 
not  structured  like  patriarchy,  that  it 
was  non-hierarchical.  17 

Would  "Goddess"  be  likely  to  func- 
tion oppressively,  like  "God"?  Given 
the  present  situation  of  women,  the 
danger  is  not  imminent.  "Would  it  func- 
tion that  way  in  the  future?"  My  in- 
clination is  to  think  not,  but  it  is  not 
my  intention  to  attempt  to  "prove" 
this  point  at  this  time.  The  question 
has  a  quality  of  "abstraction"  and 
remoteness  from  the  present  social 
realities  and  it  is,  it  seems  to  me, 
diversionary.  When  it  is  raised,  and  it  is 
usually  raised  by  men,  one  senses  an 
"atmosphere"  about  the  question,  an 
aroma  of  masculine  hysteria,  a  fear  of 
invading  hordes  of  "matriarchs"  (read: 
female  patriarchs)  taking  over  The 
Man's  world. 

There  are,  however,  two  points  con- 
cerning the  symbol  "Goddess"  which 
I  think  are  relevant  to  the  existing 
situation.  First,  it  can  at  the  very  least 
be  pointed  out  that  whenever  the 
pendulum  has  swung  extremely  in  one 
direction  (and  it  has-iov  millennia), 
it  is  psychologically/socially/ethically 
important  to  emphasize  "the  other 
side."  The  hermaphroditic  image  hard- 
ly seems  satisfactory  for  anyone.  For 


an  increasing  minority  of  women-and 
even  for  some  men!8_"Goddess"  is 
becoming  more  functional,  meaningful, 
and  loaded  with  healing  associations. 
As  this  minority  grows,  Western  society 
will  be  shaken  by  the  presence  of 
gynarchic  symbolism  in  a  new  and  po- 
tent way.  It  should  be  noted  that  wom- 
en are  inclined  to  speak  and  write  of 
"The  Goddess,"  whereas  one  seldom 
says  "The  God."  In  our  culture  it  has 
been  assumed  that  "goddesses"  are 
many  and  trivial,  whereas  the  "real" 
divinity  is  "God,"  who  does  not  even 
require  the  definite  article.  The  use  of 
the  expression,  "The  Goddess,"  is  a 
way  of  confronting  this  trivialization, 
of  exorcising  the  male  "God,"  and 
of  affirming  a  different  myth/reality. 

A  second,  and  related,  point  has  to 
do  with  the  fact  that  the  "self-tran- 
scending immanence,"  the  sense  of 
giving  birth  to  ourselves,  the  sense  of 
power  of  being  within,  which  is  bein  g 
affirmed  by  many  women,  does  not 
seem  to  be  denoted,  imaged,  ade- 
quately pointed  to,  or  perhaps  even 
associated  with  the  term  "God."  With 
her  permission,  I  will  relate  a  story 
told  to  me  by  a  theologian  for  whose 
insights  I  have  the  greatest  respect. 
This  woman  told  me  that  in  the  past 
when  riding  in  planes  (and  feeling  fear- 
ful about  the  situation)  she  often  con- 
jured up  images  remembered  from 
childhood  of  "God"  as  "having  the 
whole  world  in  his  hands."  Later,  this 
image/prayer?  became  meaningless. 
When  she  was  on  a  plane  recently,  the 
ride  suddenly  became  extremely 
"bumpy"    and   rough.   It   occurred  to 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/35 


her  to  "try  on"  the  name/image  "God- 
dess." The  result,  as  she  described  it, 
was  immediate,  electrifying,  consoling. 
She  sensed  a  presence  and  had/heard? 
the  thought:  "Just  let  go.  Just  sit  on 
the  seat  and  sit  on  the  air  waves  and 
ride."  The  ride,  though  as  rough  as  be- 
fore, became  a  joyful  experience.^ 

Clearly,  it  would  be  inappropriate 
and  arrogant  to  try  to  "explain"  or 
"interpret"  this  experience  of  another 
person.  I  can  only  comment  that  many 
women  I  know  are  finding  power  of 
being  within  the  self,  rather  than  in 
"internalized"  father  images.  As  a  phil- 
osopher, my  preference  has  been  for 
abstractions.  Indeed  I  have  always  been 
annoyed  and  rather  embarrassed  by 
"anthropomorphic"  symbols,  prefer- 
ring terms  such  as  "ground  and  power 
of  being"  (Tillich),  "beyond  subjec- 
tivity and  objectivity"  (James),  "the 
Encompassing"  (Jaspers),  or  the  com- 
monly used  "Ultimate  Reality,"  or 
"cosmic  process."  More  recently  I  have 
used  the  expression  "Intransitive  Verb." 
Despite  this  philosophical  inclination, 
and  also  because  of  it,  I  find  it  impos- 
sible to  ignore  the  realm  of  symbols, 
or  to  fail  to  recognize  that  many  wom- 
en are  experiencing  and  participating 
in  a  remythologizing  process,  which  is 
a  new  dawn. 

It  is  necessary  to  add  a  few  remarks 
about  the  functioning  of  the  confusing 
and  complex  "Mary"  symbol  within 
Christianity.  Through  it,  the  power  of 
the  Great  Goddess  symbol  is  enchained, 
captured,  used,  cannibalized,  token- 
ized,  domesticated,  tranquillized.  In 
spite  of  this,  I  think  that  many  wom- 


36 1  Quest 


en  and  at  least  some  men,  when  they 
have  heard  of  or  imaged  the  "Mother 
of  God,"  have,  by  something  like  a 
selective  perception  process,  screened 
out  the  standardized,  lobotomized, 
dull,  derivative  and  dwarfed  Christian 
reflections  of  a  more  ancient  symbol; 
they  have  perceived  something  that 
might  more  accurately  be  described  as 
the  Great  Goddess,  and  which,  in 
human  terms,  can  be  translated  into 
"the  strong  woman  who  can  relate 
because  she  can  stand  alone."  A  wom- 
an of  Jewish  background  commented 
that  "Mother  of  God"  had  always 
seemed  strange  and  contradictory  to 
her.  Not  having  been  programmed  to 
"know"  about  the  distinctions  between 
the  "divine"  and  the  "human"  nature 
of  "Christ,"  or  to  "know"  that  the 
"Mother  of  God"  is  less  than  God, 
this  woman  had  been  able  to  hear  the 
expression  with  the  ears  of  an  extraen- 
vironmental  listener.  It  sounded,  she 
said,  something  like  "infinite  plus 
one."20  When  this  symbolic  nonsense 
is  recognized,  it  is  more  plausible  sim- 
ply to  think  "infinite,"  and  to  image 
something  like  "Great  Mother,"  or 
Goddess." 

It  may  appear  that  the  suffix  "-ess" 
presents  a  problem,  when  one  considers 
other  usages  of  that  suffix,  for  exam- 
ple, in  "poetess,"  or  in  "authoress." 
In  these  cases,  there  is  a  tone  of 
depreciation,  a  suggestion  that  women 
poets  and  authors  are  in  a  separate  and 
"inferior"  category  to  be  judged  by' 
different  standards  than  their  male 
counterparts.  However,  the  suffix  does 
not  always  function  in  this  "diminish- 


ing" way.  For  example,  there  appear 
to  be  no  "diminuitive"  overtones  sug- 
gested by  the  word  "actress."  So  also 
it  seems  that  the  term  "Goddess"-or 
"The  Goddess"-is  not  only  non-dimin- 
uitive,  but  very  strong.  Indeed,  it  calls 
before  the  mind  images  of  a  powerful 
and  ancient  tradition  before,  behind, 
and  beyond  Christianity.  These  are 
multi-dimensional  images  of  women's 
present  and  future  becoming/be-ing. 

"Priests"  or  "Priestesses"? 

I  would  suggest  that  "priestess" 
has  diminuitive  connotations  if  it  is 
applied  within  the  framework  of  Chris- 
tianity (Episcopalian  priestesses?), 
since  of  course  within  the  limitations 
of  that  framework  the  role  "acted 
out"  by  women  has  to  be  seen  as  deri- 
vative. It  is  only  when  one  considers 
the  possibility  that  the  Christian  tra- 
dition is  itself  derivative  from  a  far 
more  ancient  and  woman-centered  tra- 
dition, that  one's  perception  of  priest- 
hood changes.  For  women  to  be  priest- 
esses then  is  no  longer  perceived  sim- 
ply as  a  derivative  phenomenon,  but 
as  primary  and  authentic.  But  then 
neither  is  it  a  Christian  phenomenon. 
The  priesthood  of  women  need  not 
seek  legitimation  within  Christian 
churches.  Nor  need  it  be  seen  as  a  title 
or  office  conferred  upon  certain  offi- 
cially designated  women  to  the  exclu- 
sion of  others. 

Moreover,  there  are  impossible  con- 
tradictions in  the  idea  of  woman-iden- 
tified Christian  priests.  While  it  may 
be  possible  for  a  twice-born  Athena  to 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/37 


"say  Mass,"  or  to  commit  baptism  "in 
the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  this  sort  of 
behavior  presents  incredible  problems, 
that  is,  problems  of  credibility.  More- 
over, as  I  have  said,  it  is  inconsistent 
simply  to  try  to  fit  a  "feminine" 
symbolism  into  these  sclerotic  vessels. 
The  "form"  would  still  be  the  message, 
with  some  alterations  in  "content." 

Is  it  true,  as  Malcolm  Boyd  has  re- 
cently argued,  that  "when  the  (Chris- 
tian) priest  is  a  woman,  even  God  is  no 
longer  a  male?"21  At  one  time,  some 
years  ago,    I   might  have   agreed  with 


this.  However,  it  is  important  to  look 
at  Protestant  churches  which  have  been 
ordaining  women  for  years.  Clearly, 
their  God  (and  Gods)  are  still  male. 
Large  patriarchal  institutions  are  still 
male.  Large  patriarchal  institutions  are 
still  quite  capable  of  absorbing  a  few 
tokens  and  in  fact  of  profiting  from 
this,  appearing  "liberal"  while  at  the 
same  time  attracting  women  who  are 
doubly  devoted  to  the  task  of  serving 
male  Gods.  I  say  "doubly  devoted" 
because,  as  the  cliche  goes,  a  woman 
has  to  be  twice  as  "good"  as  a  man 
to  get  half  as  much  recognition. 


38/Quesf 


It  is  instructive  to  read  the  list  of 
110  Catholic  signers  who  have  called 
for  the  ordination  of  women  "to  the 
priesthood  of  the  universal  church. "22 
Having  read  some  writings  of  some  of 
them,  I  question  1)  whether  they  can 
possibly  understand  what  the  logic  of 
feminism  is  all  about  (i.e.,  leaving 
behind  and  thus  leaving  to  die  the  in- 
herently oppressive  structures  of  pa- 
triarchal religions);  2)  whether  they 
do  "understand"  what  the  logic  of 
feminism  is  about  and  see  "contain- 
ment" as  an  important  tactic  for  hold- 
ing women  in  bondage, as  long  as  pos- 
sible. 

The  women's  movement  is  about 
refusal  to  be  merely  contained  as  well 


as  refusal  to  be  mere  containers.  It  is 
about  saying  "Yes"  to  ourselves,  which 
is  the  deepest  way  of  saying  "Yes"  to 
others.  At  some  point  in  her  history  a 
woman  may  sincerely  see  ordination 
to  the  Christian  priesthood  as  her  way 
of  saying  this  "Yes."  It  is  my  hope 
that  such  women  will  continue  their 
journey.  Ambition  to  "ordination" 
perhaps  reaches  a  respectable  altitude 
for  the  jet  age,  but  it  does  not  reach 
very  far,  I  think,  into  feminist  space/ 
time.  It  is  my  hope  that  these  sisters 
will  raise  their  ambitions  and  their 
self-respect  higher,  immeasurably  high- 
er, that  they  will  one  day  outgrow 
their  books  of  common  prayer  and 
dream  less  common  dreams. 


Footnotes 


^Beyond  God  the  Father:  Toward  a 
Philosophy  of  Women's  Liberation  (Boston: 
Beacon  Press,  1973);  The  Church  and  the 
Second  Sex,  With  a  New  Feminist  Post- 
christian  Introduction  by  the  Author  (New 
York:  Harper  Colophon,  1975). 

^An  elaborate  historical  study  of  the 
Sins  is  to  be  found  in  Morton  W.  Bloom- 
field,  The  Seven  Deadly  Sins  (Michigan 
State  University  Press,  1952,  1967). 

^Bloomfield  gives  a  variety  of  "listings" 
of  Deadly  Sins  in  different  periods  and 
cultures,  with  useful  contextual  informa- 
tion. 

4See  Dolores  Bargowski's  review  of  the 
film  in  Quest:  A  Feminist  Quarterly  I,  No.  1, 
(Summer,  1974),  pp.  53-57. 

^This  idea  is  developed  in  a  remarkable 
article.  See  Peggy  Allegro,  "The  Strange 
and  the  Familiar,"  Amazon  Quarterly,  I,  1, 
pp.  29-41. 

^Virginia  Woolf,  Three  Guineas  (New 
York:  Harcourt,  Brace,  and  World,  Inc., 
1938,  1966),  p.  63. 


'Phyllis  Chesler,  Women  and  Madness, 
(New  York:  Doubleday,  1972),  pp.  24-26. 

°This  expression  was  used  by  Emily 
Culpepper  in  an  unpublished  paper  entitled 
"Reflections  on  Ethics  and  Self  Defense: 
Establishing  a   Firm   Stance." 

""Self  Defense  and  the  Preservation  of 
Females,"  in  The  Female  State:  A  Journal 
of  Female  Liberation,  Issue  4  (April,  1970), 
p.  96. 

10Elizabeth  Gould  Davis,  author  of  The 
First  Sex  (New  York:  G.P.  Putnam's  Sons, 
1971)  wrote  this  in  an  article  about  her 
own  devastating  rape  in  Prime  Time,  June, 
1974,  p.  3. 

11-The  horrors  of  footbinding  are  re- 
counted by  Andrea  Dworkin,  Woman  Hating 
(New  York;  Dutton,  1974),  pp.  95-117. 
These  "tiny  feet"  were  malodorous,  mutil- 
ated humps.  Women  fell  from  one  to  the 
other.  These  stumps  were  described  in  fan- 
tastically deceptive  euphemistic  language 
and  were  the  objects  of  sadistic  male 
fetishism. 


The  Qualitative  Leap  Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion/39 


12"Beyond  Male  Morality,"  in  Women 
and  Religion,  Revised  Edition,  edited  by 
Judith  Plaskow  and  Joan  Romero,  (Mis- 
soula, Montana:  American  Academy  of  Re- 
ligion and  The  Scholars'  Press,  1974),  pp. 
115-125. 

l^Linda  L.  Barufaldi  and  Emily  E. 
Culpepper,  "Androgyny  and  the  Myth  of 
Masculine/Feminine,"  Christianity  and  Cri- 
sis, April  16,  1973,  pp.  69-71. 

l^Adrienne  Rich,  Diving  into  the  Wreck, 
Poems  1971-72  (New  York:  W.W.  Norton, 
1973). 

l^In  a  speech  delivered  at  the  Modern 
Languages  Association  Forum,  December, 
1973,  Cynthia  Secor  noted  that. there  is  no 
"Androgyne  Quarterly"-most  probably  be- 
cause there  are  no  androgynes  around  to 
publish  it. 


■'■"Juliana  of  Norwich,  Revelations  of 
Divine  Love,  edited  by  Clifton  Walters 
(Baltimore,  Maryland:  1966),  Ch.  61. 

17See  Robert  Briffault,  The  Mothers, 
(New  York:  Macmillan,  1927),  Vol.  I.  See 
also  J.J.  Bachofen,  Myth,  Religion  and 
Mother-Right,  trans,  by  Ralph  Manheim 
(Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press,  1967). 

1° Kenneth  Pitchford  chooses  Goddess 
imagery,  which  occurs  frequently  in  his 
more  recent  poems. 

l^The  story  was  told  by  Professor  Nelle 
Morton  of  Drew  Theological  Seminary,  and 
paraphrased  by  myself. 

^Comment  of  Linda  Franklin,  Boston 
College  student. 

21Ms.,  December,  1974. 

22 Reported  in  National  Catholic  Re- 
porter, November  8,  1974,  p.  5. 


Mary  Daly,  associate  professor  at 
Boston  College,  is  author  of  Beyond 
God  the  Father:  Toward  a  Philosophy 
of  Women's  Liberation,  and  The  Church 
and  the  Second  Sex,  reissued  with  a 
New  Feminist  Postchristian  Introduc- 
tion by  the  author. 


40/Quest 


WITCHCRBFT: 

The  Art  of  Remembering 


by    Morgan    McFarland         graphics  by  Nancy  Myron 

There  was  a  time  when  you  were  not  a  slave,  remember  that.  You  walked 
alone,  full  of  laughter,  you  bathed  bare-bellied.  You  say  you  have  lost  all 
recollection  of  it,  remember.  .  .  You  say  there  are  no  words  to  describe  this 
time,  you  say  it  does  not  exist.  But  remember.  Make  an  effort  to  remember. 
Or,  failing  that,  invent. 

Monique  Wittig,  Les  Guerilleures 


A  woman  kneels  within  a  chalked 
circle,  writing  the  names  of  the  God- 
dess around  its  edge  in  ancient  runic 
letters.  She  is  remembering.  Two  wom- 
en build  an  altar  of  vine-draped  tree 
trunks  and  brightly-coloured  autumn 
leaves.  They  are  remembering.  Nine 
women  dance,  chanting  their  own 
music,  around  a  tenth  who  stands  be- 
fore a  flaming  cauldron  with  her  ritual 
knife  held  above  her  head.  They  are  all 
remembering  their  ancient  past  when 
their  mothers  walked  the  earth  with 
pride.  They  are  remembering  rituals 
performed  generations  ago.  They  are 
remembering  when  each  was  called 
"Wicce,"  the  Wise  Woman.  They  are 
remembering  that  they  are  all,  today, 
Witches. 

Witchcraft  is  a  religion.  It  is  the 
worship,  not  of  the  Christian  Satan,  but 
of  the  Great  Mother,  the  Supreme 
Creatrix,  the  Primum  Mobile.  It  is  the 
celebration  of  the  Goddess.  Its  roots 


spring  from  the  very  dawn  of  human- 
kind's instinct  to  worship,  when  the 
Lady  of  the  Hunt  brought  forth  wild 
animals  for  Her  children,  when  the 
Great  Mother  of  the  Earth  gave  forth 
fruit  and  was  replenished,  when  every 
living  thing,  every  part  of  Nature,  was 
evidence  of  the  Goddess  who  lived 
within  each  of  Her  divine  creations. 
The  Goddess  was  seen  as  having 
three  aspects:  the  Virgin  Huntress,  the 
Great  Mother,  and  the  Old  One  who 
held  the  keys  to  the  door  of  Death  and 
whose  other  side  was  Rebirth  and  Rein- 
carnation. She  was  the  Sun  Goddess, 
the  Mother  of  the  Stars;  the  Moon 
Goddess,  the  Mother  of  All  Living 
Things.  In  the  ancient  lore,  She  arose 
from  chaos  and  gave  birth  to  Herself 
before  anything  else  had  been  born,  in- 
cluding Herself.  And  when  She  had 
separated  the  skies  from  the  waters  and 
had  danced  upon  them,  the  Goddess 
created  all  that  is.  She  took  for  Herself 


Witchcraft:  The  Art  of  Remembering/41 


a  Consort  for  pleasure  and  companion- 
ship and  crowned  Him  with  Her  cres- 
cent moon  so  that  He  was  known  as 
the  Horned  God. 

The  oldest  known  site  of  Goddess 
worship  is  on  the  banks  of  the  Desna 
River  in  Russia.  Constructed  of  mam- 
moth skulls  and  tusks,  it  dates  back  to 
70  000  BCE.l  All  over  the  world,  the 
awe,  reverence,  and  celebration  of  the 
Great  Goddess  became  the  basis  for 
culture  and  civilization,  and  it  was  Her 
religions  and  ceremonies  that  were  the 
foundation  of  the  recent  patriarchal 
theologies. 

The  Witches  of  whom  I  spoke  at  the 
beginning  are  Dianic  in  aspect.  Their 
rituals  and  tradition  (and  there  are 
many  and  varied  ones  within  Witch- 
craft) are  reflections  of  the  Celtic  past, 
celebrating  as  did  their  earliest  ancest- 


resses the  Goddess  almost  exclusively; 
the  Consort  being  a  part  of  rite  only 
around  and  on  the  Midsummer  and 
Midwinter  Solstices.  The  tradition  con- 
tains elements  from  Wales  and  Scotland 
within  its  practice  and  lore,  using  the 
names  and  symbols  of  the  Celtic  people 
within  ritual  circles.  Historically,  the 
Crafte  of  the  Wise  existed  for  thousands 
of  years  as  the  religion  of  the  people 
throughour  Europe,  led  by  a  sisterhood 
of  priestesses  who  were  sometimes 
trained  within  a  sacred  college  of  wom- 
en or  on  one  of  the  women's  islands 
described  by  Strabo  and  Pomponius 
Mela.  The  priestesses  were  the  Wise 
Women  who  performed  rites  for  bring- 
ing prosperity  to  the  land  and  the  peo- 
ple, acted  as  seers,  and  were  the  healers. 
In  many  instances,  the  High  Priestess 
was   also   the   Clan   Mother  or  Queen, 


42/Quest,    vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


and  it  was  among  her  duties  to  mete 
out  justice  and  rule  the  tribe.  The  laws 
within  these  Celtic  societies  were  basi- 
cally egalitarian,  although  in  some  no- 
table instances  they  were  slanted  to- 
ward the  women.  Woman,  it  was 
believed,  personified  the  female  prin- 
ciple, and  this  respect  was  carried  well 
into  the  periods  following  man's  dis- 
covery of  his  part  in  procreation.  Both 
property  and  name  were  passed  down 
matrilineally  as  were  positions  of  lead- 
ership. Men's  power  lay  within  those 
spheres  designated  by  women.  Upon 
such  laws  and  customs  of  the  matriar- 
chal societies  was  based  common  law, 
and,  Blackstone  notwithstanding,  it  re- 
mains as  it  was  handed  down  for  mil- 
lenia  from  High  Priestess  to  High  Priest- 
ess in  the  oral  tradition  within  the 
coven  law  of  the  traditions  of  Witch- 
craft. 

Within  the  British  Isles,  the  Wiccan 
seemed  to  pose  little  threat  to  the  Ro- 
mans. The  Craft  lived  side  by  side  in 
relative  harmony  with  other  religions 
until  the  invading  Saxons,  and  partic- 
ularly the  Christianized  Saxons,  who 
feared  Witchcraft  and  hated  magick, 
began  to  formulate  laws  against  it.  Long 
before  the  first  continental  purges  be- 
gan the  Saxons  framed  laws  that  for- 
bade all  such  common  practices  of  the 
Wiccan  as  prophesying  or  precognition, 
divining  by  the  moon,  healing  either 
human  or  animal  sickness,  "loving 
wicca  crafte."  or  worshipping  the  sun, 
the  moon,  the  trees  (ceremony  within 
sacred  groves),  the  sacred  wells,  or 
stones  (rites  held  within  stone  circles). 2 
The  Craft  fared  better  under  the  Nor- 


mans, perhaps  because  the  Wiccan  join- 
ed forces  with  them  against  the  hated 
Saxons,  or  perhaps  because,  as  Margaret 
Murray,  the  eminent  anthropologist, 
believes,  many  Normans— and  all  the 
Plantagenets-were  Witches  themselves.  3 

During  the  first  three  hundred  years 
of  Norman  rule,  however,  the  Christian 
Church  did  not  completely  ignore  the 
presence  of  Goddess-worshippers.  In 
Ireland,  the  Great  Mother  was  simply 
canonized  so  that  Her  worship  could 
continue  under  a  veneer  of  Christian 
gloss.  The  Triple  Goddess  Brigit  became 
St.  Brigit,  and  Anu,  who  was  portrayed 
in  Her  Death  Aspect  wearing  a  veil, 
became  the  "nun"  St.  Agnes.  Even  the 
Consort  Lugh  blazed  forth  as  St. 
Michael  the  Archangel.  Throughout  the 
isles,  churches  were  built  over  the 
foundations  of  Pagan  temples,  and  they 
were  duly  and  humourously  decorated 
by  their  heathen  builders.  One  can  ^till 
see  sheila-na-gigs,  figures  of  the  God- 
dess exposing  anthropomorphic  geni- 
talia as  a  symbol  of  Her  gifts  of  fertili- 
ty, the  Horned  God  grinning  through 
the  branches  of  the  sacred  oak,  penta- 
grams, circles,  and  Her  Celtic  crosses 
upon  the  walls  of  Christian  churches, 
chapels  and  shrines.^ 

The  joy  of  Her  rites  evidently 
touched  many  of  the  monks  and  priests 
of  the  new  patriarchal  religion  so  bent 
on  the  conversion  of  all  heathendom. 
In  the  Bishop's  Register  at  Exeter  there 
is  a  gentle  reprimand  to  the  monks  at 
Frithelstock  Priory  who  were  caught 
worshipping  the  "unchaste  Diana" 
within  a  sacred  grove.  But  revelry  with- 
in the  groves  and  circles  was  to  come 


Witchcraft:  The  Art  of  Remembering/43 


to  a  bloody  end.  Around  the  beginning 
of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  Church 
Militant  lit  the  first  torch  of  the  Burn- 
ing Time,  and,  for  the  next  four  hun- 
dred years,  all  deviance  from  Church- 
defined  norm  was  punished  by  death. 
This  death  took  the  forms  of  burning 
at  the  stake,  strangulation,  crushing 
with  stones,  whipping,  hanging,  drown- 
ing, and  unspeakable  and  vile  tortures. 
In  the  massive  wave  of  hysteria  that . 
plunged  humankind  into  the  Dark 
Ages,  it  is  estimated  that  nine  million 
women,  men,  and  even  children  were 
murdered  in  the  name  of  a  patriarchal 
god  whose  message  was  said  to  be  of 
peace,   universal   fellowship,  and  love. 

It  was  an  example  of  insanity  and 
woman-hating  for  which  there  can  be 
no  reparation.  The  majority  of  those 
put  to  death  were  women;  women  as 
young  as  ten  and  eleven;  women  so  far 
into  pregnancy  that  they  gave  birth  in 
the  flame  of  their  funeral  pyres  and  saw 
their  infants  perish  before  they  them- 
selves did;  women  who  were  burned 
"quick,"  that  is  to  say  alive  while 
their  male  counterparts  were  mercifully 
strangled  before  being  put  to  the  torch; 
women  who  were  old,  alone,  lonely, 
and  senile  and  who  talked  to  themselves 
and  their  pets;  women  who  enflamed 
lust  in  the  groins  of  their  celibate 
priest-confessors;  women  who  miscar- 
ried after  having  been  beaten  by  their 
husbands,  and  who  knew  that  their  hus- 
bands walked  free  as  they  screamed  in 
agony  on  the  rack  for  their  crime 
against    God-Jehovah. 

The  crime  for  which  these  women 
died    was    called   Witchcraft.    Few    of 


those  who  perished  were  Wiccan.  For, 
the  Wiccan  had  gone  underground,  and 
its  priestesses  and  priests  faced  the  al- 
most impossible  sacred  labour  of  pre- 
serving the  Old  Religion.  The  lunar  and 
solar  rituals,  danced  and  chanted  upon 
the  green  earth  before  the  patriarchs 
forgot  that  they  were  Her  sons,  became 
furtively  celebrated  rites  whispered 
within  chalked  and  charcoaled  and 
pots-and-pans  outlined  circles,  instead 
of  within  the  great  henges.  The  joy  of 
each  celebration  was  tinged  ominously 
by  the  ever-present  smoke  of  burning 
faggots,  both  human  and  wooden.  Se- 
crecy and  fear  of  discovery  necessarily 
wiped  out  the  open  scholarship  of  the 
ancient  matriarchal  colleges  and  sacred 
islands,  and  a  dwindling  number  of 
women  came  through  the  dark  of  night 
to  learn,  word  for  word,  the  lore,  the 
law,  and  the  Mysteries. 

Those  who  were  herbalists  let  their 
gardens  go  to  seed,  picking  instead  wild 
herbs  after  dark  by  the  light  of  a  tallow 
candle  in  a  hollow  gourd.  Those  who 
were  midwives  found  themselves  ig- 
nored as  Woman  paid  in  labour  pains 
for  Man's  purported  fall  from  paradise. 
Those  who  could  foretell  the  future 
kept  its  secrets  to  themselves,  and  those 
who  could  conjure  fierce  storms  and 
warm  sun  and  blinding  snow  and  gentle 
winds  did  so  secretly.  Those  who  kept 
the  ancient  matrifocal  law  did  so  with- 
in the  confines  of  their  homes,  but 
publicly  joined  the  throngs  of  enslaved 
female  chattel  and  swaggering  masters. 
The  priestesses  and  priests  became  cler- 
gy without  congregation,  initiates  of 
the  most  secret  of  societies,  play  actors 


AAlQuest 


Witchcraft:  The  Art  of  Remembering/45 


within  the  crowd,  beings  who  lived 
with  a  fear  that  Witches  today  still 
know   and  remember. 

Thus  was  history  changed.  Not  only 
was  Nature  sent  careening  into  disrupt- 
ion by  the  gynocide  of  the  Burning 
Time,  but  She  also  became  the  victim 
of  the  pulverising  millwheels  of  homo- 
technocracy  as  patriarchy  plundered 
and  raped  Her.  So  was  history  re- 
written: the  pen  was  as  mighty  as  the 
sword.  The  educated  priests  and  monks 
blithely  rewrote  all  that  had  gone  be- 
fore the  Church's  coming  and  covered 
the  crime  in  illuminated  lettering.  Iro- 
nically, the  very  priests  who  began  the 
move  to  satanize  and  denigrate  worn- 
manhood  wore  the  skirts  of  women:  a 
custom  they  had  forgotten  belonged  to 
Her  priests  to  signify  their  reverence 
for  the  Creatrix,  She  Who  Created  All 
Without  Spouse. 

But  within  the  underground  caves 
of  Witchcraft,  within  the  secret  circles 
of  the  outlawed  worship  of  the  Mother 
across  the  world,  within  the  oral  trad- 
itions of  legends  and  chanted  myths 
concealed  from  contemporary  miss- 
ionaries of  the  Church  lies  the  ancient 
history  of  the  world,  a  vast  part  con- 
tributed by  women. 

However,  the  valuable  lore  that  lies 
within  these  precincts  is  not  automa- 
tically pure  and  uncorrupted.  When  any 
ruling  class  institutes  and  imposes  its 
values  as  has  patriarchal  society  upon 
the  at-large  community,  those  in  lesser 
positions  follow  suit,  either  in  imitation 
or  just  to  gain  a  breathing  space.  To- 
day, phallocentric  values  have  crept 
even  into  the  Mother's  groves,  and  if  a 


mirror  is  held  to  the  Old  Religion,  it 
reflects  back  a  murky  and  vaguely 
tumescent  image  of  androcentric  socie- 
ty as  a  whole.  Because  feminist  ideals 
were  so  firmly  incorporated  into  the 
Craft  lifestyle  during  its  earliest  under- 
ground days,  the  Law  more  often  than 
not  still  holds  within  the  circle  but  is 
largely  overlooked  without.  The  atti- 
tude toward  feminism  has  been  to  give 
it  lip-service,  to  acknowledge  women 
within  the  Covens,  and  to  either  ignore 
the  universal  movement  of  women  or 
to  trivialize  it— rather  as  though  a  cele- 
bration of  the  Female  Principle  pre- 
cludes a  political  action  involving  Her 
human  daughters. 

This  does  not  mean  that  there  are 
not  men  within  Witchcraft  who  are 
struggling  to  deal  with  their  sexism; 
there  are.  But  all-too-often,  we  women 
follow  our  societal  tracking  and  bow 
to  the  word  of  the  spokesmen  rather 
than  follow  our  historically  proven  and 
intuitive  desires  for  women-teaching 
and  work  with  our  sisters.  The  times 
are  changing,  however,  and  as  feminism 
grows,  so  does  our  strength,  and  we  lay 
waste  all  the  "reasons"  for  not  coming 
together. 

The  contemporary  coven  is  almost 
always  female  and  male  together  in 
work  and  celebration.  However,  our 
tradition,  the  Dianic,  condones  and 
even  encourages  all-female  circles  and 
covens.  Our  coven  law  is  clear:  never 
can  there  be  more  men  than  women 
within  a  circle;  the  High  Priestess  is  the 
apex  of  the  coven;  and  the  High  Priest- 
ess alone,  never  the  High  Priest  unless 
under  Burning  Time  conditions,  initia- 


46/Quest 


tes  all  seekers  who  are  sincere  and  dedi- 
cated. It  is  believed  that  women  toget- 
her remember  their  old  ascendency, 
their  art,  their  magick,  their  roots. 
Within  this  covenstead  there  are  three 
working  covens,  two  of  which  are 
"mixed,"  the  third  being  the  women's 
coven.  Although  each  holds  within  it  a 
special  feeling  of  power  and  delight, 
there  is  something  so  uniquely  pleasur- 
able and  strong  within  the  women's 
coven  that  it  seems  to  defy  definition. 
The  women  form  a  cohesive  whole  that 
fosters  spontaneity,  creativity,  excit- 
ement, and  memory.  The  rituals  of  the 
three  covens  are  basically  the  same. 
But  the  women  have  added  to  each 
lunar  celebration  a  second  part  presided 
over  each  month  by  a  different  priest- 
ess. After  the  Mystery  Ritual,  which  is 
a  teaching  as  well  as  an  experiencing, 


the  High  Priestess  becomes  a  link  with- 
in the  circle  of  other  women,  and  the 
lunar  priestess  begins  her  circle.  She 
has  decorated  the  outer  circle  and  cre- 
ated her  special  altar,  and,  surrounded 
by  her  creativity  and  art,  she  offers  us 
her  rite  and  celebration.  Each  circle,  as 
one  woman  said,  is  more  beautiful  than 
the  last.  For  within  the  women's  coven 
as  we  remember,  we  invent.  The  Moth- 
er necessitates  the  invention  because 
She  speaks  to  each  of  us  in  different 
ways  and  with  different  symbols,  and 
we  must  design  our  individual  rites  so 
that  all  women  may  share  our  personal 
revelations. 

Phyllis  Chesler  has  said:  "Women  in 
modern  Judeo-Christian  societies  are 
motherless  children  .  .  .  (for)  Mothers 
have  neither  land  nor  money  to  cede 
to  their  daughters.  Their  legacy  is  one 


Witchcraft:  The  Art  of  Remembering/47 


of  capitulation,  via  frivolity  or  drudg- 
ery. .  .Neither  mother  nor  daughter  can 
redeem  the  other  from  certain  harsh 
realities  that  define  the  female  as  'mot- 
her' and  'loser'  under  bio-patriarchal 
rule."5 

But  the  women  within  the  Craft  are 
not  motherless.  And  we  have  a  legacy 
for  our  daughters.  It  is  a  legacy  of 
pride—in  our  bodies,  our  minds,  our 
emotions,  our  senses,  our  awareness, 
ourselves.  It  is  a  legacy  of  strength- 
from  within,  from  our  roots,  from  our 
history,  from  each  other.  Our  woman- 
hood-daughterhood  is  "as  steady  as  the 
three  legged  cauldron""  because  within 
our  circles  come  the  triggers  that  allow 
us  to  remember.  We  know  the  chant  a 
split  second  before  the  priestess  begins. 
We  move  in  concert  when  we  have 
never  danced  together  before.  We  learn 
the  archaic  runes  and  ogham  and  read 
them  in  our  dreams.  We  trust  our  in- 
stincts and  intuitions  as  we  never  did 
before.  We  divine  within  a  cauldron's 
flames,  and  suddenly  we  know.  We 
know  that  we  are  elemental,  and  there- 
by we  are  infinite. 

We  feel  within  our  circles  power, 
not  that  of  dominance  but  that  of  a 
dynamo,  and  it  lies  within  our  female 
core,  our  womanspirit.  Women  pause 
and  listen  to  a  silent  Charge  and  feel 
their  rhythm  come  together,  playing 
upon  each  other.  The  "orthodox"  and 
"traditional"  of  patriarchal  religions 
throw  out  discordant  notes  that  jar  the 
soul  and  grate  upon  the  ancierrt  es- 
sense.  There  are  many  ways  to  relearn 
the  ancient  ways  and  make  them  into 
the  new  spirituality.  Witchcraft  is  but 


one  rhythm,  one  path,  one  wave,  one 
reality.  But  within  the  women's  circles 
everywhere  are  revealed  the  Mysteries 
of  the  ages,  the  history  of  our  spiri- 
tuality as  women,  the  strength  of  our- 
selves, the  knowledge  and  calm  accep- 
tance of  each  woman's  three  aspects. 
That  is  a  part  of  remembering:  we  are 
each  Virgin  Huntresses,  we  are  each 
Great  Mothers,  we  are  each  Death- 
Dealers  who  hold  out  the  promise  of 
rebirth  and  generation.  We  are  no 
longer  afraid  to  see  ourselves  as  Her 
daughers,  nor  are  we  afraid  to  refuse 
to  be  the  victims  of  this  subtle  Burn- 
ing Time.  The  Wicce  is  revolutionary. 

Women  confront  their  spirituality, 
and  they  remember  much.  And  one 
thing  above  all  they  remember:  that 
another  name  for  the  Great  Mother 
was  Nemesis. 

Footnotes 

1  Campbell,  Joseph;  The  Masks  of  God. 

^Glass,  Justine;  Witchcraft,  the  Sixth 
Sense-and  Us. 

^Murray,  Margaret;  Witch  Cult  in  West- 
ern Europe:  The  God  of  the  Witches;  The 
Divine  King. 

^Lethbridge,  T.  C. ;  Witches;  Gogmagog: 
The  Buried  Gods. 

^Chesler,  Phyllis;  Women  and  Madness. 

°Wittig,  Monique;  Les  Guerilleures. 

Morgan  McFarland,  High  Priestess 
of  the  Covenstead  of  Morrigana,  past 
editor  of  The  New  Broom,  is  presently 
working  on  a  book  of  women's  rituals 
and  legend,  and  is  a  lecturer  on  Wom- 
en's Hidden  History  and  the  ma- 
triarchies. 


48/Quest 


Does  The  Spirit  Matter  For 
Feminists? 


SPIRITUAL 

€XPLORM*IOW 
CROSS- 
COUNTRY 


by 

Susan  Rennie 

and 

Kirs  ten  G  rims  tad 

graphics  by  Aileen  Pearlwoman 
©Kirsten  Grimstad  and  Susan  Rennie  1975 


Traveling  around  the  country,  gath- 
ering material  and  impressions  first- 
hand from  feminists  has  been  an  inte- 
gral source  of  information  for  The  New 
Woman's  Survival  Catalog  and  its  suc- 
cessor, The  New  Woman's  Sourcebook 
(to  be  published  in  September,  1975 
by  Alfred  Knopf).  What  struck  us 
during  our  trip  in  the  summer  of  1973, 
and  in  fact,  what  launched  the  first 
catalog,  was  the  proliferation  of  sur- 
vival institutions  and  women's  cultural 
alternatives:  rape  crisis  centers  and  hot- 
lines, self-defense  schools,  self-health 
clinics,  skills  centers  as  well  as  feminist 
art  schools,  galleries,  film  cooperatives, 
theaters,  and  so  on.  This  past  summer 
of  1974  we  observed  a  subtle  but  quite 
definite  addition  to  these  concerns, 
evident  throughout  the  country-a 
widespread  and  surging  interest  in  what 
we  can,  for  the  moment,  loosely  call 
the  spiritual  aspects  of  life.  Though 
this  development  is  most  highly  ad- 
vanced in  the  Southwest  and  on  the 
West  Coast,  we  found  wherever  there 
are  feminist  communities,  women  are 
exploring  psychic  and  non-material 
phenomena;  reinterpreting  astrology; 
creating  and  celebrating  feminist  rituals 
around  birth,  death,  menstruation; 
reading  the  Tarot;  studying  pre-patriar- 
chal  forms  of  religion;  reviving  and 
exploring  esoteric  goddess-centered 
philosophies  such  as  Wicce;  developing 
and  cultivating  dream-analysis,  ESP, 
astral  projection,  precognition;  learning 
psychic  and  homeopathic  healing;  res- 


Spiritual  Explorations  Cross-Country/49 


cuing  the  wholistic  perspective  of  the 
right  hemisphere  of  the  brain  from  the 
contempt  of  left-brained  linear-mind- 
edness;  practising  meditation  and  yoga; 
rewriting  the  /  Ching;  revolutionizing 
our  food  and  natural  resource  con- 
sciousness of  our  connectedness  with 
the  rest  of  the  biosphere. 

When  we  encountered  this  trend  on 
our  first  stops,  our  initial  reaction  was 
indifference  bordering  on  uneasiness 
and  apprehension,  a  frequent  reaction 
among  feminists  who  are  intellectually- 
oriented  or  who  are  political  activists. 
Later,  when  we  looked  back  at  our 
earlier  impressions,  it  was  clear  that 
this  reaction  stemmed  from  two 
sources.  First,  there  is  the  conditioning 
in  this  culture  to  view  with  scepticism 
and  suspicion  and  ridicule  anything 
which  cannot  be  "scientifically"  val- 
idated: "irrational"  phenomena  such 
as  precognition,  or  psychic  healing  are 
kooky,  indulged  in  only  by  charlatans 
and/or  wierdos-very  effective  condi- 
tioning to  keep  people  from  messing  in 
these  areas,  especially  if  you  are  "edu- 
cated!" The  second,  more  obvious 
source,  is  our  association  of  things  spir- 
itual with  reactionary  politics.  Spiritual 
equals  religious,  which  in  turn  equals 
opiate,  solipsism,  retreat.  In  these  days 
of  gurus  and  other  short  cuts  to  inner 
peace-and-cosmic-awareness,  we  have 
the  terrifying  spectacles  of  young, 
energetic,  and  talented  feminists  like 
Sally  Kempton  going  the  Arica  route 
and  ending  up  at  the  feet  of  Baba 
Muktananda.  Sally  has  "transcended" 
feminism.  Scepticism  in  these  matters 
certainly     didn't     seem    unreasonable. 


By  the  time  we  reached  Tucson  it 
was  clear  that  something  of  major  sig- 
nificance was  occurring,  feminists  were 
on  to  something,  and  we  began  to 
sharpen  up  our  ears  and  listen.  As  we 
traveled  up  the  West  Coast,  through  the 
mountain  states  and  back  across  the 
Midwest,  it  became  increasingly  ob- 
vious that  what  seem  like  disparate 
interests  are  aspects  of  one  phenom- 
enon. Women,  feminists,  are  becoming 


sensitized  and  receptive  to  the  psychic 
potential  inherent  in  human  nature- 
and  they  are  realizing  that  women  in 
particular  are  the  repository  of  powers 
and  capabilities  that  have  been  sup- 
pressed, that  have  been  casualties  of 
western  man's  drive  to  technological 
control  over  nature.  It  is  as  if  feminists 
have  recognized  an  even  deeper  source 
of  female  alienation  and  fragmentation 
than  the  sex  role  polarization  which 
has  so  effectively  limited  women's 
lives— the   mind/body  dualism  progres- 


50!Quest   vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


sively  fostered  by  patriarchal  culture. 
In  acknowledging  this  side  of  our  being, 
women  are  in  effect  striving  for  a  total 
integration  and  wholeness.  Accepting 
the  wholeness  that  includes  psychic 
awareness  and  exploration  takes  fem- 
inist consciousness  into  an  entirely  new 
dimension-it  amounts  to  a  redefinition 
of  reality. 

As  we  listened  to  women  (these  were 
the  long  night  sessions)  telling  about 
their  discoveries,  explorations,  exper- 
iences of  the  spiritual,  non-material  in 
their  lives,  our  conviction  grew  that  this 
trend  is  not  reactionary,  not  authori- 
tarian, not  mystical,  not  solipsistic.  The 
effect  we  observed  was  that  this  reach- 
ing out  for  a  broader  conception  of  our 
natural  powers,  a  larger  vision  of  whole- 
ness, is  energizing,  restorative,  regener- 
ative. There  are  abuses-some  mindless 
anthropomorphizing  of  goddess  wor- 
ship, here  and  there  crude  fatalism,  ("I 
can't  participate,  the  Tarot  says  not 
to,"  or  "Don't  blame  me  for  screwing 
up.  .  .  how  do  you  expect  me,  a  Pisces, 
to  work  with  an  air  sign!")  But  the 
overall  impression  was  one  of  strength 
and  self-confidence,  a  closer  sense  of 
community  with  women  and  excite- 
ment at  discovering  an  added  tool  to 
neutralize  and  combat  the  destructive 
energies  of  patriarchy,  a  feeling  that  we 
are  only  beginning  to  fulfill  our  poten- 
tial as  we  tap  into  the  sources  of  our 
real  power.  And,  quite  contrary  to  the 
distasteful  authoritarianism  that  seems 
such  an  integral  facet  of  male-domina- 
ted spiritual  forms-from  the  Catholic 
Church  to  the  Divine  Light  Mission- 
feminist  spiritual  explorations  are  mar- 


vellously anarchic,  chaotic,  or  even 
hydra-like  in  their  manifestations.  No 
correct  line  or  correct  leader  here! 
Paradoxically,  this  new  spiritual  in- 
quiry has  challenged  and  further  bro- 
ken down  patriarchal  authority— the 
authority  of  patriarchal  science  and 
religion.  At  the  same  time,  this  broad- 
ening of  our  vision  of  reality  cannot 
help  but  have  a  formative  and  creative 
impact  on  the  development  of  our  fe- 


male culture— as  inspiration  and  mate- 
rial for  our  art,  music,  literature, 
aesthetics,  and  by  adding  a  profound 
new  dimension  to  our  relations  with 
one  another. 

This  article  will  appear  in  the  forth- 
coming New   Woman's  Sourcebook. 

Kirsten  Grimstad  and  Susan  Rennie 
are  the  editors  of  The  New  Woman's 
Sourcebook. 


<^> 


Will    your    Quest    be    expired? 
Renew  yourself! 


<-*-> 


Spiritual  Explorations  Cross-Country/51 


TO:   Our  Sisters  in  Ecnamor* 

FROM:  Sally  Gearhart  and  Peggy  Cleveland.  The  Ad  Hoc 
Commission  on  the  Investigation  of  the  Ecnamor 
National  Illness  of  Stilps.  Special  agreeing/ 
disagreeing  consultants:  Dorothy,  Jean, 
Juanita,  Judy  C,  Judy  0.,  Kennette,  Liz, 
Raelyn,  Sharon,  Tucson's  Desert  Dykes. 

RE:   Sexuality  and  Spirituality  as  Separated  Func- 
tions Resulting  from  Stilps:  Preliminary  Report 
on  the  Nature  of  the  Disease,  Speculation  as  to 
Its  Origins,  and  Suggestions  for  Cure. 

We  are  gratefully  inundated  by  the  evidence  you 
are  sending  about  the  rapid  spread  of  Stilps  in  your 
area  and  how  that  disease  affects  your  lives.  At 
present  we  can  say  for  certain  that:  1)  the  incidence 
of  the  disease  is  epidemic,  and  2)  the  establishment 
of  an  exhaustive  symptomatology  (touched  on  here), 
seems  just  around  the  corner.  So  keep  those  cards  and 
letters  coming. 

We  feel  the  urgency  of  your  questions  about 
Stilps  and  hope  eventually  to  address  them  all.  For 
now  we  must  caution  against  hasty  action.  Some  of  you 
who  relate  to  children  are  wringing  your  hands  and 
threatening  either  remission  of  feminism  or  infanti- 
cide; please  remember  that  we  are  all  Stilps  victims 
and  that  not  even  a  child  will  be  entirely  healthy 
or  free  from  its  effects  in  our  lifetime—probably  not 
for  generations.  Steady  application  of  philogyny 
(womanlove,  our  recommended  treatment,  explored  herein 
in  Part  II)  will  eventually  wipe  out  the  disease. 

Oh  yes:  Will  the  woman  (you  didn't  put  a  return 
address)  who  is  "contemplating  splitting  after  the 
summer  solstice  if  by  then  I  have  not  found  an  equal 
relationship,"  please  recontact  us?  We  have  a  little 
handbook,  "How  to  Survive  in  Ecnamor  When  Your  Heart 
Is  In  Utopia,"  which  will  be  helpful  to  those  of  you 
not  ready  to  undertake  the  recommended  treatment. 

^Apparently     Ecnamor  is    both    a    geographical  location  whose  boundaries  are  roughly 
those  of  western  civilization  and  a  body  of  experiences  best  characterized  as  sexual 
relations  under  capitalism.-Editors 


52/Quest,  vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps 


by  Sally  Gear  hart  &  Peggy  Cleveland 


graphics  by  Wendy  Cadden 

Report  on  Sexuality 
and  Spirituality 

We  have  formulated  out  of  our  re- 
search a  hypothesis  that  needs  examin- 
ation and  criticism  by  us  all:  The 
sexual  and  the  spiritual  functions  of 
our  lives  are  potentially  a  unity.  They 
have  been  separated  in  each  of  us  per- 
sonally and  in  Ecnamor  socially  by  the 
disease  we  call  Stilps.  A  cure  of  the 
disease  necessitates  a  reuniting  in  the 
individual  and  in  society  of  the  now 
separated  functions  of  sexuality  and 
spirituality.  In  this  report  we  want  to: 
•  Show    what    we   believe   to   be   the 

origin  of  Stilps. 
•Examine  the  three  major  strains  of 

the  Stilps  virus. 
•Suggest    that    a    treatment/cure    of 

Stilps    and    of   our    sexual/spiritual 

separation  lies  in  philogynous  (wom- 

anloving)  experiences. 

We  have  approached  our  research/ 
reflection  deliberately  in  non-tradition- 
al ways.  In  order  to  get  into  words  the 
broad  outlines  of  the  hypothesis,  we 
overstate/oversimplify.  Further,  we  en- 
gage in  "what  if"  thinking:  since  prob- 
ability is  the  foundation  of  patriarchal 
science,  possibility  might  well  charact- 
erize the  research  methods  of  philogyny 
ideologues.  Those  of  us  schooled  in  the 


rigors  of  western  scientific  method 
find  speculating  surprisingly  compatible 
with  our  training. 

We  count  on  dialogue  with  sisters 
to  further  inform  and  energize  the 
process  by  which  our  extreme  and  spec- 
ulative ideas  will  be  affirmed/denied/ 
challenged/changed. 

•  Origin  of  Stilps 

The  stilps  virus  sports  a  long  Latin 
name  which,  roughly  translated,  means 
"separation  from  selP'  or  "division  of 
self."  We  know  it  to  be  contagious, 
infectious,  and  at  its  present  intensified 
development,  probably  congenitally 
carried.  Stilps  is  the  psychological  divi- 
sion of  our  "selfs"  into  body/mind 
manifested  in  the  sociological  division 
of  our  "self"  into  female/male.  The 
sexual  has  become  the  function  of  the 
body  only;  the  spiritual  the  function  of 
the  mind  only.  Thus  we  cannot  talk  of 
the  relationship  between  sexuality  and 
spirituality  except  as  those  two  are 
socially  expressed  in  women  and  men 
respectively.  While  we  can  time-travel 
into  the  deep  past,  we  shall  be  unable 
to  ascertain  the  nexus  of  causes  that 
surrounded  the  origin  of  the  disease. 
But  we  can,  and  must,  speculate.  For 
example: 

What  if,  once  upon  a  time,  we  were 


On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps/53 


s 


^ 


,# 


lltt&S^iii 


54/Quest 


each  a  complete  entity,  integrated  in 
action  and  thought,  at  home  in  both 
body  and  mind,  and  perhaps  even  capa- 
ble of  reproduction  par  theno genetical- 
ly? What  if,  for  some  reason  later  to 
be  discovered/recovered,  there  came  a 
time  of  wrenching  division  within  each 
self,  an  actual  division  into  female  and 
male,  into  body  and  mind?  What  if  this 
psychological  occurrence  then  became 
translated  into  societal  terms  so  that 
some  of  self  went  about  bearing  and 
nursing  children,  bleeding  regularly 
from  our  body,  growing  food  and  per- 
petuating physical  life,  making  pots  of 
the  stuff  of  the  ground,  being  con- 
cerned for  the  physical  health  of  chil- 
dren and  community?  And  others  of 
our  self-alienated  from  and  enemy  to 
the  body— started  killing  animals  and 
each  other,  protecting  and  expanding 
the  boundaries  of  the  community,  be- 
coming more  and  more  the  strategists, 
the  problem  solvers,  the  thinkers,  the 
philosophers? 

What  if  the  alienation  from  our 
"selfs"  thus  guaranteed  further  the 
division  of  the  characteristics  between 
women  and  men,  so  that  women  were 
"bodies  only"  and  men,  "minds  only"? 
What  if,  then,  men  knew  their  bodies 
exclusively  by  subduing  the  bodies  of 
women?  And  women  knew  their  minds 
exclusively  as  mirrors  of  the  minds  of 
men?  What  if  such  a  mind/body  divi- 
sion, such  a  division  into  "self"  and 
"other,"  resulted  in  the  exercise  of 
dominance  by  the  male  over  the  fe- 
male? And,  what  if,  as  many  of  us 
believe,  male-over-female  became  the 
model  for  all  the  power-over  relation- 


ships in  human  history? 

With  men  in  the  dominant  position, 
superior  value  would  then  be  visited 
upon  the  functions  of  the  mind;  entire 
theologies  could  grow  out  of  the  des- 
perate need  of  men- of  whole  societies- 
to  reunite  with  the  body,  with  materiel  I 
reality.  In  fact,  wouldn't  this  be  the 
height  of  alienation:  out  of  the  desire 
to  repossess  the  self,  the  unremitting 
need  to  possess  the  other?  What  if  that 
were  precisely  the  course  of  western 
spiritual  development:  men  reaching 
upward,  toward  the  sky,  to  praise  or 
petition  A  Great  Other  who  is  but  a 
mystification  of  the  need  for  self- 
wholeness,  who  is  but  a  reflection  of 
man  himself  of  his  own  eagerly  manu- 
factured self-esteem? 

Further,  it  may  have  been  at  just 
such  a  juncture  that  "The  Sex  Drive" 
was  invented:  the  moment  when  man 
knew  himself  to  need  his  physical  body 
but  sought  it  outside  himself,  in  the 
other,  rather  than  repossess  his  own. 
Well,  we  in  Ecnamor  have  come  to  be- 
lieve from  birth  that,  at  least  in  men, 
The  Sex  Drive  is  natural  and  inevitable. 
It  is  easier  for  man  to  call  the  search 
for  the  body  "The  Sex  Drive"  than  it 
is  for  him  to  claim  the  only  body  that 
belonged  to  him  from  the  start-his 
own. 

Later  man  could  and  did  condemn 
the  sex  act  and  woman  except  as  neces- 
sary for  progeny-though  even  procrea- 
tion bore  a  strong  taint  of  evil.  Sexual- 
ity represented  for  man  both  his  loss 
to  The  Sex  Drive  of  control,  and  also 
the  contamination  of  his  organ.  Thus, 
he    constructed    a    whole    morality    a- 


On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps/55 


round  sex  and  then  proceeded  to  live 
out  the  schizophrenia  of  his  desire  ver- 
sus his  purity.  But  always,  since  he 
was  the  spiritual  being  that  woman 
was  not,  he  could  return  to  righteous- 
ness by  way  of  a  long  and  agonizing 
confession,  or  by  punishment  of  his  or 
another's  recalcitrant  body.  In  the  end 
he  held  inviolate  the  conviction  that 
his  spiritual  communion  with  The  Up- 
per Other-his  own  image  projected 
heavenward-had  resulted  in  his  rein- 
stated virtue.  If  later,  as  a  sop,  he 
pedestaled  woman  so  as  to  worship 
her,  we  are/may  be  sure  that  she  who 
stood  above  him  was  an  ideal  woman 
against  whose  virtues  any  material/ 
bodily/real  woman  necessarily  fell  short. 

Thus  woman  would  have  to  define 
herself  as  she  was  told.  Huddled  in  the 
isolation  of  her  menstrual  hut,  she 
knew  herself  to  be  all  and  only  sexual, 
all  and  only  body,  incapable  of  the 
conquests  and  choices  enjoyed  by  men 
and  cut  off  from  the  intellectual  and/ 
or  spiritual  ecstasies  allowed  them. 

As  different  as  women  are  from 
men  in  the  extremes  of  sex-role  con- 
ditioning, that  is  the  extent  of  the 
difference  between  the  sexual  and  the 
spiritual.  That  is  as  well  the  measure 
of  the  mortal  sickness  that  afflicts  us, 
for  Stilps  is  as  old  as  the  mind/body 
dichotomy  and  every  act  of  patriarchal 
society  since  that  original  division, 
particualrly  in  Ecnamor,  has  conspired 
to  widen  the  gap.  Everywhere  we  see 
it,  and  a  close,  if  embryonic,  examina- 
tion of  the  incidence  of  Stilps  has  led 
to  an  identification  of  its  three  domi- 
nant strains. 


•Three  Strains  of  the  Stilps  Virus 

Sisters  working  throughout  Ecna- 
mor have  been  able  to  isolate  three 
major  forms  of  the  infecting  virus. 
No  one  of  the  forms  remains  isolated 
for  long,  of  course,  since  each  has  a 
tendency  to  blend  into  and  inflame 
another.  We  wish  here  to  identify  each 
and  remark  upon  its  participation  in 
sex/spirit,  body/mind,  female/male. 

STRAIN  A:  We  have  called  the 
most  common  variety  of  the  disease 
"power-over"  attitudes,  resulting  in 
dependent  and  competitive  behavior. 
This  strain  bears  closest  attention  since 
it  may  well  be  a  more  fundamental 
conformation  than  either  of  the  others, 
and  thus  an  indirect  source  of  all  Stilps. 
STRAIN  A  develops  along  the  fol- 
lowing course: 

First,  simple  differences  between/ 
among  people  are  understood  to  have 
better-or-worse  values.  In  Ecnamor, 
as  we  know,  to  be  male,  white,  and 
heterosexual  is  best.  Judgments  are 
made  not  only  by  one  person  about 
another,  but  also  by  the  whole  society 
about  each  individual.  Infection  begins 
at  birth  when  we  are  given  to  under- 
stand that  all  our  lives  there  will  be 
those  above  us  and  those  below  us, 
and  that  our  task  in  life  is  to  climb 
above  more  people  than  we  allow  to 
climb  above  us. 

It  is  here  in  the  power-over,  or 
value-ridden,  stage  of  the  infection 
that  each  woman  internalizes  society's 
hatred  of  her  and  understands  her  iden- 
tity to  be  utterly  dependent  on  her 
image  as  a  sexual  Other.  The  self-esteem 


56/Quest 


\      ( 


that  is  internalized  by  men  at  this 
same  stage  allows  them  the  psychologi- 
cal assumption  throughout  their  lives 
of  their  natural  superiority. 

The  second  phase  of  the  power- 
over  strain  is  dependency,  wherein 
each  victim  begins  a  neurotic  posses- 
siveness  of  an  other.  Refusing  to  claim 
themselves  wholly,  victims  try  to  own 
the  person  who  has  the  qualities  they 
(unconsciously)  think  they  themselves 
lack.  Mind,  having  no  Body,  marries 
one  so  as  to  possess  it  and  lets  her 
carry  all  his  emotionality  and  carnal 
filth  for  him;  Body,  having  no  Mind, 
marries  one  so  as  to  bask  in  the  glory 
of  its  possession  of  her  and  lets  him 
carry  all  her  initiative,  intellect,  and 
spirit  for  her.  On  the  surface  this  is 
very  convenient;  ultimately  it  is  pain- 
ful. Here  in  Ecnamor  we  are  all  famil- 
iar-even across  race  and  class  lines- 
with  The  Death  Clutch  Syndrome 
wherein  one  partner,  either  in  frontal 
or  piggy-back  attack,  leaps   upon  the 


other-all  teeth  and  fingernails-screech- 
ing or  grunting  those  immortal  words, 
"I  can't  live  without  you!"  The  pat- 
tern is  repeated  in  our  spiritual  lives: 
few  of  us  can  live  without  at  least 
token  acknowledgement  of  some  Great- 
er-Than-We-Spirit  who  abides  above 
us  awaiting  our  dependence  and  depen- 
dent upon  us  for  His  existence. 

The  last  phase  of  this  strain  emerges 
directly  from  the  dependent  needs, 
for  in  seeking  fulfillment  in  an  other 
rather  than  in  self,  victims  are  forced 
to  a  vicious  competition  for  the  per- 
sons and  things  that  they  believe  they 
need.  In  the  Ecnamor  marketplace,  the 
competition  is  fierce,  the  possession 
is  jealous,  and  any  loss  is  violent.  Sex- 
uality and  spirituality  as  we  know  them 
in  Ecnamor  are  afflicted  by  every 
phase  of  Strain  A.  Both  sexual  and 
spiritual  expression  must  operate  with- 
in a  hierarchical  power-over  pattern: 
in  both  there  must  be  acts  of  submis- 
sion   to    something    higher    and    some 


On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps/57 


form  of  obedience,  guilt,  punishment. 
In  both  we  yield  up  control  of  our 
own  life  and  of  some  human  qualities 
to  an  other  on  whom  we  are  neuroti- 
cally dependent.  For  both  sexual  and 
spiritual  rewards  we  compete  with  a 
vengeance.  And  yet,  in  every  phase  of 
the  strain,  the  sexual  and  the  spiritual 
are  driven  further  apart,  identified  as 
separate,  and  set  against  each  other. 

STRAIN  B:  This  form  of  the  virus 
manifests  itself  in  exclusiveness.  It 
usually  takes  the  form  of  mono-behav- 
ior, i.e.,  monogamy,  monotheism, 
monologue,  monopoly,  etc.  When  we 
hear  about  one  and  only  one  god,  one 
and  only  one  love  relationship,  one  and 
only  one  political  line,  we  should  sus- 
pect a  hefty  case  of  Strain  B. 

Historically  men  have  practiced  a 
kind  of  "monogender"  in  preserving 
the  values/traditions  that  bind  them 
together  to  the  exclusion  of  women: 
armies,  religious  orders,  sports,  lodges, 
fraternities,  police  forces,  universities, 
professions,  etc.  Historically  women, 
for  their  part,  have  been  excluded  not 
only  from  the  company  of  men  except 
when  it's  their  turn  to  be  used,  but 
from  the  serious  companionship  of 
each  other.  Yet  despite  the  mutual  ex- 
clusiveness of  the  sexes,  the  Ecnamor 
myth  suggests  that  women  and  men 
can  live  together,  can  even  communi- 
cate. It  suggests  that  the  heterosexual 
mixing  of  one  Mind  and  one  Body 
ought  to  yield  one  Person. 

What  really  happens  is  that  the 
Mind  excludes  the  Body  from  itself 
and  seeks  it  at  a  distance  as  the  Other: 
the  Body  does  not  often  aspire  to  cross 


the  line  that  excludes  it  from  the  world 
of  Mind,  but  when  it  does  so,  it  finds 
that  the  other  Minds  there  cannot 
handle  its  attempting  to  be  both  Mind 
and  Body.  We  do  not  yet  have  statistics 
on  the  number  of  women  who  have 
attempted  to  "'make  it"  as  Minds-only 
in  the  man's  world.  We  do  have  a 
catalogue  of  horror  stories  demon- 
strating the  high  cost  of  success.  It  is 
simply  easier  for  the  woman  to  admit 
to  being  a  Body,  but  then  of  course, 
her  career  has  to  be  scuttled  because 
her  whole  identity  is  defined  as  Body 
only. 

This  exclusiveness  Stilps  strain  can- 
not tolerate  both/and;  it  requires 
either/or.  To  act  both  sexually  and 
spiritually,  with  both  Body  and  Mind, 
is  to  have  a  rare  and  probably  impos- 
sible experience  of  health. 

STRAIN  C:  Expectation  character- 
izes the  third  Stilps  strain.  We  do  not 
simply  mean  "goal  orientation,"  though 
that  too  can  result  in  Stilps-like  symp- 
toms; nor  do  we  mean  our  expectations 
of  another  on  the  basis  of  her  commit- 
ment, since  clearly  we  must  live  with 
some  understanding  of  each  other's 
intentionality. 

This  strain  expresses  itself  in  our 
ungrounded  expectation  of  deliverance 
from  the  necessity  to  be  self-reliant. 
It  is  the  constantly  exacerbated  hope 
that  we  will  not  have  to  take  responsi- 
bility for  our  lives,  that  some  deus  ex 
machina  will  swing  down  from  the  sky 
to  rescue  us  from  having  to  claim  our 
own  "selfs."  We  need  only  wait;  our 
passivity  is  sanctified  by  the  expecta- 
tion. Fulfillment,  we  believe,  will  come 


58/Quest 


"later,"  "next  time"  or  "in  the  fu- 
ture," but  never  now.  The  delay  em- 
phasizes the  possibility  for  fulfillment 
and  thus  the  expectations  grow  more 
and  more  false,  more  and  more  mysti- 
fied, more  and  more  presumptuous. 
Reality  falls  short;  we  are  disappoint- 
ed; we  are  cast  back  upon  our  inade- 
quacies and  frantically  flail  about  for 
someone/something  else  upon  whom 
to  place  our  expectations,  to  whom 
to  give  over  our  personal  power. 

Ecnamor's  continued  heterosexual 
practice  of  the  dating  game  affords 
the  finest  of  expectation  litanies.  "Will 
he  call  me?"  "Will  he  kiss  me?"  "Will 
she  put  out?"  With  each  Blossoming 
Hope,  another  reprieve  from  my  having 
to  guide  my  own  life;  with  each 
Broken  Dream,  another  dangerously 
infected  Stilps  victim.  In  the  future 
projections,  in  the  presumptuous  hopes 
and  fears,  lie  the  superficial  excitement, 
the  adventure,  the  risk,  and  hence  the 
sickness. 

A  religious  aspect  of  this  strain  is 
found  in  the  Christian  hope-of-heaven 
-fear-of-hell  reward  and  punishment 
system  which  behaviorists  certify  as 
one  of  the  most  highly  effective  in 
history.  Not  only  satisfaction  but  pun- 
ishment as  well  is  postponed  until  after 
death;  again  we  remove  ourselves  from 
the  present,  projecting  the  meaning  of 
and  accountability  for  our  actions  into 
a  future  time. 

It  is  a  sad  paradox  that  the  more  ful- 
fillment is  strived  for,  the  less  likely 
it  becomes.  Sexual  orgasm  is  affected 
by  our  experience  of  it.  Many  have 
said  it  is   "best"  when  unsought,  un- 


relied  upon  and  unanticipated.  In  fact, 
the  anticipation  that  drives  us  in  frenzy 
to  orgasm  is  the  same  anticipation  that 
keeps  us  concentrating  on  the  after- 
life, on  future  gratification  or  punish- 
ment. 

Such  expectation  can  be  recognized 
in  the  plight  of  a  stranded  motorist. 
The  motorist  needed  a  jack  for  his  car 
and  as  he  walked  in  the  night  to  the 
nearest  farmhouse  he  fantasized  asking 
to  borrow  a  jack,  being  refused,  get- 
ting angry,  seeing  the  farmer  slam  the 
door  in  his  face.  By  the  time  \\e  got  to 
the  farm,  the  reality  of  that  expecta- 
tion was  so  intense  that  he  walked 
straight  up  to  the  sleeping  household, 
threw  a  rock  in  the  window  and 
shouted,  "You  can  keep  your  goddam 
jack!"  The  plight  of  the  stranded 
motorist  is  only  funny  when  we  recog- 


On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps/59 


nize  in  it  our  own  affliction  with 
Strain  C. 

All  three  strains  of  the  virus  find  a 
vector,  a  carrier,  in  the  Falling  In  Love 
Syndrome.  Patterns  of  power-over, 
dependence  and  jealous  competitive- 
ness (Strain  A)  stride  across  the  pages 
of  Ecnamor's  Falling-In-Love  literature. 
These  same  patterns  inform  the  cul- 
ture's media  and  art.  Hear  them  in  the 
voice  of  the  next  door  neighbor,  in  our 
own  voice:  "It's  bigger  than  both  of 
us.  Don't  fight  it."  "You're  the  air  I 
breathe,  you're  my  everything."  "One 
alone  to  be  my  own." 

Again,  Being  In  Love  demonstrates 
the  painful  consequences  of  the  exclu- 
sivity of  Stilps  (Strain  B).  Only  two 
of  us  who  can  share;  no  one  else  is 
eligible.  Can  you  imagine  three  people 
Being  In  Love  with  each  other?  Never 
wanting  to  be  apart?  Totally  absorbed 
in  each  other?  Possessing,  claiming, 
needing,  among  all  three  of  them? 
We  have  trouble  seeing  Being  in  Love 
as  possible  except  between  two  people 
who  close  out  the  rest  of  the  world. 

And  what  clearer  expression  of 
Being  in  Love  than  the  expectancy  in- 
volved in  sexual  attraction  (Strain  C)? 
Is  it  possible  that  Being  in  Love  is  an 
escape  from  our  need  to  take  responsi- 
bility for  our  "self?"  Is  it  possible  that 
when  we  are  In  Love  what  we  have 
been  seeking  (i.e.,  expecting,  though 
not   ostensibly),   is   what   another  can 

It  is  about  this  section  of  the  report 
that  members  of  the  Commission  have 
raged  most  creatively,  lost  most  sleep,  and 
approached    the    most    unsisterly    conduct. 


give  us-orgasm-and  thereby  claim  us? 
How  much  of  the  exotic  intensity  of 
the  usual  relationship  remains  when 
sex  is  no  longer  a  chase  or  a  mystery? 
Can  couples  remain  In  Love  all  their 
lives-relinquishing  self-reliance  for  oth- 
er-reliance, expectant  of  orgasm  with 
that  one  partner,  exhilarated  or  despair- 
ing in  the  taut  anticipation  of  conquest 
and  possession  games?  Are  not  most 
relationships  in  Ecnamor  broken  after 
the  sexual  expectations  die?  Do  not 
good  relationships  endure  and  grow, 
not  in  spite  of  the  loss  of  such  expecta- 
tions, but  because  of  that  loss? 

Our  report  raises  a  host  of  new 
questions.  We  of  course  urge  further 
research  and  speculation  into  such 
areas  as:  1)  the  relationship  between 
capitalism  and  Stilps;  2)  art  as  a  pos- 
sible expression  of  Stilps;  3)  Ecnamor's 
disease  within  its  own  educational 
system-how  the  different  strains  oper- 
ate in  our  learning  to  perpetuate  Stilps; 
and  4)  how  science  and  technology 
have  contributed  to  or  challenged  the 
spread  of  Stilps— does  knowledge  de- 
pend upon  the  Stilps  virus? 

There  are  undoubtedly  other  areas 
calling  for  exploration.  We  invite  all 
sisters'  reflections  on  and  analysis  of 
their  experiences  in  this  matter.  In  any 
event,  out  of  this  tentative  beginning 
of  analysis,  we  can  already  formulate 
the  broad  outlines  of  a  cure  of  Stilps. 

Toward  a  Cure 

It's  not  easy  to  envision  a  society 
free  of  Stilps,  a  healthy  society.  Utopi- 
an   philosophers,    because    they    have 


60/Quest 


been  men,  have  refused  to  entertain 
what  our  research  continues  to  affirm: 
that  a  healthy  society  will  necessarily 
require  the  loss  of  male  power.  The 
rule  of  Mind  over  Body  must  end;  men 
will  not  "have"  women,  bodies  outside 
their  own;  and  women  will  claim  the 
minds  within  themselves  that  Stilps 
has  denied  them. 

•  Philqgyny 

The  cure  ultimately  lies  with  wom- 
en. Because  power  does  have  its  com- 
pensations, men  will  continue  to  be 
hidden  by  their  own  privilege  from 
the  realization  of  their  sickness.  Con- 
stantly spurred  onward  and  upward  by 
the  battlecries  of  masculinity's  glorious 
conquests,  they  cannot  be  expected  to 
forsake  the  myth  of  their  superiority 
which  has  for  so  many  centuries  bol- 
stered their  alienated  lives.  Women, 
in  no  way  so  inflated  by  the  myths 
and  mystiques,  but  rather  understood 
always  to  be  the  spoils  of  those  splen- 
did battles,  can  better  articulate  the 
sickness,  envision  the  health,  begin 
the  long  cure. 

So  the  Stilps-free  society  might  very 
well  be  an  all-woman  society.  Any  men 
there  would  be  men  who  are  woman- 
identified  and  woman-like.  The  wom- 
en there  would  have  begun  from  the 
only  source  possible-the  material,  the 
bodily,  the  experiential-and  would 
have  claimed  their  minds  (and  other 
"male"  qualities)  while  grounded  by, 
connected  to,  and  living  in  those  bodies. 
The  society  healed  of  its  separations 
could  not  divide  body  and  mind  or  the 
functions  of  sex  and  spirit. 


What  can  it  mean  to  us  here  in  Ec- 
namor  for  the  spirit  to  be  re-embodied? 
It  would  mean  at  least  for  us  to  treat 
the  earth-the  physical,  material  entity 
that  we  as  a  species  live  in/on-no 
longer  as  a  conquest/possession,  but 
as  we  treat  our  own  whole  self.  It 
would  be  to  relate  to  and  care  for 
rather  than  to  rape  and  exploit.  It 
would  be  awareness  of  what  we  are 
doing  now,  of  the  release  of  our  senses 
for  the  total  present  experience-with- 
out rampant  expectations,  without  ex- 
clusivity, without  "control." 

In  our  wholeness  we  are  process  and 
not  product,  and  we  will  expect  neither 
reward  nor  punishment,  failure  nor 
immortality.  Whatever  is  yielded  up 
from  the  earth  or  from  our  "selfs" 
will  be  returned  in  the  same  gesture  to 
the  giver.  To  restore  the  physical  and 
the  spiritual  to  each  other  is  to  trans- 
form material  reality-economic  and 
social  conditions-by  an  extinction  of 
the  power-over  strain  of  Stilps.  It  is 
to  wipe  out  exclusivity  and  to  allow 
an  infinite  variety  within  a  highly  con- 
scious society.  No  one  of  us  will  de- 
pend upon  any  one  person  but  upon 
all  of  us:  just  as  the  spider  web  does 
not  depend  upon  any  one  strand  but 
would  collapse  if  all  strands  were 
broken.  The  web  of  interdependent 
relationships  that  will  support  each 
person  will  be  absolutely  founded,  not 
in  some  future  "other,"  but  in  the 
strong  and  independent  present  rela- 
tionship   of    each    person    to    herself. 

The  wipe-out  of  Stilps  will  mean 
the  unconditional  collapse  of  our  civili- 
zation as  we  have  known  it.  Ecnamor 


On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps/61 


will  be  no  more,  and  our  parting  from 
it  will  be  the  beginning  of  health.  And 
here  is  the  paradox  of  the  vision:  no 
one  of  us  will  make  it  until  all  of  us 
do  so,  but  all  of  us  cannot  do  so  until 
each  of  us  has  done  so.  Thus  we  can 
only  trust  our  consciousness  and  the 
healing  process  itself.  However,  we 
see  two  aspects  of  the  cure,  conscious- 
ness and  healing,  and  potentially  the 
need  for  time/space  interlude  between 
disease  and  cure-a  buffer  state. 

•  The  Consciousness 

The  first  step  in  the  treatment  is 
consciousness:  recognizing  our  symp- 
toms, naming  our  pains,  admitting 
that  we  are  sick.  Heretofore  we  have 
kept  the  sickness  hidden:  worse,  we 
have  pretended  that  Stilps  was  "beau- 
tifuT'-though  "tragic."  We  have  pre- 
tended even  that  its  drive  was  a  great 


Qwes£  goes  on— do  you?  Renew ^^ 
yourself! 


civilizing  force  in  history  and  that, 
above  all,  it  is  "natural"  both  for  us 
to  be  the  sexual  objects  and  for  men 
exclusively  to  think  and  achieve. 

But  we  know  now  that  it  is  not 
"natural"  to  be  so  diseased,  that  there 
is  a  better  way  to  be  in  the  world. 
The  very  survival  of  all  of  us  depends 
upon  this  awakening.  Consciousness  is 
both  a  preliminary  and  a  continuous 
factor  in  growth  toward  health,  for  by 
it  we  begin,  and  through  it  we  reflect 
upon  our  actions  and  create  new  ac- 
tions. 

This  consciousness,  already  happen- 
ing, is  distinguished  by  two  forms: 
1)  the  awareness  of  the  institutional, 
societal,  and  international  dimensions 
of  Stilps  and  thus  particularly  of  its 
class  and  race  implications;  and  2) 
the  awareness/practice  of  philogyny 
itself,  the  affirmation  of  womanness 
and  woman-love  particularly  in  the 
lives  of  open  Lesbians.  These  two 
forms  of  consciousness  will  make  the 
crucial  difference:  either  women  will 
redeem  the  human  enterprise  or  that 
enterprise  itself  will  find  that  Stilps 
is  a  mortal  disease. 

•  The  Healing 

The  second  part  of  the  treatment 
requires  a  quarantine  of  conscious  vic- 
tims from  the  conditions  which  allow 
Stilps  to  flourish.  This  means  literally 
a  separation  to  heal  the  separation.  In 
quantities  great  enough  to  make  the 
qualitative  difference,  women  and  men 
must  separate  from  each  other  and 
undergo  the  radical  treatment  of  philo- 
gyny. Men  quarantine  themselves  from 


62/Quest 


the  epidemic  and  from  women  to  find 
and  to  love  the  womanly,  the  bodily, 
the  materiality,  within  each  of  their 
"selfs."  Unfortunately  our  investiga- 
tion reveals  most  men  to  be  terrified  of 
and  resistant  to  the  necessary  con- 
sciousness; they  clearly  do  not  have 
the  strength/interest  to  separate  from 
women.  Thus  it  is  women  who  must 
leave  men  in  an  exodus  large  enough 
to  allow  1)  us  to  cure  our  "selfs"  and 
2)  men  to  take  seriously  what  that 
exodus  requires  of  them.  In  quarantine 
our  tasks  are  to  love  and  to  work: 
they  begin  separately. 

Loving  begins  as  the  healing  act 
itself  within  each  woman's  body.  It  is 
the  laying  on  of  hands  on  our  "selfs," 
on  each  other,  in  affirmation  of  the 
bodies  we  have  learned  to  hate.  It  is 
the  holding,  the  hearing,  the  caressing, 
the  enfolding,  the  comforting.  It  is 
remembering  our  mothers,  inventing 
our  daughters,  claiming  our  histories 
and  moving  to  touch  and  mend  the 
hurts  of  other  women.  Profound  self- 
love  results.  Unique  relationships  grow. 
Energy  is  discovered,  gathered,  expo- 
nentially increased,  channeled,  dis- 
persed, rediscovered,  gathered  again. 
Infinite  possibilities  appear  for  loving, 
for  moving  with  the  earth  and  bio- 
sphere, for  communicating,  for  learn- 
ing, for  acknowledging  and  using  the 
minds  we  were  told  we  did  not  have. 
To  touch,  to  hold,  and  to  heal  each 
other,  to  learn  from  and  to  teach  our 
"selfs"  and  our  children  these  new 
ways  to  be-that  is  the  movement 
toward  collective  love. 

Working   begins    as   survival  within 


the  quarantine— the  filling  of  material 
needs  for  food,  protection,  physical 
health,  the  care  of  children.  It  is  the 
struggle  to  move  together  in  the  same 
space  as  we  fill  those  needs.  It  is  to 
relate  always  to  each  other  out  of  a 
sense  of  power  in  our  lives,  out  of  each 
woman's  acknowledgement  of  her  own 
worth  and  of  her  value  to  more  than 
one  person.  It  is  to  seek  the  twin  gifts 
of  self-reliance  and  interdependence 
without  backsliding  into  old  dependent 
structures.  Through  the  painful  pro- 
cess we  learn  how  hierarchical  power 
relations  keep  us  down  and  apart  from 
each  other,  how  through  such  relations 
the  fires  of  jealousy,  possessiveness, 
and  competition  are  fed  and  fanned, 
how  the  temporary  empowerment  of 
any  one  person  for  any  task  is  ground- 
ed in  those  who  empower.  To  feed, 
to  clothe,  to  house  each  other,  to 
learn  from  and  to  teach  our  "selfs" 
and  our  children  these  new  ways  to 
be-that  is  the  movement  toward  col- 
lective work.  So  both  love  and  work 
are  freed  from  the  Stilps  that  has  sep- 
arated them;  they  move  into  collective 
being  and  action,  there  to  become  in- 
distinguishable one  from  the  other. 

Further  functions  of  the  treatment 
are  more  obscure.  The  collective  prac- 
tices that  underlie  our  love/work  will 
create  structures  and  processes  so  new 
that  they  cannot  yet  be  conceived. 
We  have  some  grasp  upon  how  the  re- 
uniting of  the  physical/ mental  will  have 
occurred  in  individuals  but  we  cannot 
yet  imagine  the  dimensions  or  the  na- 
ture of  a  collective  body/mind.  Still  it 
is  a  sense  of  that  collective  social  entity 


On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps/63 


which  must  be  held  in  the  depths  of 
our  consciousness  throughout  our  quar- 
antine. 

•The  Buffer  State 

Probably  the  coming  into  being  of  a 
large  collective  force  of  reunited  body/ 
mind  will  mean  the  re-entry  on  the  part 
of  some  women  into  the  world  of 
disease,  there,  in  small  collective  forces 
of  health  and  solidarity,  to  create  and 
maintain  a  buffer  state  between  the 
quarantined  areas  and  the  epidemic  of 
Stilps.  Such  re-entry  can  create  the 
atmosphere  for  greater  consciousness 
on  the  part  of  women  still  stricken 
with  Stilps  and  thus  hasten  their  seek- 
ing of  the  philogynous  treatment.  Fur- 
ther, such  a  buffer  state  could  hold  off 
the  spread  of  Stilps  from  the  quaran- 
tined areas;  the  steady  flow  of  con- 
scious women  already  moving  into  iso- 
lation from  Ecnamor  must  be  accom- 
modated and  the  love/work  that  go  on 
there  must  be  protected,  given  time  to 
grow  strong  in  quantity  as  well  as  in 
quality. 

The  action  and  reflection  of  the 
women  re-entering  the  diseased  society 
-perhaps  on  a  rotation  basis-will  re- 
quire the  formation  of  careful  coali- 
tions and  strategies  with  others  who 
are  heavily  victimized  by  Ecnamor's 
disease.  This  we  have  learned;  that  to 
join  other  victims  in  those  economic, 
national,  and/or  racial  struggles  re- 
quires health— probably  health  that  can 
only  be  attained  by  the  quarantine. 
Individual  women  of  whatever  color 
or  class  who  have  not  been  isolated 
from  the  disease  and  who  thus  try  to 


fight  only  Stilps'  symptoms  and  not 
its  causes  succumb  to  the  disease  and 
on  one  level  actually  encourage  the 
epidemic. 

Without  the  collective  conscious- 
ness that  the  quarantined  philogynous 
experience  will  yield,  we  are  still 
Bodies-only  pretending  that  we  can 
share  the  glory  of  a  revolution  that, 
as  usual,  will  belong  to  Minds-only. 
It  may  well  be  true  that  if  we  are  not 
completely  healed  of  Stilps  and  united 
with  other  women  also  completely 
healed  of  it  then  we  will  only  have 
arrested  the  sickness  and  any  re-entry 
into  society  will  mean  falling  back  into 
Ecnamor's  dominant  patterns  as  soon 
as  we  are  exposed  to  them.  Such  a 
prospect  suggests  that  the  quarantine 
itself  must  last  for  several  generations. 

We  remind  the  sisterhood  that  this 
memorandum  itself  staggers  under  the 
heavy  effects  of  Stilps.  Our  quarantines 
are  as  yet  too  few,  our  healing  is  too 
frightening  for  too  many  of  us,  and 
our  reflections  on  our  actions  are  too 
limited.  Yet  we  know  better  each 
day  that  we  will  not  be  both  sexual 
and  spiritual,  we  will  not  unite  our 
bodies  with  our  minds  until  we  love 
and  work  in  isolation  from  the  condi- 
tions that  encourage  the  disease.  For 
those  who  can  now  make  that  choice, 
let  us  be  about  that  business. 

Sally  Gearhart  is  Professor  of  Speech 
Communication  at  San  Francisco  State. 

Peggy  Cleveland,  unemployed  fem- 
inist, is  researching  women,  land,  and 
food  production. 


dAIQuest 


Renew  Yourself! 

Dear  Subscriber  and  Reader, 

Wondering  what  all  those  catchy  one  liners  are  about?  Your  subscription 
to  Quest,  of  course! 

This  issue,  "Women  and  Spirituality,"  is  the  last  of  Volume  I.  If  your  sub- 
scription started  with  the  first  issue,  "Processes  of  Change,"  then  it  expires 
with  this  issue.  If  you  subscribe  for  your  second  (and,  why  not,  third!)  year 
now,  you'll  be  sure  to  get  your  next  issue  of  Quest  as  soon  as  it  comes  out. 

Quest's  first  year  has  been  a  challenge  for  us  and  we  hope  for  you  too.  We 
are  excited  over  what  the  next  year  holds.  More  and  more  women  are 
writing  articles  and  submitting  photos  and  graphics. 

The  themes  of  the  second  year  build  upon  the  thoughts  and  inspirations 
of  the  first.  In  "Future  Visions  and  Fantasies"  (Vol.  II,  No.  1)  we'll  present 
some  feminist  designs  of  cities,  ideas  for  new  economic  and  social  relation- 
ships and  some  plain  far-out  Utopian  fantasies.  Then  onto  practical  questions 
in  "Theories  of  Revolution"  (Vol.  II,  No.  2):  what  are  the  elements  of  revolu- 
tion; what  does  it  take;  when  and  how  does  it  begin;  can  we  make  it  happen? 
From  there  we  will  turn  to  the  "how  to's"  in  "Organizations  and  Strategies" 
(Vol.  II,  No.  3)  and  the  meanings  and  possibilities  of  "Leadership"  (Vol.  II, 
No.  4). 

We  were  going  to  offer  a  gimmick  to  persuade  you  to  resubscribe.  (We 
had  in  mind  a  vacation  trip  to  Washington  with  overnight  accommodations 
with  Quest  members!)  But  we  realized  that  we  don't  need  to  play  games  to 
get  your  support  and  subscription.  You  understand  that  your  subscription  is 
what  makes  Quest  possible.  We  hope  that  Quest  is  as  important  to  you  as  you 
are  to  us.  We  need  your  subscription  renewal  to  survive. 

We  hope  you'll  fill  out  the  coupon  on  the  title  page  flap  right  now  before 
you  file  this  issue  away  on  your  shelves  and  let  it  slip  your  mind.  Just  check 
the  appropriate  renewal  box  (for  one  year  or  two)  and  circle  the  first  issue 
of  your  new  subscription.  We  thank  you  for  reading  and  supporting  Quest 

Sincerely, 

The  Quest  Staff 

P.S.  We  wish  that  we  could  offer  a  reduced  rate  for  2  or  3  year  renewals  but 
with  increasing  paper,  printing,  and  postage  costs  we  just  can't  afford  it. 
However,  if  our  number  of  subscribers  tripled  in  the  next  year,  we  should  be 
able  to  keep  our  price  the  same  and  spare  you  an  increase  in  six  months! 
(Hint-ask  your  friends,  relatives  and  lovers  to  subscribe!) 


Quest/ '65 


New  daughters  of  Minerva 
Seek  directions  from  the  stars 

like  ancient  sailing  women 

steering  ships 

through  dark  tumults  of  sea 

eyes  skyward. 
Goddess  of  wisdom  and  war 
The  daughters  are  learning 
The  secret  of  your  vision 

mystery  of  planet  motions 

mystery  of  woman.    * 


Along  with  the  other  ancient  arts, 
astrology  is  a  victim.  What  was  once 
women's  powerful  intuitional  science 
has  been  relegated  to  trashy,  sexist 
magazines  and  the  inanities  of  the 
daily  newspaper.  Astrology  originated 
in  matriarchal  times  as  a  key  to  under- 
standing the  Self  in  harmony  with  the 
Universe  and  the  cyclic  nature  of  time. 
Now  we  see  patriarchy  misuse  it  as  a 
fortune-telling  amusement  or,  if  taken 
seriously,  as  a  further  instrument  in 
sex  role  oppression  and  perpetuation 
of  male  values. 

Women  invented  astrology;  we  now 
reclaim  it  for  ourselves.  As  we  move 
into  new  ways  of  being,  we  need  tools 
for  getting  in  touch  with  our  intuition, 
our  power,  our  awareness  of  life  from 
new  perspectives.  Astrology  can  be 
helpful  as  a  descriptive  framework  for 
our  lives,  for  developing  a  new  under- 
standing of  our  universe  and  how  we 
operate    in    it.     Birth    chart    interpre- 

Written  by  Barbara  A  twood  for  the 
opening  of  Minerva,  Feminist  Astro- 
logy Center. 


Chart 


by  Minerva 


graphics  by  Carol  Lipton 


66/Quest,  vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


tation  can  provide  a  woman  with  a 
new  look  at  her  life,  in  terms  of 
both  general  directions  and  specific 
present    issues. 

Like  other  women,  we  found  it 
difficult  for  many  years  to  accept  any 
validity  in  astrology.  But  each  of  us, 
in  her  own  way,  came  to  take  it  very 
seriously  as  we  learned  what  a  valuable 
and  practical  tool  it  is  for  looking  at 
ourselves  and  other  women  as  whole 
beings  rather  than  sets  of  partially 
functioning  fragments.  Knowledge  of 
our  patterns  of  behavior  challenges  us 
to  new  areas  of  personal  fulfillment. 
We  realized  that  power  for  change  lies 
in  our  hands;  no  external  authority 
(individual  or  societal)  can  tell  us  what 
we  need  for  our  growth  the  way  our 
charts  have  taught  us  about  our  inter- 
nal cycles  and  rhythms.  We  learned 
that  astrology  frees  us  to  exercise  our 
power  for  change. 

Minerva  began  one  evening  in  April 
1974  while  we  all  sat  around  the  table, 
immersed  in  our  favorite  pasttime- 
drawing  and  discussing  charts.  Dor- 
othy told  us  of  a  woman  who  had  just 
bought  an  astrology  center  in  New 
Mexico.  Two  thoughts  flashed  out  in 
rapid  succession:  "Wouldn't  it  be  won- 
derful to  go  to  work  there?"  and 
"Why  not  start  a  center  here?"  With- 
in the  week  we  did. 

Reinterpretation 

Working  together  we  began  to  no- 
tice very  quickly  that  as  feminists  it 
was  nearly  impossible  to  work  with 
the  totally  sexist,  traditional  interpre- 


tations that  were  available.  It  became 
clear  that  women  were  only  mention- 
ed in  terms  of  being  a  good  mother,  a 
homemaker,  a  nag,  too  fussy,  aggres- 
sive, or  psychologically  oppressive  to 
her  children  or  husband. 

So  began  the  work  of  reinterpreta- 
tion,! a  process  which  is  slow  but  ex- 
citing. We  are  eliminating  the  idea  that 
certain  signs,  planets  or  aspects  are 
inherently  better  for  either  females  or 
males  because  of  the  sexist  qualities 
traditionally  ascribed  to  them.  The 
"masculine"  signs  are  all  "positive, 
active  and  intellectual".  The  "femin- 
ine" signs  are  all  "negative,  passive- 
receptive  and  emotional."  For  exam- 
ple: 

a)  Libra— masculine,  positive:  makes 
a  woman  unfeminine,  i.e.,  assertive 
and  intellectually  oriented. 

b)  Cancer— feminine,  negative:  mak- 
es a  man  too  sensitive  and  nurturing . 

We  are  integrating  these  traits  and 
naming  them  as  being  neither  feminine 
nor  masculine. 

The  energies  and  activities  represen- 
ted by  the  planets  and  houses  have 
also  become  patriarchally  defined.  For 
example,  it  has  been  particularly  im- 
portant that  we  redefine  our  under- 
standing of  the  moon's  function  and 
energy: 

The  equation  of  the  Sun  with  male 
and  the  Moon  with  female  has  distorted 
their  meaning.  The  Sun  represents  that 
blazing  life  force  which  is  available  to 
us  all,  and  which  can  burn  us  out  if  it 
is  not  channeled  and  directed.  The 
symbolic  role  of  the  Moon  in  our  lives 
is    to    represent    how    we   grow    and 


Chart  Your  Self/67 


+  4- 
ft 


<Ptiltf*.K 


68/Quest 


channel  our  energy.  It  is  our  guide. 
Each  month  it  plays  out  for  us  the 
spiral  of  our  growth.  It  reflects  to  us 
as  much  light  as  we  can  absorb  directly, 
beginning  with  a  tiny  amount,  increas- 
ing up  to  full 

It  shows  that  there  are  times  when 
we  are  high  energy  and  times  when  we 
are  low  energy,  that  we  need  times  of 
growth  (waxing)  and  times  of  reflection 
and  consolidation  (waning).  Each 
month  the  Moon  reaches  its  peak  in  a 
different  place  (sign),  showing  us  that 
our  growth  pattern  is  a  spiral  rather 
than  a    static  cycle/circle. 

Each  phase  of  the  Moon  happens 
slightly  differently  each  time,  though 
there  is  a  general  repetition,  symbol- 
izing that  we  keep  dealing  with  differ- 
ent aspects  and  issues  over  and  over 
again  but  from  different  perspectives. 
By  the  Moon's  sign  and  house  place- 
ment in  our  charts,  we  can  understand 
how  we  filter  I  reflect  information  to 
ourselves  that  we  need  for  our  own 
growth. 

Practicing  Feminist  Astrology 

The  art  of  astrology  begins  with  the 
calculation  of  the  birth  chart,  which 
is  basically  a  map  of  the  planets'  posi- 
tions in  relation  to  the  earth  at  the 
time  and  place  of  one's  birth.  This 
gives  an  approximate  diagram  of  the 
magnetic  field  operating  at  the  mom- 
ent a  person  takes  her  first  breath. 
Because  this  is  the  first  energy  pattern- 


The  second  year  is  coming!  Re- 
new yourself! 


ing  that  she  internalizes,  her  first 
impression  of  the  world,  it  has  part- 
icular significance  on  how  she  appro- 
aches her  life.  By  studying  her  chart, 
a  woman  can  become  more  aware  of 
the  kinds  of  activities  that  come  easily, 
and  those  that  are  difficult  for  her. 
With  this  knowledge  of  her  tendencies 
and  potentials,  she  can  work  to  change 
the  patterns  in  her  life  and  make  dec- 
isions about  the  kinds  of  experiences 
he  wants. 

This  knowledge  is  power,  power 
enabling  a  woman  to  sense  her  own 
uniqueness,  to  become  aware  of  her 
strengths  and  weaknesses,  and  to  take 
control  of  her  own  identity.  In  patriar- 
chal society,  where  a  woman  has  no 
claim  to  anything,  the  revolution  be- 
gins here.  To  claim  her  own  definition- 
that  these  qualities,  whatever  they  may 
be,  are  her  own  and  can  be  changed 
or  controlled  by  no  one  but  herself- 
is  real  empowerment. 


THE 

LESBIAN 
TIDE 

A  VOICE  OF  THE 

FEMINIST  LESBIAN 

COMMUNITY 

sisters  subscribe  now! 

$7.50  per  year  in  U.S. 
$  .65  for  sample  copy 
$10.00  Institutional  rate 

send  to:  tide  collective 

373  No   Western   •    Room  202 
Los  Angeles.  Calif.  90004 


bulk  rates  available 
upon  request 


Chart  Your  Self/69 


Astrology  is  by  no  means  the  only 
tool  for  self-understanding,  but  its  spe- 
cial value  is  in  its  ability  to  picture  the 
personality  as  a  whole,  to  give  a  sym- 
bolic image  of  all  the  forces  at  work  in 
the  individual  experience.  With  this 
total  picture  a  woman  can  begin  a 
process  of  sorting  these  forces  so  that 
she  can  work  with  her  own  energies, 
rather  than  against  them  in  self-defeat. 
She  can  find  the  hidden  strengths  that 
can  help  her  through  what  is  consis- 
tently difficult.  She  can  choose  what 
she  will  emphasize,  what  behavior  she 
wants  to  change.  In  a  sense,  her  birth 
chart  is  a  set  of  instructions  about  how 
she   can  work  toward  self-integration. 

In  doing  interpretations,  we  try  to 
give  women  as  much  information  as 
we  can  about  the  different  possible 
meanings,  and  encourage  a  woman  to 
reflect  on  the  chart  herself.  We  reject 
the  hierarchy  relationship  that  many 
astrologers  encourage,  i.e.,  the  I-know- 
what  -  is-going-on-here-and-I'll-tell-you- 
what-you-need  syndrome.  We  believe 
that  each  woman  must  decide  for  her- 
self what  her  birth  chart  means,  and 
so  our  main  focus  is  on  helping  women 
understand  their  charts  so  these  can 
become  useful  tools  in  their  daily  lives. 

For  example,  the  planets  symbolize 
forms  of  experience  common  to  every- 
one, personality  components  that  we 
all  share.  But  the  way  the  planets  fit 
into  the  various  signs  shows  how  these 
basic  forms  can  be  greatly  modified  in 
different  individuals.  For  instance,  ev- 
eryone has  a  mind,  an  intellect,  a  cap- 
acity for  communication  (symbolized 
by  the  planet  Mercury);  yet  our  minds 


V 


\ 


r> 


\ 


•  %Mfc 

b* 


-^y  v 


Csls*    I 


10/Quest 


work  in  different  ways.  One  person 
may  be  quick,  perceptive,  and  full  of 
ideas,  yet  easily  scattered  and  dis- 
tracted. Another  may  have  great  mental 
concentration  and  memory,  yet  be  slow 
to  learn  and  stubborn  in  her  opinions. 
The  sign  that  Mercury  is  in  can  reveal 
these  different  tendencies  and  help  us 
understand  one  another. 

One  of  the  things  we  stress  over  and 
over  to  women  is  that  there  is  nothing 
inherently  good  or  bad  about  anything 
in  a  birth  chart.  The  chart  indicates 
potentials,  not  fate.  (Male  interpreta- 
tions would  have  us  believe  otherwise. 
Anatomy  is  destiny.. .Your  birth  chart 
is  destiny...).  Rather,  how  a  particular 
planet  placement  or  aspect  affects 
someone  depends  upon  how  she  relates 
to  it.  A  chart  is  never  incomplete.  No- 
where in  a  chart  is  there  a  challenge 
that  cannot  be  met  by  the  strengths 
within  it. 

Political  Relevance 

To  say  that  the  personal  is  political 
is  to  say  that  everything  the  individual 
does  affects  the  context  in  which  she 
lives.  We  do  not  live  in  a  vacuum;  our 
actions  have  repercussions  on  the  outer 
world.  At  times  individuals  have  had 
as  much  or  more  effect  on  their  envir* 
onment  as  mass  movements.  As  femin- 
ists we  are  attempting  to  change  our 
lives  completely.  We  are  therefore  act- 
ing out  of  step  with  the  patriarchy  in 
which  we  live.  This  creates  a  certain 
amount  of  tension  which  grows  accord- 
ing to  the  amount  of  power  we  possess. 
As    individual  women,   acting  from  a 


clear  sense  of  our  own  control  in  any 
situation,  we  step  out  of  the  group  of 
powerless  objects  being  acted  upon. 
Women  reclaiming  their  personal  power 
is  a  basic  political  act  of  feminism. 
This  concept  of  individual  action  as 
highly  political  is  important  in  under- 
standing the  political  relevance  of  as- 
trology. As  feminist  astrologers,  we  use 
the  birth  chart  as  an  essential  tool  in 
the  process  of  regaining  our  personal 
power. 

Footnote 

iSee  D.  Riddle  and  R,  Dobson,  Our 
Birth  Charts  (Tucson:  Sufi  Community  Press 
1974). 

Minerva,  Feminist  A stro  logy  Cen  ter, 
is  a  partnership  of  three  feminists  oper- 
ating in  Tucson  and  Cleveland. 

fJUUL 


IUSI 


NEWS 


^ 


Feminist  Alliance  Against  Rape 
Bi-monthly  Newsletter 

Over  200  groups  worldwide  are  or- 
ganized against  rape.  Their  political 
and  tactical  struggles  are  of  interest 
to  all  feminists.  Read  F.A.A.R.  News 
for: 

•  news  of  innovative  anti-rape  pro- 
jects   being    developed    by    women. 

•  analysis  of  issues  and  problems 
which  face  women  committed  to  stop- 
ping rape  .  .  .  prisons,  reformism,  pro- 
fessionalism, funding,  rape  preven- 
tion, etc. 

Annual  subscription  rates: 
$5/individuals,  rape  groups 
$10/institutions 

P.O.  Box  21033 
V^         Washington,  D.C.  20009  J 


Chart  Your  Self/71 


Editor's  Note-The  religious  revival 
associated  with  the  twelfth  century  led 
thousands  of  women  to  enter  convents. 
Most  of  the  religious  movements  of  the 
period,  dominated  by  male  clergy,  ex- 
erted strong  pressures  to  limit  women's 
independence   within   their  nunneries. 


^cmvnunitu 


Against  this  background  appeared  a 
women's  religious  movement  independ- 
ent of  any  male  impetus  or  direction- 
the  beguines.  The  name  was  attached  to 
the  movement  by  its  opponents  in  an 
unsuccessful  smear  campaign  to  link 
its  adherents  with  the  Albigensian  here- 


72/Quest,   vol.  I  no.  4,  spring,  1975 


^L^{~ 


by  Gracia  C 

Ax    graphics  by  Carol  Clemefflmxd 


tics.  The  movement  was  primarily  ur- 
ban, in  part  a  result  of  the  female  ma- 
jority in  medieval  cities;  they  were 
women  who  often  were  unable  to  fend 
for  themselves  individually  and  there- 
fore sought  a  collective  existence.  By 
the  early  fourteenth  century   the  be- 


guines  had  established  highly  complex 
and  self-sufficient  political,  economic 
and  social  systems.  As  the  beguines 
grew  in  numbers,  the  church,  threaten- 
ed by  their  refusal  to  follow  the  tradi- 
tional role  of  women  in  religion,  was 
successful  in  integrating  the  beguines 
into  organized  religious  life  and  sever- 
ing the  independence  which  made  their 
movement  successful  In  the  fifteenth 
century  the  final  remnants  of  those 
women  who  dared  to  live  their  religious 
lives  without  formal  vows  were  sought 
out  by  the  church  and  their  communi- 
ties destroyed. 

An  understanding  of  the  rise  and 
fall  of  the  beguines  can  provide  a 
strength  and  vision  of  the  viability  of 
present  and  future  groups  of  women 
who  establish  independent  communi- 
ties separate  from  men.  The  institutions 
the  beguines  set  up  to  reconcile  class 
differences,  to  meet  the  needs  of  mem- 
bers for  food,  clothing,  housing  and 
social  and  spiritual  nourishment,  as 
well  as  the  ultimate  decline  of  the 
movement  provide  insight  into  the 
strengths  and  weaknesses  inherent  in 
various  alternative  structures.  The  be- 
guines are  a  medieval  example  of  how 
women  can  live  and  work  together. 
Their  collapse,  and  the  reasons  for  it, 
raise  questions  for  the  women's  move- 
ment today. 

Most  people  believe  that  during  the 
Middle  Ages  a  deathly  stillness  de- 
scended over  Western  Europe,  freezing 
its  inhabitants  into  hereditary  roles 
defined  by  custom  and  rigidly  en- 
forced by  feudal  orders  and  the  Church. 


The  Beguines:  A  Medieval  Women's  Community/73 


Women,  in  particular,  had  no  rights  and 
no  influence  except  through  their  men, 
who  exchanged  women  as  political 
chattels  if  noble,  or  as  units  of  labor  if 
peasants. 

In  fact,  during  the  high  middle  ages, 
i.e.,  the  twelfth  through  fourteenth 
centuries,  a  large  number  of  women 
within  the  mainstream  of  Catholic  or- 
thodoxy took  it  upon  themselves  to 
provide  spiritual  stimulation,  recogni- 
tion and  security  for  each  other.  Hun- 
dreds of  thousands  of  them  built  lives 
of  spiritual  and  economic  independence 
as  beguines  in  the  towns  of  Northern 
France  and  Germany  and  the  inter- 
vening Low  Countries.  Contempora- 
ries conferred  on  these  conspicuously 
pious  women  a  semi-clerical  respect. 
Women  in  every  part  of  society  drew 
strength  from  personal  contact  with 
beguines  and  the  vigorous  alternative 
they  offered  to  life  with  men. 

Turbulence  and  instability  in  medie- 
val society  during  these  centuries  gave 
such  women  a  powerful  motivation 
for  self-reliance.  Traditional  means  of 
delivering  daily  needs  and  assuring  sta- 
tus could  not  be  depended  on.  Political 
groupings  shifted  constantly.  Rapid 
growth  of  wholesale  trade  and  concen- 
trated industry,  especially  in  textiles, 
shifted  power  to  new  cities  and  intro- 
duced money  and  mysterious  economic 
forces  into  the  political  process.  The 
booming  cloth  industry  bloated  towns 
with  unmarried  wage  earners.  Institu- 
tions developed  to  protect  commerce 
competed  openly  with  rural,  feudal 
patterns. 

In  the  twelfth  century  women  who 


practiced  Christian  virtue  on  their 
own,  dressing  and  living  simply  and 
not  associating  with  men,  began  to 
stand  out  as  a  separate  category  of 
person.  They  followed  this  pattern  of 
life  in  many  places-in  family  homes, 
alone  in  working-class  huts,  in  town- 
houses  they  shared  with  likeminded 
relatives,  near  sympathetic  convents, 
and  in  remote  wild  places.  In  the 
thirteenth  century  they  began  to  call 
themselves  beguines.  Their  growing 
numbers,  self-awareness,  and  solidarity 
enabled  them  to  protect  and  develop 
their  way  of  life  into  the  next  century. 
Not  only  did  beguinism  begin  with 
the  independent  impulses  of  thousands 
of  individuals,  but  it  proceeded  to  take 
its  form  from  their  need  to  become 
independent  of  the  established  institu- 
tions of  society.  Family  life  seriously 
hampered  their  efforts  to  act  out  the 
ideals  of  chastity  and  unworldliness 
endorsed  by  the  Church.  It  subjected 
them  to  living  conditions  and  schedules 
designed  by  their  husbands  and  fathers. 
Just  maintaining  a  family's  house  and 
social  position  meant  many  hours  of 
irreligious  activity.  Most  young  women 
living  at  home  faced  strong  pressure 
to  marry  and  improve  the  family's 
financial  or  political  position.  Rural 
women  often  depended  entirely  on 
their  place  in  the  family  for  income. 
Widows  and  townspeople  controlled 
their  own  property,  but  still  felt  con- 
stant psychological  pressure  to  marry. 
A  woman  who  adopted  voluntary  chas- 
tity proved  she  could  provide  herself 
one  of  the  prerequisites  to  a  spiritual 
life.     Clearly,     beguines    had    to    find 


74/Quest 


alternatives  to  the  family  strong  enough 
to  protect  them  from  a  family-oriented 
society. 

Nunneries  were  popular,  but  un- 
suitable for  many  women.  For  one 
thing,  nuns  needed  considerable  family 
support.  Monastic  discipline  effectively 
prevented  them  from  earning  a  living 
by  requiring  about  six  hours  of  ritual 
prayer  a  day  and  forbidding  all  contact 
with  the  world.  The  overcrowded  con- 
vents consequently  accepted  only 
wealthy  women  with  enough  property 
to  support  them  for  life. 

Living  Within  the 
Beguines  Community 

In  the  towns,  beguines  gathered 
along  certain  streets  much  as  weavers, 
butchers,  and  other  tradespeople  did. 
Dayton  Phillips'  careful  compilation 
of  their  wills  and  addresses  in  Stras- 
bourg uncovers  a  whole  section  of 
town  inhabited  mainly  by  women  who 
shared  houses,  rented  to  one  another, 
bequeathed  houses  to  their  roommates, 
or  provided  for  the  selection  of  other 
beguines  as  tenants  as  the  present 
residents  left  or  died.  Concentrated 
in  cheap,  subdivided  houses  in  the 
artisan  areas  of  town,  they  particular- 
ly favored  land  owned  by  the  Francis- 
can and  Dominican  monasteries.  The 
friars  were  willing  to  experiment  with 
new  terms  of  leasing  which  did  not 
provide  for  including  women's  families. 
They  leased  rooms  within  houses  and 
let  tenants  leave  if  they  found  their 
own  replacements.  They  wanted  to 
acquire  property,  so  often  exchanged 


a  life  interest  in  a  house  for  a  woman's 
farmland  in  a  nearby  village.  They  also 
would  lease  at  reduced  rates  to  women 
who  agreed  to  forfeit  the  right  of 
medieval  renters  to  pass  the  lease  on 
to  their  descendents.  By  such  means, 
a  well-defined  neighborhood  grew  up, 
with  beguines  as  the  nucleus  of  a  larger 
group  of  unattached  women  who  were 
not  recognized  as  beguines  but  often 
left  property  to  other  women  or  be- 
guines. Phillips  estimates  that  in  Stras- 
bourg, this  community  amounted  to 
ten  to  twenty-five  percent  of  the  city, 
and  that  other  major  cities  supported 
communities  of  similar  importance. 

Such  a  large  number  of  houses,  each 
containing  up  to  seven  women,  pro- 
vided a  wide  choice  of  living  condi- 
tions. Some  houses  had  reputations  for 
spiritual  enthusiasm  and  austerity, 
while  others  catered  to  women  more 
interested  in  the  independence  and  re- 
spectability available  through  the  be- 
guine  life.  Houses  varied  widely  in 
their    rules    concerning   hours,    meals, 


RT 


:A JOURNAL  OF 
"RADICAL  THERAPY 

FORMERLY 
ROUGH  TIMES  and  THE  RADICAL  THERAPIST 

articles,  poetry,  analysis,  ideas,  and  news  of 
the  growing  mental  health  movement 
working  towards  human  liberation 


RT,  PO.  BOX  89,  W.SOMERVILLE,  MASS. 

02144 


name . 
street , 
city 


O  subscriptions  (8  issues)  $6      Oforeign  $10 
O  current  issue    $.75 


The  Beguines:  A  Medieval  Women's  Community/75 


living  expenses  and  church  attendance. 
Through  the  strength  of  the  beguine 
community  women  could  choose  these 
options  on  their  own  initiative,  irre- 
spective of  their  wealth  or  past  behav- 
ior. 

The  independence  of  the  beguine 
movement  from  clerical  leaders  or 
overseers  distinguished  it  from  all  other 
Christian  groups  of  the  time.  Beguines 
had  sought  no  one's  permission  to  be 
chaste  or  thoughtful,  and  their  virtue 
was  not  enforced  by  obedience  to  their 
family  or  religious  head.  Because  they 
had  observed  parish  duties  and  adhered 
to  orthodox  beliefs,  the  Church  hier- 
archy could,  at  that  time,  find  no  rea- 
son to  oppose  them.  Meanwhile,  they 
undermined  the  Church  by  swaying 
the  spiritual  orientation  of  the  time 
toward  virtues  that  anyone  could  prac- 
tice. Humility  and  compassion  did  not 
require  the  same  overhead  as  esoteric 
meditation,  theology  or  dramatic  self- 
abasement.  The  degree  to  which  be- 
guines found  spiritual  stimulation  in 
each  other  and  ignored  the  Church 
hierarchy  obviously  unnerved  many 
officials,  who  kept  giving  them  permis- 
sion to  do  the  things  they  already  were 
doing. 

Women  interested  in  intellectual  and 
spiritual  questions  came  to  the  beguine 
communities  to  learn  to  read  and  dis- 
cuss the  scriptures  and  other  popular 
issues  of  the  day.  Most  beguine  crea- 
tive activity  took  the  form  of  influence- 
ing  other  women,  either  informally  or 
during  house  meetings.  These  meetings 
were  secret  to  prevent  tale-bearing,  so 
most   of  their  content  has  been  lost. 


Only  a  few  letters  survive,  between 
people  who  met  in  one  place  and  kept 
in  touch  through  their  wanderings. 

Hostile  clerics  denounced  their  un- 
natural thirst  for  knowledge,  interest 
in  theological  questions  and  respect 
for  each  other's  opinions.  Beguines 
shocked  Church  observers  by  arguing 
with  their  pastors,  debating  the  Trinity, 
and  weighing  the  merits  of  manual 
labor  against  those  of  renouncing  all 
possessions.  They  directly  inspired  nuns 
and  laywomen  to  pursue  their  own 
spiritual    interests   with  more  energy. 

Beguines  soon  began  to  provide  for 
themselves  the  services  normally  pro- 
vided through  family  connections.  Very 
early  they  contributed  to  hospitals  for 
their  sick  and  aged.  By  1250,  in  most 
towns  they  had  formed  corporations 
in  imitation  of  the  craft  guilds,  through 
which  they  bargained  with  city,  Church, 
and  overlord  for  various  privileges. 
Sometimes  beguines  got  tax  relief  or 
the  right  to  ply  certain  trades  without 
joining  the  appropriate  guilds.  Whether 
or  not  she  joined  one  of  the  beguine 
corporations  and  enjoyed  its  privileges, 
a  beguine  arranged  her  life  as  she 
liked.  Many  women  were  beguines 
for  a  short  time,  perhaps  after  a  per- 
sonal crisis.  A  beguine  chose  the  trade 
which  most  appealed  to  her.  Beguines 
commonly  nursed  the  sick,  washed 
wool,  cloth  or  clothing,  baked  bread, 
spun  and  ran  schools  for  young  girls. 
Spinning  occupied  a  good  part  of  the 
female  population  of  Europe.  Before 
widespread  use  of  the  spinning  wheel, 
the  flourishing  cloth  industry  had  an 
insatiable    appetite    for    wool    thread. 


7  61  Quest 


^^-W  * 


Mm 


% 


:? 


1      V 


V 


;/''•#>;    "* 


In 

:  I 

P:  i>  Ifi 


Carrying  only  a  spindle,  a  beguine 
could  settle  anywhere  and  immediately 
have  work.  They  often  traveled  to  stay 
with  illustrious  people  or  hear  famous 
preachers.  They  chose  their  own  com- 
panions, and  any  activity  they  found 
rewarding  could  be  carried  on  with 
honor  as  part  of  a  chaste  and  therefore 
already  special  life. 

Life  in  the  beguinage  was  informal 
and  quiet.  Women  lived,  worked  and 
visited  in  their  own  homes.  Novices 
and  women  under  thirty  lived  in  a 
large  building,  ate  together,  and  met 
weekly  for  discussion  and  correction. 
The  whole  beguinage  met  monthly  for 
mutual  criticism  and  exhortation,  at 
which  time  infractions  of  the  rules 
were     punished.     Beguines    controlled 


their  own  property  and  could  rent  to 
other  beguines  and  bequeath  part  of  it 
as  they  chose.  The  remainder,  includ- 
ing houses  in  the  beguinage,  reverted 
to  the  beguinage  when  the  owner  died 
or  left.  The  Grand  Mistress  or  Martha 
administered  common  property  in  the 
name  of  the  infirmary.  Sick  or  desti- 
tute residents  could  get  free  meals 
at  the  infirmary  and  retire  to  live 
there. 

Such  practical  advantages  attracted 
many  women  to  beguine  communities, 
but  they  also  were  the  main  centers  of 
religious  thought  for  interested  women. 
Nunneries  at  that  time  frequently  did 
not  even  teach  their  members  the 
meaning  of  the  daily  services  they  re- 
cited,   though    a   few  were   noted   for 


The  Beguines:  A  Medieval  Women's  Community/77 


scholarship  and  mysticism. 

Absence  of  central  authority  or 
hierarchy  within  the  beguine  movement 
let  it  absorb  contributions  from  wom- 
en of  different  social  classes  without 
one  or  another  group  capturing  special 
influence.  By  avoiding  both  economic 
insecurity  and  dependence  on  a  central 
treasury,  it  could  ignore  economic 
leverage.  Highborn  figures  often  got 
more  publicity,  but  within  the  houses 
themselves  leaders  emerged  from  group 
meetings.  Working-class  women  domi- 
nated the  movement,  since  workers 
numerically  dominated  the  towns  and 
had  no  other  religious  option.  Many 
of  the  houses  noted  by  Phillips  had 
founders  or  leaders  of  artisan  or  pea- 
sant origin.  Artisan  families  trained 
their  daughters  as  independent  workers 
who  easily  could  continue  as  beguines, 


and  often  gave  them  experience  in 
skills  like  money  management.  Citizens 
or  bourgeoises,  a  separate,  richer  class 
in  the  towns,  enjoyed  less  independ- 
ence, but  their  families  often  support- 
ed the  beguinage  with  its  close  ties  to 
their  beloved  city.  Therefore,  beguin- 
ages  could  absorb  numbers  of  upper- 
class  women  without  becoming  un- 
balanced. 

Sharing  skills  and  support  in  count- 
less communities  built  up  ties  to  wom- 
en in  all  sections  of  society.  Families 
sent  their  daughters  to  the  beguinage 
to  be  educated  before  marriage  in 
reading,  religion  and  the  domestic  arts. 
They  returned  home  with  self-confi- 
dence from  the  example  of  strong  wom- 
en and  the  knoledge  of  an  independen 
en  and  the  knowledge  of  an  independ- 
ent life  always  open  to  them.  Many  re- 


% 


A 


i. 


ISIQuest 


tained  sentimental  ties  to  the  beguin- 
age  and  came  back  in  their  old  age. 
Beguinism  achieved  such  a  strong  posi- 
tion in  the  life  of  medieval  women  by 
uniting  the  drives  for  spiritual,  social 
and  economic  independence.  Women 
soon  found  that  one  goal  necessitated 
the  others,  and  that  they  had  to  work 
together  for  an  environment  that  pro- 
moted their  aims.  For  a  half  dozen 
generations,  they  succeeded  very  well 
in  creating  such  environments  on  a 
large  scale.  Women  who  chiefly  desired 
to  leave  their  former  living  groups,  or 
to  earn  their  own  living  in  their  own 
way,  or  to  reach  out  towards  a  higher 
spiritual  awareness,  found  that  the  ef- 
forts of  other  women  complemented 
their  own  by  removing  obstacles  they 
had  been  less  aware  of. 

Beguines  at  the  height  of  the  move- 
ment enjoyed  more  freedom  and  more 
power  to  expand  their  lives  in  any 
direction  than  any  of  their  contem- 
poraries, male  or  female.  They  had 
conquered  class  norms  almost  entirely. 
While  a  woman's  income  or  earning 
capacity  still  determined  her  material 
standard  of  living,  this  standard  did 
not  govern  non-material  aspects  of  her 
life  and  was  not  emphasized  as  a  yard- 
stick of  worth.  They  did,  however, 
show  considerable  ageism  in  their 
choice  of  leaders.  In  many  sources,  the 
terms  "mistresses"  and  "elder  beguines" 
clearly  represent  at  least  overlapping 
categories.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
authority  of  the  mistresses  over  their 
colleagues  was  extremely  limited.  They 
could  not  force  any  woman  to  give  up 
or  adopt  any  practice  not  covered  in 


the  by-laws.  Holiness  was  not  expected 
to  coincide  with  the  temporal  authori- 
ty of  mistresses,  and  many  young  wom- 
en won  distinction  for  their  kindliness, 
self-denial  or  learning. 

Beguines  vs.  the  Church 

In  the  early  fourteenth  century  the 
Church  managed  to  check  the  beguines' 
expansion.  The  commitment  to  re- 
spectability which  had  helped  beguines 
reach  into  parts  of  society  under  male 
control  deprived  them  of  a  base  from 
which  to  resist  outright  orders  from 
the  Church.  Catholic  leaders  could 
not  with  consistency  tell  any  woman 
to  marry  or  wear  provocative  clothing, 
but  they  were  fundamentally  hostile 
to  beguine  independence.  After  several 
false  starts,  they  settled  on  the  tactic 
of  requiring  women  to  live  in  beguin- 
ages  or  organized  beguine  houses  to  en- 
joy beguine  privileges  and  avoid  ridi- 
cule by  jealous  neighbors  and  clerics. 
During  the  1320's  and  1330's,  the 
informal  communities  of  women  who 
had  gathered  around  most  concentra- 
tions of  beguines  dispersed  under  this 
pressure.  Those  which  remained  be- 
came a  status  group  of  the  Church, 
relatively  isolated  and  known  to  be 
concerned  with  defending  their  privi- 
leges. Soon  Church  authorities  made 
the  further  demand  that  they  take 
permanent  vows  as  lay  associates  of  the 
Franciscans  or  Dominicans.  These  vows 
permitted  a  more  normal  life  than 
beguines  already  led,  but  a  singular 
lack  of  energy  followed  their  adoption. 
Removing  the  beguinages'  peculiar  in- 


The  Beguines:  A  Medieval  Women's  Community/79 


dependence  by  enforcing  obedience  to 
a  supervising  friar  was  evidently  enough 
to  make  them  decline  sharply  into 
charity  homes  and  sheltered  work- 
shops. 

Beguines'  independence,  both  from 
society  and  each  other,  appears  to  have 
been  the  lifeblood  of  their  movement. 
As  autonomous  women  they  lived  to- 
gether long  enough  to  have  worked 
out  ways  of  satisfying  almost  all  of 
their  own  needs.  We  could  ask  about 
what  weakness  did  they  leave  for  the 
Church  to  work  on?  Perhaps  their  very 
lack  of  central  discipline  prevented 
them  from  resisting  forcefully  the 
Church's  determined  efforts  to  under- 
mine them.  On  the  other  hand,  their 
organization  into  corporations  might 
have  created  vested  interests  among 
members,  who  later  proved  willing  to 
abandon  their  informal  sisters  to  keep 
their  privileges.  By  all  accounts,  these 
privileges  alienated  their  working  class 
neighbors,  who  had  no  such  insulation 
against  war  and  disaster. 

Feminists  wrestle  with  similar  pres- 
sures and  questions,  and  need  to  con- 
sider this  past  experience  from  many 
perspectives.  Could  the  drive  for  inde- 
pendence be  used  as  a  uniting  force  in 
our  own  work  or  does  it  have  an  intrin- 
sic flaw  we  should  respect  by  avoiding? 
For  beguines  it  integrated  the  tran- 
scendent, material,  and  social  spheres 
of  life  into  a  coherent  spirit  of  self- 
definition  which  at  its  most  powerful, 
made  external  categories  irrelevant. 


Gracia  Clark  is  an  intermittent 
plumber  and  anthropologist,  presently 
studying  matrilineal  societies. 


CONTEMPORARY 

AMERICAN  WOMEN'S 

POETRY  SERIES 

It  has  long  been  evident  to  us  that  much 
of  woman's  rising  consciousness  and  ex- 
panding rage  is  being  expressed  in  poetry. 
Our   new  series,   Contemporary  American 
Woman  Poets,  is  part  of  our  commitment 
to    spread    the    revolution    by    sharing 
challenging  expressions  of  awareness. 
Volumes   1-5  are  $2.25  each   (including 
postage)  or  $10.00  for  the  entire  series. 
• 
K6100  Lessons  in  Leaving 
by  Sheila  Raeschild 
K6200  Woman  In  Search  of  Herself 

by  Toni  Ortner  Zimmerman 
K6300  Contractions  by  Barbara  Lipschutz 
K6400  From  The  Fire  by  Susan  Staff 
K6500  Outrage  by   Lucille    Iverson 

• 
Send  25C  for  our  new  categorized  price  list 


I   KNOW,   Inc.  ■ 

P.O.  Box  86031 

Dept.  AD, 

Pittsburgh,  PA  15221 


Where  does  this  leave  you— at  the 
end  of  your  Quest?  Renew  your- 
self! 


SO/Quest 


Notes  for  prospective  contributors 


We  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling  material 
for  each  issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off  the 
presses,  a  small  development  committee  prepares  a  list  of  ques- 
tions and  ideas  which  we  hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  This 
list  is  available  to  anyone  who  is  considering  submitting  ideas  for 
the  issue,  outlines  for  potential  articles,  manuscripts,  poetry,  gra- 
phics, etc.  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out  writers  and 
artists  known  to  have  definitive  political  perspectives  on  issues 
related  to  the  theme. 

All  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members,  if  it  is  not 
appropriate  for  Quest  purposes  the  manuscript  or  graphic  will  be 
returned  to  the  author.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered,  it  is 
then  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible  for 
working  with  the  author  through  whatever  processes  of  rewriting 
and  editing  required.  This  process  includes  soliciting  comments  and 
suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and  Advisory  Committee 
members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review 
before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8V2  by  11  paper,  using 
a  black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy). 
Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10  type- 
written pages)  for  reviews,  responses  and  short  articles,  to, 
at  most,  7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where 
appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  collected  and 
typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manu- 
scripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  are  requested.  For  information 
concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspondence 
to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


future  issues 

FUTURE  VISIONS   and  FANTASIES 

vol.  II  no.  J 

"What  do  we  want?"— what  are  women's  visions  of  a  new  society, 
what  are  our  projections  for  new  ways  of  living  and  working  that  meet 
our  needs  for  love,  friendship,  security,  growth,  freedom  and  fulfill- 
ment. Areas  for  articles  include:  what  kind  of  political  system  do  we 
want;  what  kind  of  economic  system;  what  cultural  and  spiritual  forms; 
how  should  society  be  reorganized?  Copy  Deadline:  March  1,  1975 

THEORIES  of  REVOLUTION 

vol.  II  no.  2 

How  do  we  get  what  we  want?— will  we  need  a  revolution  to  achieve 
new  political  and  economic  systems,  new  cultural  and  spiritual  forms, 
and  if  so,  what  kind  of  revolution.  Areas  for  articles  include:  defini- 
tions of  revolution;  what  ingredients  are  required  for  revolution  in 
different  societies;  what  is  the  role  of  leaders  and  political  parties  in 
change;  what  are  the  steps  necessary  and  obstacles  to  women  taking 
power  to  change  society.  Copy  Deadline:  June  1,  1975 

ORGANIZATIONS  and  STRATEGIES 

vol.  II  no.  3 

Organizations  and  Strategies  picks  up  where  Theories  of  Revolution 
left  off— on  the  relationships  between  our  priorities,  needs  and  ideology 
and  our  actions.  Areas  for  articles  include:  how  to  measure  success  and 
effectiveness  of  an  organization;  how  to  build  coalitions;  what  is  the  role 
of  political  parties,  national  groups,  community  organizing  and  other 
forms  of  networks;  how  will  feminist  programming  deal  with  race  and 
economic  conditions?  Copy  Deadline:  September  1,  1975 

LEADERSHIP 

vol.  II  no.  4 

Leadership  is  vital  to  achieving  social  change  but  we  need  to  examine 
the  role  and  function  of  leaders  in  a  feminist  movement.  Areas  for 
articles  include:  concepts,  types  and  problems  of  leadership;  how  to 
achieve  collectivity  and  accountability  without  destroying  initiative  and 
imagination;  problems  of  fame  and  public  recognition;  the  process  of 
training,  sharing  and  developing  skills  that  create  more  and  stronger 
leaders.  Copy  Deadline:  December  1,  1975 


