Quest  Communique 

We  at  Quest  would  like  to  use  the  inside  front  and  back  covers  to 
speak  directly  to  you.  Often  we  have  special  concerns  which  we'd  like  to 
draw  to  your  attention;  new  formats  we'd  like  to  point  out;  or  special 
news  or  announcements  about  Quest,  its  staff,  its  policy,  or  upcoming  is- 
sues. We  hope  that  these  messages  will  facilitate  the  dialog  and  feedback 
that  is  essential  to  making  Quest  a  useful  tool  in  your  analysis  and  in  the 
process  of  creating  a  feminist  movement  to  bring  about  basic  change. 

New  Feature 

This  issue  contains  Quest's  first  "Letters"  section.  When  we  began  pub- 
lishing, we  intended  for  "Critique  and  Commentary"  to  be  the  section  for 
readers'  response  to  articles  we  publish.  However,  we  have  learned  that 
this  section  does  not  fulfill  another  important  function:  reflecting  the 
short  comments  that  show  how  Quest  is  affecting  its  readers,  what  you 
would  like  to  see  more  or  less  of,  what  you  strongly  like  or  dislike,  and 
what  you  agree  or  disagree  with.  Although  such  letters  often  do  not  set 
out  an  analysis  (as  the  Critique  and  Commentary  responses  do),  they  do 
show  what  feminists  are  thinking  and  bring  attention  to  things  we  have 
overlooked  or  misjudged.  We  hope  the  "Letters"  section  will  be  a  regular 
feature  and  urge  you  to  contribute. 

Readers'  Survey 

We'd  like  to  thank  the  many  Quest  readers  who  have  taken  the  time  to 
respond  to  our  Survey.  We  have  been  overwhelmed  and  thrilled  by  the 
feedback.  It  fills  the  void  we  often  feel  in  communicating  with  our  read- 
ers and  we  have  already  carried  out  some  of  your  suggestions.  We  hope 
to  compile  the  information  in  the  next  couple  of  months  and  to  publish  it 
along  with  some  of  your  comments  in  the  next  issue.  It's  been  great  fun 
getting  to  know  Quest's  readers,  and  we  know  you'll  enjoy  it,  too. 


QUEST 

a  femumst  quarterly 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  2 
Fall,  1976 


COMMUNICATION 
&  CONTROL 

Contents 

CREATING  FEMINIST  COMMUNICATIONS 

Alexa  Freeman  and  Valle  Jones  3 

MAYDAY,  MAYDAY 

Sheri  Maeda,  Moira  Rankin  and  Natalie  Reuss  11 
LETTERS  21 
SNUFFING  SEXUAL  VIOLENCE 

Deb  Friedman  and  Lois  Yankowski  24 
CRITIQUE  and  COMMENTARY 

The  Female  Journalism  Debate  31 
WOMEN  MAKE  MOVIES 

An  Interview  42 
HOW  IMAGES  FUNCTION 

Nelle  Morton  54 

THE  AMERICAN  FATHER,  A  Poem 

Sharon  Olds  60 

THE  SHADOW  BOX 

Chris  Murphey  62 
LIFTING  the  VEIL  of  ISIS 

An  Interview  with  Daniela  Gioseffi  70 
PUT  ANOTHER  NICKEL  IN 

Sheri  Maeda  and  Jill  Shapiro  77 


©  Copyright  1976  by  Questta  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights  re- 
served. Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  prohibited.  Quest: 
a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in  January,  April, 
July  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  1909  Que  St. 
N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Second  class  postage  paid  at 
Washington,  D.C.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  is  a  tax-exempt, 
non-profit  organization. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals;  $10.00/ 
year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  surface,  $14.50/ 
year  overseas  air;  $15.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.75  and  .35  postage 
and  handling  for  single  issues.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003.  Bulk 
rates  available  upon  request.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available 
upon  request. 


Staff 

Editorial  Coordinator 

Sidney  Oliver 
Managing  Editor 

Beverly  Fisher 
Design  Editor 

Alexa  Freeman 
Promotion  Editor 

Karen  Kollias 
Editors 

Dorothy  Allison 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Jane  Dolkart 

Nancy  Hart  sock 

Mary-Helen  Mautnei 

Gerri  Traina 


Assistants 

Denise  Burch 
Ariel  Dougherty 
Marge  Dumond 
Elizabeth  Frazer 
Judith  Jones 
Valle  Jones 
Deborah  Kelley 
Chris  Murphey 
Arleen  Rogan 
Margaret  Streitenberger 


Cover  Design  by 
Carol  Clement 


IN  MEMORIAM 


This  issue  is  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  Ronni  Karpen  Moffit,  who 
was  killed  with  Orlando  Letelier  by  a  bomb  as  they  were  driving  to 
work  on  September  21,  1976.  Ronni  and  Orlando  were  our  co- 
workers at  the  Institute  for  Policy  Studies,  and  in  their  memory,  we 
rededicate  ourselves  to  working  for  the  end  of  tyranny  over  all 
people. 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  po- 
litical analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  itself, 
but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the  women's  movement  possi- 
bly including  such  concrete  forms  as  regional  or  national  conferences,  a 
national  organization,  or  a  political  party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  wo- 
men who  have  been  in  the  movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached 
a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been 
through  various  ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feel- 
ing that  our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  strug- 
gle brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power  for 
women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence  against  wo- 
men? Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the 
answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the 
world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


graphic  by  Constance  Samaras 


Communications 


By  ALEXA  FREEMAN  and 
VALLE  JONES 


When  one  thinks  of  the  words 
"communication"  and  "control," 
what  frequently  comes  to  mind  is  the 
MEDIA— that  major  force  of  commu- 
nication that  determines  the  informa- 
tion we  receive.  We  tend  to  think  of 
communication  as  Walter  Cronkite 
and  CBS  or,  bug-like  satellites 
bleeping  invisible  signals  around  the 
globe,  or,  even  less  mystifying,  but 
still  untouchable,  the  local  city  news- 
paper that  arrives  daily  at  our  door- 
step. In  each  case,  a  media  product  or 
technical  system  enables  us  to  receive 
information  instantly.  Additionally, 
we  are  offered  special  interest  fea- 
tures, magazines,  television,  and  radio 
programs  to  meet  each  of  our  person- 
al curiosities,  beliefs,  and  fancies.  All 


in  all,  the  media  would  appear  to  be 
an  accessible,  varied  source  of  infor- 
mation. 

But  what  Walter  Cronkite  tells  us 
at  7  o'clock  is  determined  by  an  un- 
known process  over  which  we  have 
no  control.  We  can  either  accept  on 
faith  his  overview  of  the  day's  events, 
or  we  can  turn  the  channel  and  do  the 
same  with  John  Chancellor.  Or  we 
can  pick  up  the  evening  paper  and  be- 
lieve in  that.  Basically,  our  choice  ap- 
pears to  be  either  to  trust  media  we 
do  not  control,  or  not  to  communi- 
cate at  all.  Since  choosing  not  to  com- 
municate is  completely  unreasonable, 
the  critical  issue  becomes  one  of  con- 
trol— control  of  the  transmission  and 
reception  of  information. 

For  those  of  us  who  emerged  from 
the  left  in  the  Sixties,  there  was  no 
question  that  a  conspiracy  existed  be- 
tween government  and  mass  media. 


photograph  by  Jo  Delaplaine 


Creating  Feminist  Communications /3 


"They"  controlled  and  manipulated 
what  information  was  transmitted, 
and  when  and  how.  Perhaps  our  con- 
spiracy theory  was  unduly  paranoid, 
but  the  possibility  for  manipulation  is 
clearly  enormous.  Control  and  dis- 
semination of  information  is  real 
power:  what  is  reflected  in  the  media 
becomes  reality  for  the  audience. 
Thus  "reality"*  is  created  and  pre- 
sented by  the  media:  those  who  con- 
trol it  can  reflect  whatever  "reality" 
they  choose.  It  is  clear  that  any  group 
either  seeking  power  or  attempting  to 
maintain  power,  must  control  mass 
communications.  It  is  critically  im- 
portant that  feminists  make  it  a  prior- 
ity to  challenge  that  control. 

This  challenge  must  use  a  three- 
pronged  strategy.  First,  we  must  re- 
search and  expose  the  nature  of  the 
beast:  who  does  control  communica- 
tions, both  in  this  country  and  global- 
ly? For  whose  interest  is  that  control 
developed  and  maintained?  What 
corporations  are  involved  and  what 
relationships  do  they  have  with  each 
other?  With  their  advertisers?  With 
politicians  currently  holding  or  seek- 
ing power?  How  is  the  control  of 
communications  maintained  (eco- 
nomically, legally,  politically)?  Sec- 
ond, we  need  to  examine  and  develop 
various  reform  strategies.  What  suc- 


*  This  [simply  put]  is  achieved  by  the  seduc- 
tiveness of  T.  V. ,  radio,  film,  etc. ;  by  the  use  of 
the  myth  of  objectivity;  and  by  the  media's  im- 
mediate access  to  us. 

**  This  is  not  true  in  a  strict  sense,  but  only 
theoretically  speaking.  There  will  never  be 
total  control  so  long  as  we  are  operating  within 
the  current  political  and  economic  framework. 
But  the  presence  of  a  radical  feminist  communi- 
cations system  which  challenges  the  power  of 
corporate  media  enables  our  movement  to 


cesses  or  failures  have  occurred  in  the 
areas  of  monitoring,  public  education 
campaigns,  boycotts,  alerts,  strikes, 
increasing  job  opportunities,  and  the 
creation  of  feminist  programming? 
Who  has  been  most  affected  by  these 
efforts?  Finally,  we  must  look  beyond 
male-created  mass  media  and  create 
our  own  forms  and  designs  of  feminist 
communication.  Only  in  this  way  can 
we  assert  uncompromising  control 
over  the  content  and  distribution  of 
our  message.**  Because  the  left  and 
the  women's  movement  have  already 
produced  many  critiques  and  exposes 
of  mass  communications,  and  have 
put  much  activity  and  energy  into  re- 
form strategies,  this  article  will  focus 
instead  on  feminist  communication — 
on  what  it  should  look  like  and  how 
we  can  continue  to  develop  it. 

Principles  of 
Feminist  Communication 

In  order  to  create  feminist  commu- 
nications, we  must  consider  three 
principles.  First,  it  is  important  for 
feminists  to  consider  the  broad  scope 
of  communication,  both  in  our 
attempts  to  reform  existing  communi- 
cations institutions  and  in  the  crea- 
tion of  our  own.  By  examining  differ- 
ent forms  of  communication,***  we 


grow  and  to  create  an  independent  power  base. 
***  Communication  occurs  in  a  wide  variety 
of  forms.  The  following  is  a  sampling  of  the 
variety  and  scope  of  the  ways  in  which  we 
communicate.  The  list  was  prepared  by  the 
Quest  "Communications  and  Control"  Devel- 
opment Committee,  and  is  meant  only  to  pro- 
vide examples,  not  to  be  the  definitive  list: 
Non-verbal:  Body  language,  dress,  body  con- 
tact [fighting,  love-making,  nurturing],  ESP, 
sign  language,  lip  reading,  smoke  signals, 


A/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fail,  1976 


can  begin  to  understand  how  most  ef- 
fectively to  reach  women,  what  trig- 
gers our  imaginations  and  passions, 
and  what  inspires  change. 

Second,  we  must  discard  the  notion 
that  the  media  are  objective.  Even  the 
most  honest  attempt  to  present  factu- 
al information  cannot  encompass  the 
full  variety  of  possible  perspectives. 
At  best,  it  can  only  attempt  to  achieve 
representation  of  a  broad  range  of 
views.  (Moreover,  we  should  ask 
whether  objectivity  is  necessarily  a 
goal  to  which  feminist  communica- 
tion should  aspire.  Do  we  always 
want  to  present  an  "objective"  ac- 
count of  the  "facts"?  Even  in  commu- 
nicating women's  news,  would  we 
want  to  give  Ellen  McCormack  time 
or  space  equal  to  Bella  Abzug's?) 

Third,  feminist  communication 
must  incorporate  the  notion  that  to 
communicate  is  to  share,  that  it  is, 
through  whatever  medium,  a  process 
by  which  something  is  exchanged.  It 
is,  ideally,  a  mutual  process.  This 
principle  of  mutuality  demands  both 
that  we  have  access  to  the  tools  of 
communication  and  that  we  actively 
participate  in  it.  Current  media  allow 
us  neither. 

Needless  to  say,  some  forms  of 
communication  lend  themselves  more 
easily  than  others  to  the  principle  of 


totem  poles,  notches  on  sticks,  rituals,  spells, 
symbols,  tea  leaves,  Tarot  cards,  palm  reading, 
aura,  dance,  carrier  pigeon,  insignias,  coats  of 
arms,  flags,  stars,  geographical  formations, 
paths  in  the  woods. 

Verbal:  One-to-one  speech,  letters,  conscious- 
ness-raising groups,  "old  wives  tales, "  gossip, 
the  grapevine,  informal  gatherings  of  women 
such  as  quilting  bees,  singing,  street  theater, 
rallies,  soap  box  orations,  diaries,  therapy  ses- 
sions, myths,  jokes. 


mutual  exchange,  but  almost  any 
form  can  be  adapted  at  least  to  a  de- 
gree. For  instance,  a  singer  can  allow 
time  for  the  audience  to  react  to  each 
song  and  take  cues  from  them  about 
what  kinds  of  music  they  want.  At 
most  concerts  by  feminist  singers,  the 
audience  and  the  musicians  each 
stimulate  the  other,  and  convey 
power  and  energy. 

A  local  showing  of  The  Other  Half 
of  the  Sky,  Shirley  MacLaine  and 
Claudia  Weill's  film  about  their  trip 
to  China,  provided  a  good  example  of 
how  even  a  film  can  begin  to  be  a  mu- 
tual sharing  of  experience  and  ideas. 
After  the  showing,  Claudia  Weill  and 
the  audience  discussed  the  film  and 
exchanged  ideas,  suggestions,  criti- 
cisms, and  questions. 

On  the  most  elemental  level,  letters 
to  the  editor  serve  the  principle  of  mu- 
tual exchange  in  print  media.  The 
idea  could  be  broadened  to  include 
editorial  and  news-reporting  sections 
open  to  those  not  on  the  staff.  Even 
television,  the  medium  that  often 
seems  most  inaccessible,  already  has  a 
few  cable  stations  which  by  law  have 
at  least  one  channel  reserved  for 
"public  access."  Anyone  in  the  com- 
munity can  get  a  certain  (albeit  limi- 
ted) amount  of  "air  time"  to  say  what- 
ever she  wants.  The  main  problem 


Technical  -.Books,  newspapers,  novels,  comics, 
magazines,  poems,  recipes,  leaflets,  laws  and 
codes,  photographs,  telephone,  records,  tapes 
[audio  and  video],  films,  video  discs,  slides, 
computers,  data  banks,  microfilm,  microfiche, 
government  files,  dossiers,  sonar,  radar, 
teletype,  telegram,  X-ray,  billboards,  maps, 
charts,  diagrams,  braille,  calendars,  date- 
books,  biofeedback,  television  and  radio  shows 
[soap  operas,  news,  variety  shows],  trade- 
marks, and  brand  labels. 


Feminist  Communications /5 


with  public  access  as  it  now  stands  is 
that  the  time  available  to  us  is  mini- 
mal, and  that  it  is  allocated  on  a  first- 
come,  first-served  basis  without  pro- 
vision for  regularly  scheduled,  on-go- 
ing programs.  Feminists,  however, 
could  lease  their  own  channel  from  a 
cable  station  (as  has  been  done  in 
Memphis,  Tennessee)  and  provide 
other  women  with  substantial  and 
regularly  scheduled  time  slots,  with 
the  necessary  technical  and  produc- 
tion assistance,  and  with  time  for  re- 
buttal and  the  presentation  of  differ- 
ent viewpoints. 

These  examples  of  how  communi- 
cation can  represent  a  real  sharing 
just  scratch  the  surface  of  possibili- 
ties. It  is  vital  that  we  work  to  open 
up  our  communication  so  that  it  be- 
comes a  multi-leveled  exchange  of 
energy,  ideas,  and  information.  Only 
through  such  exchange  can  we  create 
the  accountability  necessary  for  a  po- 
litical movement.  Through  it,  we  can 
broaden  the  control  of  our  communi- 
cation to  include  many  more  women, 
create  a  more  active  and  participating 
audience,  and  counteract  the  ten- 
dency of  mass  media  to  produce  pas- 
sive consumers  of  information  and 
entertainment. 

Guidelines  For 
Feminist  Communication 

The  concept  of  feminist  communi- 
cation leads  us  to  expand  the  defini- 
tion of  communication  beyond  me- 
dia, to  discard  the  notion  of  objectivi- 
ty, and  to  stress  the  mutual  sharing 
involved  in  communicating.  Now  we 
turn  to  a  more  specific  question:  what 
do  we  want  from  feminist  communi- 
cation ?  Basically,  there  are  four  areas 


which  both  provide  groundwork  for 
feminist  communication  and  are  criti- 
cal elements  in  challenging  the  cor- 
porate media:  content  of  the  message, 
design  of  the  message,  skills  and  jobs, 
and  access  to  the  messages. 

Content 

Content  serves  several  functions.  It 
provides  analysis:  explanations  of 
institutions  and  power,  and  discus- 
sions of  history  and  factors  involved 
in  political  issues  affecting  women.  It 
provides  direction  for  change,  a  vi- 
sion of  what  we  want  and  of  the  goals 
to  be  reached.  It  provides  tools  and 
strategies  for  change,  ideas  (examples 
and  models  of  organization)  about 
the  ways  and  means  of  achieving  our 
goals  and  realizing  our  visions.  And  it 
provides  resources — information  that 
aids  in  our  psychic  and  physical  sur- 
vival and  well-being  so  we  have  the 
strength,  energy,  and  courage  to 
function  effectively  toward  feminist 
objectives. 

The  content  of  feminist  communi- 
cation should  provide  for  all  four  of 
these  functions.  Ideally,  a  group  or  an 
individual  woman  working  in  com- 
munications would  strive  for  all  these 
areas,  although  specific  projects 
might  concentrate  on  only  one  or  two 
(such  as  a  videotape  on  how  to  apply 
for  welfare  or  a  ritual  or  spell  for 
good  health).  In  any  case,  a  commu- 
nication is  feminist  by  virtue  of  its 
content,  not  by  its  form— witchcraft, 
for  example,  is  a  woman's  form,  but 
one  that  can  easily  be  used  for  coun- 
ter-feminist purposes. 

Design 

In  considering  the  second  aspect  of 
the  message,  its  design,  we  need  to 


6/Quest 


ask  who  the  intended  audience  is  to 
be.  The  answer  will  greatly  affect 
how  we  say  what  we  want  to  say  in 
order  to  have  maximum  impact.  For 
instance,  given  a  certain  audience, 
what  assumptions  can  we  make  about 
their  experiences  and  the  issues  and 
information  that  would  be  most  im- 
portant to  them?  What  kinds  of  cul- 
tural, racial  and  class  differences  are 
there  among  different  audiences  that 
could  determine  the  style  of  commu- 
nication which  will  best  speak  to 
them?  What  kinds  of  "language" 
should  we  use  to  reach  them? 

Quality,  too,  is  an  important  as- 
pect of  the  message  design.  Rhetorical 
language  should  be  avoided  whenever 
possible;  issues  and  information 
should  be  presented  clearly,  and  the 
"technical"  quality  of  our  message 
should  be  uniformly  high.t  This  tech- 
nical excellence  requires  that  we  hone 
our  skills  as  finely  as  possible  within 
the  limits  of  our  time,  money  and  en- 
ergy constraints. 

Production  technique  must  also  be 
considered.  While  here  we  can  learn 
from  "straight"  communications,  we 
must  carefully  sift  that  knowledge. 
Corporate  communications  (and  here 
we  speak  primarily  of  media)  are  ex- 
pert at  the  art  of  manipulation  (see 
"Mayday,  Mayday"  and  "Shadow 
Box").  As  feminists,  we  should  reject 
manipulating  the  minds  and  emotions 
of  the  audience,  and  instead  persuade 
by  fact  and  effective  presentation. 
The  distinction  between  manipulation 
and  persuasion  comes  down  to  the 


t  The  term  "technical"  is  used  loosely  here, 
and  applies  to  such  diverse  forms  of  communi- 
cations as  songs,  rituals,  dance,  publications, 
and  computer  programs. 


level  of  the  audience's  conscious 
awareness  of  the  factors  that  have 
convinced  or  motivated  them.  For 
example,  feminists  could  manipulate 
an  audience  into  supporting  wages  for 
housework  by  the  use  of  subliminal 
suggestion  in  videotapes  or  films,  or 
they  could  persuade  them  by  presen- 
tation of  an  effective  debate  on  the 
subject.  This  principle  is  especially 
important  for  feminist  communica- 
tions because  we  want  to  encourage 
women  to  take  more  control  of  their 
lives.  Manipulation,  by  contrast, 
takes  control  out  of  the  audience's 
hands  and  puts  it  in  the  hands  of  the 
communicator. 

The  "persuasion  approach,"  how- 
ever, certainly  does  not  exclude  an 
appeal  to  the  emotions;  it  only  means 
that  the  appeal  should  not  be  made 
subliminally  but  instead  at  a  level  at 
which  the  viewer  can  consciously  ac- 
cept or  reject  the  message.  In  this  con- 
text, the  role  of  "entertainment"  in 
feminist  communications  must  be 
considered.  Too  often,  the  word  has 
had  the  negative  connotation  of 
"frivolous"  or  "apolitical."  An  enter- 
taining format  makes  people  want  to 
hear,  see,  experience  our  message.  We 
still  want  feminist  content,  but  far 
from  ruling  out  entertaining  designs 
and  forms,  we  should  view  them  as 
essential. 

Finally,  the  make-up  of  the  group 
producing  the  message  helps  deter- 
mine its  design.  If  we  want  to  create  a 
world  in  which  sexism,  heterosexism, 
racism,  classism  and  ageism  have  no 
place,  then  the  make-up  of  our  com- 
munications groups  must  reflect  this 
struggle  and  our  vision  for  the  future. 
On  a  practical  level,  this  means  we 
must  seriously  examine  our  groups, 


Feminist  Communications/ 7 


our  priorities  and  our  processes.  It 
means,  among  other  things,  that  we 
must  make  a  priority  of  acquiring  and 
generating  money  for  salaries  which 
will  make  possible  input  from  many 
women  by  providing  full-time  paid 
work  in  the  movement  or  consulting 
fees  for  their  participation. 

Skills  and  Jobs 

In  order  to  control  our  communica- 
tions and  to  broaden  our  bases  of 
power,  one  of  our  goals  must  be  to 
develop  skills  and  paying  jobs.  What 
exactly  is  the  responsibility  of  skilled 
feminists  for  teaching  others?  Skills 
are  an  asset  that  should  be  used  like 
other  assets.  But  our  time  and  energy 
are  limited  and  we  need  guidelines  to 
help  us  establish  priorities. 

Basically,  there  are  two  important 
reasons  for  putting  time,  energy  and 
money  into  teaching  skills:  to  enable 
a  woman  to  get  a  job,  or  to  enable  her 
to  use  these  skills  for  political  work, 
to  communicate  and  receive  mes- 
sages. We  must  make  decisions  about 
the  relation  of  money  to  skills  shar- 
ing: whom  do  we  charge  and  when? 
Some  of  these  decisions,  for  example, 
can  be  made  on  the  basis  of  the 
purpose  for  which  the  woman  is 
acquiring  the  skills.  Since  our  time  is 
valuable  we  prefer  to  share  it  with 
women  who  will  put  something  (time 
or  money)  back  into  the  feminist 
movement.  Therefore,  it  might  be  ap- 
propriate not  to  charge  women  who 
are  learning  skills  in  order  to  do 
serious  political  work,  but  to  charge 
those  women  who  are  learning  skills 
for  curiosity's  sake  or  for  personal 
satisfaction.  Where  skills  will  be  used 
to  get  a  better-paying  job,  the  appro- 
priate charge  might  be  a  portion  of 


the  extra  salary  to  be  earned.  Of 
course,  these  suggestions  are  not 
intended  as  hard  and  fast  rules.  They 
would  depend  on  how  we  define 
"serious  political  work,"  on  who 
defines  that  term,  and  on  numerous 
other  variables.  For  example,  much 
depends  on  the  relative  financial 
positions  of  the  teacher  and  the 
student— if  a  teacher  must  charge  for 
her  time  to  make  a  living,  we  should 
devise  ways  ("scholarships")  to  pay 
the  charge  for  the  woman  who  wants 
to  do  feminist  work  but  can't  afford 
to  pay  the  fees.  Nevertheless,  the 
sharing  of  skills  and  the  creation  of 
jobs  are  functions  vital  to  the  creation 
of  effective  feminist  communications. 

Access 

Our  ability  to  receive  communica- 
tions is  critical  to  our  access  to  knowl- 
edge and  information.  Therefore, 
feminists  must  be  concerned  with 
opening  up  our  access  to  the  commu- 
nications of  others  and  with  provid- 
ing others  access  to  our  communica- 
tions. 

Depending  on  where  and  how  in- 
formation is  stored  and  transmitted, 
access  can  be  wide  open  or  severely 
limited.  The  factors  determining  this 
access  are  varied.  Our  access  to  cer- 
tain information  can  be  improved 
with  skills-sharing  and  skills-learning; 
our  access  to  other  information  can- 
not. Let  us  consider  those  which  can. 

Any  information  storehouse  is 
based  on  a  system  of  retrieval.  In 
order  to  gain  access  to  the  informa- 
tion held  there,  we  must  have  certain 
skills.  For  example,  given  a  book,  a 
poem  or  other  written  material,  we 
must  be  able  to  read  the  language  in 
which  it  is  written. 


Our  access  to  the  vital  information 
stored  in  archives,  museums,  libraries 
and  computer  banks  is  even  more 
limited.  In  order  to  gain  access  to  in- 
formation concerning  such  things  as 
the  structure  and  functioning  of  vari- 
ous patriarchal  institutions,  or  our 
history  and  achievements,  or  to  new 
developments  in  areas  affecting  us, 
we  need  to  develop  the  appropriate 
skills — how  to  use  a  library,  how  to 
read  a  computer  printout,  how  to  use 
equipment  such  as  projectors,  tape  re- 
corders, microfilm  and  microfiche, 
and  how  to  retrieve  the  computerized 
information  we  desire.  They  are  im- 
portant as  well  for  designing  our  own 
libraries  and  archives,  and  other  re- 
trieval systems  that  will  provide  us 
greater  access  to  the  information  we 
need  now  or  may  need  later. 

In  addition,  we  must  also  be  aware 
of  other  access-limiting  factors.  For 
example,  different  forms  of  communi- 
cations have  different  geographical 
limitations:  access  to  such  media  as 
paintings,  books,  radio  shows  or 
movies  varies  according  to  where  you 
live.  Money  also  affects  audience  ac- 
cess. A  bus  trip  across  town  to  a  tarot 
reading,  a  $6.00  play,  a  trip  across  the 
country  to  a  special  library  will  be 
possible  for  some  women,  but  will  be 
beyond  the  reach  of  others. 

The  problem  of  access,  however, 
goes  deeper  than  skills,  money  or 
geography.  Corporations  such  as 
IBM,  ITT  and  RAND  refuse  us  access 
to  their  information  and  communica- 
tions systems.  So  does  the  U.S.  gov- 
ernment— witness  the  problems  we've 
had  in  proving  the  U.S.  has  inter- 
vened in  Chilean  politics,  or  the  ina- 
bility of  even  Congressional  commit- 
tees to  examine  CIA,  Presidential  and 


Justice  Department  activities.  These 
problems  of  access  can  only  be  solved 
by  gaining  political  power. 

Structures  for  the  Future 

In  the  short  run,  feminists  can  im- 
prove access  to  communications  by 
paying  close  attention  to  the  design 
and  form  of  communications  and  by 
setting  up  special  structures  both  for 
those  who  produce  messages  and  for 
those  who  seek  them.  For  instance,  if 
a  woman  wants  to  write  and  distrib- 
ute a  song,  she  will  need  the  help  of 
many  other  communicators.  Al- 
though she  can  write  the  song,  she  will 
need  a  band,  a  singer,  a  recording 
company,  and  a  distributing  com- 
pany to  turn  it  into  a  viable  record.  In 
addition,  she  may  want  a  publisher  to 
print  sheet  music  and  lyrics,  and  a 
concert  producer  and  public  relations 
expert  to  enable  her  to  reach  larger 
audiences.  Since  we  lack  structures 
for  connecting  people,  skills  and 
resources,  she  must  depend  on  her 
contacts,  on  word-of-mouth  and  so 
on.  Feminist  regional  or  national 
communications  clearing-houses  con- 
necting those  involved  in  producing 
communications  could  be  an  impor- 
tant aid  to  those  seeking  to  send  mes- 
sages and  those  who  want  to  receive 
them.  A  feminist  clearinghouse  could, 
for  example,  aid  a  video  group  in 
meeting  its  need  for  still  photographs, 
graphics,  records,  and  a  company  for 
distributing  its  products.  Unfortu- 
nately, as  it  now  stands,  those  in- 
volved in  producing  communications 
use  and  need  access  to  a  variety  of 
forms,  but  usually  have  only  ineffi- 
cient and  haphazard  ways  of  finding 
them. 


Feminist  Communications  19 


For  seekers  of  messages,  the  ab- 
sence of  connecting  structures  is  even 
more  significant.  For  instance,  if  a 
woman  wants  to  find  out  everything 
she  can  about  the  way  women  in  Eng- 
land have  organized  around  housing, 
she  will  probably  find  only  a  relative- 
ly small  amount  of  information  easily 
obtainable.  If  reports  have  been  pub- 
lished in  Newsweek,  The  New  York 
Times,  or  in  an  academic  journal,  she 
can  probably  find  them  through  a  li- 
brary card  catalogue  or  the  Reader's 
Guide.  However,  if  she  wants  infor- 
mation from  special  reports  or  from 
discussions  in  feminist  periodicals, 
videoletters  or  radio  shows,  her  task 
may  be  nearly  impossible.  That 
valuable  information  may  be  stored 
in  very  usable  form,  but  most  of  us 
have  no  way  of  knowing  where  or 
how  to  find  it,  or  even  that  it  exists. 

Feminist  archives  are  a  step  in  the 
right  direction,  but  are  very  limited 
by  money  and  space  constraints,  and 
additionally,  fail  to  preserve  many 
forms  of  communications.  They  are 
currently  so  few  and  scattered  that 


they  are  of  limited  practical  use.  In 
short  we  should  begin  to  make  a 
priority  not  only  of  preserving  our 
important  messages,  but  of  develop- 
ing efficient  and  usable  cataloguing 
and  retrieval  systems,  and  of  know- 
ing their  uses  and  limitations. 

The  issues  raised  in  this  article 
represent  a  beginning  in  our  efforts  to 
develop  effective  feminist  communi- 
cations. At  each  point  along  the  way, 
we  must  look  at  the  tools  used  by 
corporate  media,  at  the  sources  of 
corporate  control  of  media,  and  at 
how  we  can  change  that  control.  At 
the  same  time,  we  must  diligently 
search  for  sources  of  power  "straight" 
communications  have  not  imagined, 
have  discounted  as  insignificant,  or 
cannot  use  effectively.  The  key  to 
success  lies  in  doing  both  in  compre- 
hensive and  creative  ways. 

Alexa  Freeman  works  on  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly. 

Valle  Jones  is  a  co-founder  of  Spec- 
tra Feminist  Media. 


Back  Issues  of  Quest  Still  Available 


At  $2.00  &  .35  postage/handling: 

Money,  Fame,  and  Power 

{vol.  I,  no.  2) 

The  Selfhood  of  Women 

{vol.  I,  no.  3) 

Women  and  Spirituality 

{vol.  I,  no.  4) 

Future  Visions  and  Fantasies 
(vol  II,  no.  1) 


Theories  of  Revolution 

(vol.  II,  no.  2) 

Organizations  and  Strategies 
(vol.  II,  no.  3) 
At  $2.75  &  .35  postage/handling: 

Leadership 
(vol.  II,  no.  4) 
Kaleidoscope  One 
(vol  III  no.  1) 


10/Quest 


Mayday 
Efjfellij  Mayday 

By  SHERI  MAEDA,  MOIRA  RANKIN,  NATALIE  REUSS 

graphics  by  Sue  Lenaerts 


Disco-stereo  K-A-S-H!  You  hear 
the  moldy  oldies  and  the  discs  that 
can't  miss,  spun  for  you  with  a  hustle 
that  can  rustle.  .  .  .Dvorak,  Sympho- 
ny No.  5  in  E  minor,  Opus  95  ("From 
the  New  World');  Herbert  von  Kara- 
jan  conducting  the  Berlin  Philhar- 
monic, Deutsche  Grammophon  §138- 
922...  .From  the  UPl  World  Desk- 
Fighting  has  broken  out  in  the  Middle 
East;  casualties  are  reported  high. .  .  . 
Now,  more  music.  ..  .Sensational 
40%  savings — more  features  than 
ever  before — new  hi-fi  speaker — the 
little  speaker  that  thinks  it's  big;  genu- 
ine, oiled,  walnut-veneered  finish — 
buy  now  and  receive,  free  of  charge, 
the  only  official  Bicentennial  two-rec- 
ord album — inspiring  patriotic  music 
by  all  four  United  States  Military 
Bands.  .  .  . 

Sound  familiar?  You  are  tuning  in 
to  what  is  euphemistically  known  as 
"good  radio  programming."  "Good" 
programming  has  one  goal:  money. 
Listen  and  buy  is  the  maxim  in  radio- 
land.  In  the  consumer-oriented  soci- 
ety in  which  we  live,  this  is  not  a  pro- 
found observation.  It  holds  for  any  of 


the  major  media  in  our  lives.  But  the 
manipulative  form  and  structure  of 
radio  broadcasting  are  unique.  This  is 
an  examination  of  that  form  and  struc- 
ture; it  is  also  an  analysis  of  viable 
strategies  for  feminists,  extrapolated 
from  our  personal  experiences  in 
broadcasting. 

The  Wall  of  Sound 

Radio's  most  important  character- 
istic is  its  total  permeation  of  the  audi- 
ence's space.  You  don't  have  to  take 
time  out  to  watch  or  read.  By  simply 
turning  the  radio  on,  you  immediately 
change  your  entire  environment  and, 
most  importantly,  change  your  space, 
from  one  in  which  you  are  the  subject, 
to  one  where  you  are  objectified, 
talked  to.  You  become  the  listener. 
The  listener  is  "saved"  from  dealing 
with  the  frustration  of  rush-hour  traf- 
fic, boredom  at  work,  or  insomnia. 
Instead,  a  sound  rushes  in.  However, 
even  though  radio  takes  over  individ- 
ual space,  it  does  not  require  immedi- 
ate and  continual  attention  to  remain 
effective.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  audi- 
ence started  to  pay  careful  attention, 


Mayday,  Mayday /ll 


the  broadcasting  industry  would  col- 
lapse. 

The  industry  is  based  on  a  wall  of 
sound.  Radio's  wall  of  sound  is  not 
just  a  background;  it  is  carefully  con- 
structed so  that  the  moment  preoccu- 
pations cease,  sound  and  the  messages 
it  conveys  step  right  in.  Programming 
is  planned  to  catch  our  unconscious 
attention. 

Top-40  formats,  for  example,  play 
a  choice  song  immediately  after  the 
news,  to  prime  our  attention  for  the 
commercial  that  will  follow.  Classical 
and  alternative/progressive  music  sta- 
tions tend  to  give  complete  record- 
purchasing  information — an  unspo- 
ken message  to  come  out  and  buy. 
And  the  wonderful  long  sets  of  music 
one  hears  at  11  o'clock  at  night  vanish 
at  7  a.m.  with  a  bombast  of  commer- 
cials. News  and  public  affairs  are  su- 
perficial and  boring,  and  leave  us  anx- 
iously awaiting  the  music  and  ubiqui- 
tous commercials. 

The  illusion  of  variety  is  important 
to  the  maintenance  of  the  wall  of 
sound.  The  spectrum  of  all  those  num- 
bers on  each  band  can  delude  the  list- 
ener into  thinking  that  no  matter  what 
her  tastes,  there  is  a  radio  program 
that  will  fit.  The  total  effect  that  pro- 
grammers wish  to  achieve  is  that  ra- 
dio, as  is,  offers  all  there  is  to  offer. 
As  listeners,  we're  led  to  believe  that 
if  we  don't  hear  it,  it  isn't  possible.  In 
reality,  the  range  of  programming  is 
determined  by  economic  markets.  Ra- 
dio stations  have  a  clear  idea  of  who 
listens  to  them,  and  when. 

In  the  early  days  of  broadcasting, 
large,  elaborate  programs  were  cre- 
ated to  appeal  to  a  family  in  an  even- 
ing of  home  entertainment.  Television 
usurped  that  role,  and  radio  changed 


its  format  to  fit  the  economic  contin- 
gencies. Radio  examined  its  assets  and 
realized  it  had  three:  mobility,  ease  of 
reception,  and  spontaneity.  Prime 
time  changed  from  the  evening  hours 
to  the  hours  when  listeners  are  driving 
to  and  from  work.  Programming 
changed  to  more  short  features,  re- 
corded music,  and  news  and  weather 
reports.  With  the  advent  of  rock'n 
roll,  announcers  became  d.j.'s,  urging 
a  peer-conscious,  consumer-oriented 
constituency  to  "buy  number  eight 
with  a  bullet."2  Public-affairs  pro- 
grams were  relegated  to  slow  times  or 
were  not  broadcast  at  all.  Thus, 
broadcasters  fill  their  required  public- 
affairs  quota  during  the  less  lucrative 
radio  hours.  Moreover,  the  slipshod 
quality  of  this  programming  simply 
reinforces  the  commonly  held  miscon- 
ception that  public-affairs  programs 
can  only  be  boring.  To  exacerbate  the 
problem,  the  FCC  ruled  that  public 
affairs  could  be  broadly  interpreted  to 
encompass  news,  weather  and  market 
reports,  talks  by  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  official  government  an- 
nouncements, and  special  events  of 
wide  public  interest — even  the  World 
Series.  Blandness,  boredom,  repeti- 
tion, and  regularity  are  the  factors  in 
radio's  "wide  variety."  The  bottom 
line  is  a  wide  profit  margin. 

Frisco  on  a  Crystal  Set 

To  understand  radio's  form,  struc- 
ture, and  illusions,  it  is  necessary  to 
understand  how  carefully  the  medium 
was  developed  by  those  who  were  al- 
ready in  control  of  the  communica- 
tions industry — that  is,  by  the  tele- 
phone and  electric  companies.  What 
could  have  become  a  public-access 


12/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


Mayday,  Mayday/ 13 


communications  system  became  an- 
other link  in  a  long  change  of  institu- 
tions that  form  the  power  structure 
we  all  experience. 

After  World  War  I,  radio  was  pur- 
sued as  a  hobby  by  the  few  whiz  kids 
who  could  understand  the  technology. 
Mini-radio  "stations,"  using  home- 
made equipment  and  broadcasting 
within  a  radius  of  a  few  miles,  sprang 
up  around  the  country.  Generally, 
programming  was  limited  to  a  few  rec- 
ords and  to  performances  by  friends 
and  neighbors.  The  haphazard  ama- 
teur broadcasts  created  a  demand  for 
receivers,  and  more  and  more  manu- 
facturers got  into  the  market;  they 
soon  realized  that  amateur  broadcast- 
ers were  not  a  reliable  source  for  creat- 
ing demand,  and  in  1920,  Westing- 
house  Electric  and  Manufacturing 
Company  started  broadcasting  music 
and  information  from  its  own  plant. 
The  supply-and-demand  cycle  was 
complete.  Not  only  were  lucrative 
profits  realized  from  the  sale  of  simple 
home  receivers  that  anyone  could  op- 
erate, but  a  manufacturer  who  owned 
a  broadcasting  station  achieved  a  rec- 
ognition that  meant  more  profits.  One 
year  later,  American  Telephone  and 
Telegraph  created  the  concept  of 
sponsorship  when  it  opened  a  station 
that  offered  time  on  a  rental  basis  to 
anyone  who  wished  to  broadcast. 
From  Zeus's  head  sprang  RCA,  NBC, 
CBS,  and  ABC.  Hera  had  to  go  find 
herself  a  Lux  Radio  Hour  if  she  wanted 
to  be  heard. 

Within  a  few  years,  the  corporate 
pattern  in  broadcasting  had  become 
entrenched.  In  the  beginning,  this  pat- 
tern depended  on  public  acquiescence 
and  was  controlled  by  the  market. 
That  uncertain  situation  was  rectified 


when  Congress  created  the  Federal 
Radio  Commission  in  1927  (later  to 
become  the  Federal  Communications 
Commission).  Although  the  Commis- 
sion was  charged  with  granting  broad- 
casting licenses  only  "if  public  con- 
venience, interest  and  necessity  will 
be  served  thereby,"  the  government 
has  never  departed  from  its  original 
position  of  cooperation  with  corpo- 
rate structures.  Government  regula- 
tion has  been  minimal  since  its  incep- 
tion, and  has  been  primarily  con- 
cerned with  technical  matters.  In  "reg- 
ulating" stations,  the  FCC  has  helped 
maintain  the  status  quo  by  maintain- 
ing radio's  ties  with  money  and  the 
corporate  structure. 

Only  Ten  Cents  A  Day  and  a 
Free  Tote  Bag 

There  are,  of  course,  mutations. 
Non-commercial  radio  is  the  Cinde- 
rella of  the  radio  industry.  When  the 
FCC  began  to  license  commercial  ra- 
dio stations,  many  educational  and  or 
religious  stations  either  were  eased  out 
of  the  market  or  were  allowed  to  oper- 
ate only  within  a  limited  broadcast 
radius.  Later,  when  the  FM  band  was 
organized,  the  FCC  designated  certain 
frequencies  at  the  low  end  of  the  band 
to  be  perpetually  non-commercial. 
Having  absolved  their  collective  con- 
science, the  regulators  then  proceeded 
to  establish  the  same  kinds  of  struc- 
tures in  non-commercial  broadcasting 
as  in  commercial.  Funding  is  provided 
by  government  sources  or  by  major 
private  foundations.  If  a  listener- 
funded  program  is  established,  the 
general  public  is  treated  to  the  hard- 
est-sell pitches  in  the  industry.  Imagi- 
native programming  is  kept  to  a  mini- 


U/Quest 


mum,  because  funding  could  be  jeop- 
ardized. The  only  difference  lies  in 
program  scheduling.  Commercial  ra- 
dio stations  established  the  archetype 
for  programming  long  ago.  The  only 
choices  non-commercial  stations  have 
lie  in  whether  to  schedule  four  hours 
of  classical  music  or  four  hours  of  U .  S . 
Senate  hearings  on  ptomaine  poison- 
ing. 

Given  the  structure  of  the  radio  in- 
dustry, the  established  archetypes  of 
programming,  and  the  apathy  of  the 
general  public,  the  possibilities  for 
feminists  within  and  without  commer- 
cial radio  appear  to  be  limited.  As  in 
any  corporate  industry,  women  face 
problems  of  isolation,  alienation,  and 
individualism.  Yet  it  is  clear  that  we 
can  no  longer  be  passive  and  simply 
experience  radio,  because  unlike  tele- 
vision, with  its  super-technology,  su- 
per-control and  super-profit,  radio 
broadcasting  remains  somewhat  ac- 
cessible. There  are  still  small  slices  of 
the  pie  to  be  gotten.  We  got  a  slice,  on 
WGTB-FM  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and 
the  experience  provided  an  analysis 
and  strategy  for  feminists  in  radio 
which  we  feel  are  important  to  share. 


Parts  of  This  Program  Have  Been 
Prerecorded:  All  of  It  Has  Been 
Premeditated 

WGTB-FM  began  as  a  low-pow- 
ered, student-centered  station  owned 
by  Georgetown  University.  Because  it 
was  an  educational,  non-commercial 
channel  with  a  broadcast  radius  of  lit- 
tle more  than  ten  miles  on  a  clear  day, 
the  FCC,  the  university,  and  the  sta- 
tion staff  of  volunteers  did  little  to 
control  the  loose,  fairly  disorganized 


programming.  Two  important  fact- 
tors,  however,  changed  the  station's 
programming,  and  therefore  the  Uni- 
versity's and  the  FCC's  attitudes  to- 
ward it.  The  first  was  the  gradual  in- 
flux of  staff  volunteers  who  were 
members  of  the  area's  radical  Left  and 
Women's  Liberation  groups;  the  sec- 
ond was  the  boosting  of  the  transmit- 
ter power  to  broadcast  over  a  radius 
of  at  least  sixty  miles.  While  the  ma- 
jority of  the  WGTB  staff  remained 
white,  male,  middle-class  apoliticals, 
the  mere  fact  that  the  station  housed  a 
vocal  minority  of  leftists  and  feminists 
airing  their  politics  over  a  broadcast 
range  that  extended  throughout  the 
D.C.  area  into  southern  Virginia, 
West  Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  and 
Delaware,  finally  caused  the  FCC  and 
Georgetown  University  to  pay  close 
attention  to  what  was  being  sent  out 
of  the  lap  of  a  prestigious,  Catholic 
institution.  Finally,  in  March,  1976, 
after  a  long,  exhausting  struggle  for 
control,  Georgetown  University 
closed  down  the  station,  fired  all  the 
staff  members,  and  set  about  organiz- 
ing a  new  staff  more  conducive  to  its 
needs  and  purpose.  WGTB  has  now 
resumed  broadcasting  with  most  of  its 
old  staff  members  but  minus  its  politi- 
cal, vocal  minority. 

Before  the  university  acted, 
WGTB's  alternative  programming 
had  temporarily  flourished  and  pro- 
vided some  important  lessons  for 
feminists  in  the  realities  of  broadcast 
media.  When,  in  1972,  the  first  radi- 
cal feminist  radio  group,  Radio  Free 
Women  (RFW),*  and  later  Sophie's 


*Radio  Free  Women  (R/W),  a  feminist  on- 
air  public  affairs  collective,  produced  weekly 
programs  for  WGTB-FM  from  1972  to  1974. 


Mayday,  Mayday/15 


It/Quest 


Parlor  (SP)  **  arrived  on  the  un- 
charted shores  of  WGTB,  they  had 
found  one  woman  in  a  staff  of  60  to  80 
members.  Further,  they  had  found 
that  the  "egalitarian"  attitude  of  the 
male  staff  consisted  of  words,  for  the 
most  part,  rather  than  action.  Around 
the  station  attitudes  toward  women, 
especially  feminists,  ranged  from  dis- 
may to  open  hostility. 

The  tactics  used  against  feminists  at 
WGTB  are  hardly  original.  Because  of 
their  universality,  they  bear  repeat- 
ing. 

1)  Separation  and  isolation  of 
women  at  the  station:  When  it  be- 
came obvious  that  the  feminist  women 
were  a  unified  group,  efforts  were 
made  to  separate  them  from  the  other 
women  at  the  station,  lest  the  dread 
disease  of  politicization  spread.  Com- 
ments directed  at  both  groups  were 
calculated  to  build  competition  be- 
tween the  groups  and  to  create  in- 
security. 

2)  On-air  and  off-air  sabotage  of 
programming:  While  on  the  air,  male 
d.j.'s  in  charge  of  airing  RFW  tapes 
would  punctuate  them  with  overtly 
sexist  and  hostile  music.  Off  the  air, 
destruction,  pilfering,  and  tampering 
with  tapes  was  common. 

3)  Engineering  power  trips:  The 
process  of  learning  to  operate  the 
equipment  was  especially  painful. 
"They"  had  all  the  information  and 
therefore  all  the  power.  At  first,  wom- 
en were  not  allowed  to  touch  any  of 
the  equipment,  because  "it's  too  com- 
plex." With  help  from  the  one  other 

**Sophie's  Parlor  (SP),  began  as  a  feminist 
music  program  on  WGTB-FM  in  1972,  working 
with  WGTB  until  March,  1976.  SPis  now  aired 
on  WPFW-FM,  Washington,  D.C.,  and  pro- 
duces both  public  affairs  and  music  programs. 


woman  at  the  station  who  was  al- 
ready trained  to  use  the  equipment, 
and  from  the  few  men  who  could  in- 
struct in  a  non-patronizing  manner, 
Radio  Free  Women  learned  engineer- 
ing skills.  This  group  of  women  then 
went  on  to  train  other  women  on  the 
WGTB  staff  and  community  women. 
Mastery  of  tape-production  and  on- 
air  disc- jockey  skills  resulted  from 
trial,  error,  perseverance,  and  sup- 
port from  other  women. 

4)  Constant  demands  that  women 
justify  our  right  to  program  for  wom- 
en: In  an  otherwise  loose  and  unstruc- 
tured station  environment,  Radio  Free 
Women  and  Sophie's  Parlor  were 
regularly  called  upon  to  prove  that  we 
had  audience  enough  to  merit  the  air 
time  allotted  to  women  by  the  sta- 
tion. Our  energies  were  drained  by 
having  to  argue  repeatedly  for  our  air- 
time  survival.  Although  SP  and  RFW 
together  were  successful  in  garnering 
more  time  than  any  feminist  program- 
ming bloc  in  this  country,  that  time 
amounted  to  only  9.5  hours  per  week 
—5%  of  WGTB's  air  time— the  pro- 
verbial drop  of  water  in  a  sea  of  patri- 
archal consciousness.  Too  often,  we 
had  to  defend  our  programming 
against  absurd  accusations  of  reverse 
sexism — on  a  station  which,  as  late  as 
1975,  aired  female  performers  no 
more  than  1  %  of  the  time,  and  had  a 
record  library  in  which  a  mere  6  %  of 
the  records  featured  women. 

These  alienating  conditions  led 
feminists  to  realize  that  their  survival 
required  autonomy  from  the  station. 
In  addition  to  the  tactics  directed  at 
early  station  feminists,  station  policies 
and  politics  (such  as  volunteerism  and 
management  hierarchies),  ran  counter 
to  our  own  politics,  further  encourag- 


Mayday,  Mayday/17 


ing  us  to  develop  a  political  philoso- 
phy independent  of  the  station. 

In  1974,  RFW  ceased  to  exist  as  a 
WGTB  collective  and  became,  in- 
stead, The  Feminist  Radio  Network 
(FRN),***  reflecting  our  realization 
that  feminist  media  work  must  be  or- 
ganized nationally.  FRN  also  began 
the  economic  groundwork  for  femi- 
nist media  that  could  pay  the  women 
who  did  the  work  (thereby  attacking 
the  inherent  race,  class  and  sex  bias  in 
existing  media).  Thus,  by  the  time 
WGTB  had  closed,  FRN  had  ceased  to 
be  dependent  on  the  station's  access  to 
the  airwaves. 

Sophie's  Parlor,  on  the  other  hand, 
chose  to  remain  with  WGTB  as  a  lo- 
cal, community-based  media  group. 
The  collective  worked  at  developing 
innovative  and  increasingly  sophisti- 
cated feminist  music  programming, 
while  building  a  political  perspective 
to  include  WGTB,  the  community, 
and  media  in  general.  This  political 
perspective  was  predicated  on  the 
realization  that  feminists  opting  to 
work  in  a  local,  non-commercial  radio 
station  must  develop  a  position  of 
strength  within  the  station  to  combat 
the  problem  of  dependence  on  the  sta- 
tion's "generosity."  Sophie's  strategy 
included:  (a)  becoming  technically 
proficient;  (b)  accumulating  a  vast 
knowledge  of  women's  music;  (c) 
moving  into  the  internal  structure  of 


*  *  *The  Feminist  Radio  Network  (FRN)  arose 
out  of  Radio  Free  Women  in  1974.  Seeking 
wider  audiences  for  feminist  radio  program- 
ming, FRN  produces  and  distributes  a  wide 
range  of  feminist  audiotapes  nationally. 
Though  founded  by  members  of  the  RFW  col- 
lective, SP  and  FRN  are  now  separate  collec- 
tives with  an  ongoing  working  relationship. 


the  station,  and  (d)  initiating  alliances 
with  groups  within  and  without  the 
station.  Thus,  when  WGTB  closed, 
we  had  acquired  the  strength  to  move 
to  the  Pacif ica  Foundation-owned  sta- 
tion, WPFW-FM. 

Nevertheless,  our  problems  have 
become  apparent.  The  public  has  been 
relatively  unmoved  by  the  demise  of 
WGTB  and  feminist  programming. 
We  surmise  that  this  public  silence  is, 
in  large  part,  the  result  of  our  not 
having  been  a  visible  part  of  Wash- 
ington's diverse  communities. 

Radio  is  a  strange  and  isolating 
medium  for  the  worker.  You  sit  in  a 
room  alone,  speaking  into  a  micro- 
phone—to whom?  Yet  we  made  few 
efforts  to  find  out  who  we  were  reach- 
ing, and  we  never  did  much  outreach 
beyond  the  immediate  feminist  com- 
munity. We  failed  also  to  realize  that 
we  lacked  an  adequate  power  base. 
We  never  really  knew  or  had  contact 
with  other  women  in  radio  around  the 
country  or  in  our  area.  This  isolation 
has  reminded  us  of  how  powerless 
women  will  be  in  the  media  until  we 
can  take  control  of  those  media  and 
begin  to  project  visions  of  our  own 
future  possibilities. 

If  the  Thoughts  in  My  Head  Could 
Reach  a  Great  Distance 

Private  languages  are  the  means 
through  which  the  oppressed  learn 
that  they  are  not  alone  and  that  they 
can  create  a  force  to  undermine  the 
sources  of  their  oppression.  Radio 
offers  feminists  the  chance  to  use  such 
communications. 

In  order  to  use  the  medium  success- 
fully, feminists  need  to  understand  the 
current  structure  and  to  start  defining 


18/Quest 


strategies  accordingly.  We  propose  a 
three-pronged  effort  toward  effective 
utilization  of  radio  broadcasting:  [1] 
formulating  media  priorities  within  a 
feminist  movement;  [2]  establishing 
local  broadcast  groups  to  meet  com- 
munity needs,  and  [3]  developing  a 
tightly  knit  national  structure  which 
allows  radio  women  to  be  much  more 
accountable  to  each  other  and  to  their 
audiences. 

In  formulating  media  priorities, 
feminists  are  just  beginning  to  under- 
stand the  effects  of  media  in  our  so- 
ciety. We  need  to  understand  that  ra- 
dio is  an  enormously  isolating  experi- 
ence— not  only  for  the  listener,  but 
for  the  woman  who  is  operating  the 
technology  as  well.  The  women's 
community  must  reach  out  to  women 
in  the  media  and  let  them  know  the 
priorities  of  the  community  as  a 
whole.  Feminists  must  understand 
that  radio  broadcasting  offers  real 
power,  and  that  there  is  still  time  to 
get  in  the  door.  At  the  same  time, 
women  in  radio  must  start  hearing 
from  each  other:  technical  skills  have 
to  be  taught;  valid  criticisms  of  each 


other's  work  must  be  heard;  and  pro- 
gramming concepts  must  be  devel- 
oped. 

Feminists  in  radio  must  seek  out 
effective  media  forms;  FRN  and  SP 
have  begun  to  articulate  distinctly 
feminist  formats  for  public  affairs  and 
music  on  radio.  We  are  expanding  the 
form  and  content  of  public  affairs. 
Instead  of  relying  on  a  linear  presenta- 
tion of  information,  FRN  and  its  affil- 
iates are  developing  collage-style  au- 
diotapes that  incorporate  music, 
drama  and  interviews.  Most  impor- 
tantly, the  patriarchal  notion  of  infor- 
mation as  unrelated  bits  of  scrap-tri- 
via is  refuted  by  the  feminist  concept 
that  all  information  is  part  of  an  or- 
ganic whole.  We  recognize  that  all 
issues  of  relevance  to  our  lives  are 
feminist  issues. 

We  have  expanded  the  concept  of 
music  programming  as  well.  Sophie's 
uses  her  access  to  the  wall  of  sound 
to  speak  subtly  in  languages  that  can 
be  understood  by  a  wide  variety  of 
groups  outside  the  norm.  Sophie's 
uses  music  to  feed  the  listener's  imagi- 
nation—and imagination  is  a  power- 


Mayday,  Mayday/ 19 


ful  tool  with  which  to  face  the  arche- 
types that  form  the  current  world- 
view. 

Women  in  the  industry  must  make 
some  hard  political  decisions  about 
their  role  in  broadcasting.  Women 
who  broadcast  on  a  local  level  should 
become  acutely  aware  of  the  local 
community's  needs,  should  focus  on 
certain  issues  not  popularly  consid- 
ered feminist  in  order  to  present  them 
as  problems  that  affect  all  women 
(such  as  city  tax  bases  and  their  rela- 
tionship to  housing),  and  make  the 
media  accessible  to  and  integrated 
with  the  lives  of  minority  and  work- 
ing-class women. 

A  certain  autonomy  from  the  sta- 
tion has  to  be  achieved,  and  account- 
ability has  to  be  maintained  with  a 
feminist  community.  (One  structure 
to  help  solve  the  accountability  prob- 
lem would  be  a  feminist  media  union, 
a  kind  of  "think-tank"  for  women  in 
all  aspects  of  the  media.)  It  is  critical 
that  women  entering  radio  have  a 
well-developed  feminist  analysis  to 
sustain  them  in  the  medium's  arid  en- 
vironment. Any  woman  who  walks 
into  a  radio  station  should  do  so  with 
the  idea  that  control  should  ultimately 
be  feminist  control.  However,  since  in 
our  lifetimes  we  are  not  likely  to  see 
many  feminist-owned,  feminist-run 
radio  stations,  alliances  have  to  be 
made  and  structures  established  for 
negotiations  with  existing  powers. 

Radio  is  a  powerful  tool  for  an 
overall  feminist  strategy.  It  can  foster 
feminist  theory,  demystify  feminism 
and  most  importantly,  bring  feminism 
to  bear  on  all  women's  lives.  One 
broadcast,  however,  can  be  trans- 
mitted effectively  only  within  a  rela- 
tively small  radius.  The  corporate 


structure,  of  course,  realized  this, 
and  that  is  why  networks  were  built. 
Until  women  become  strong  enough 
in  their  local  stations,  there  is  not  go- 
ing to  be  any  feminist  network  com- 
parable to  an  NBC. 

We  need  to  develop  a  national 
structure  that  allows  women  to  be 
much  more  accountable  to  each  other, 
that  focuses  on  clear-cut  priorities, 
and  that  can  present  feminist  analysis 
to  a  much  larger  community.  A  na- 
tional coalition  for  women  in  radio 
could  provide  coordination  for  a  real 
feminist  force  in  radio  broadcasting. 
The  women  say  that,  with  the  world 
full  of  noise,  they  see  themselves  as 
already  in  possession  of  the  industrial 
complexes.  They  are  in  the  factories 
aerodromes  radio  stations.  They  have 
control  of  communications. 

Monique  Wittig, 
Les  Guerilleres 


Footnotes 

1  We  want  to  especially  thank  Shirl  Smith, 
Laura  Bertran,  and  Lark  Prokupek  from  the 
FRN,  for  the  invaluable  analysis  they  contri- 
uted  in  the  process  of  writing  this  article. 

2  Billboard  Magazine  characterized  certain 
songs  that  were  moving  quickly  up  the  Top- 
40  charts  with  a  picture  of  a  bullet. 

Moira  Rankin  and  Natalie  Reuss 
are  members  of  Sophie's  Parlor,  an 
on-air  feminist  radio  collective  on 
WPFW-FM,  Washington,  D.C. 

Sheri  Maeda  works  with  the  Femi- 
nist Radio  Network  (FRN),  a  national 
audiotape  production  and  distribu- 
tion collective  in  Washington,  D.C, 
and  is  a  former  member  of  Sophie's 
Parlor. 


20/Quest 


etters 


Dear  Quest  Editors: 

I  am  not  renewing  my  subscription 
to  Quest  because  I  feel  excluded  by  the 
increasing  focus  of  your  contributors 
on  the  "heterosexist  analysis."  I  have 
been  an  active  feminist  for  over  seven 
years,  *  and  I  do  not  feel  it  is  just  to 
place  me  outside  the  feminist  camp 
simply  because  of  my  sexual  prefer- 
ence. While  it  may  be  true  that  the 
fact  of  being  heterosexual  in  a  homo- 
phobic society  may  exempt  me  from 
some  forms  of  discrimination,  I  resent 
being  labeled  the  enemy.  And  while 
there  are  undoubtedly  political  ele- 
ments in  everyone's  sexual  choice,  I 
do  not  feel  that  the  choice  to  be  a  he- 
terosexual or  a  lesbian  is  entirely  a 
political  one. 

I  also  feel  that  I,  as  a  single  woman 
who  has  never  been  married  and  only 
rarely  been  part  of  a  couple,  have  suf- 
fered a  great  deal  in  a  male-domi- 
nated, couple-oriented  society.  I  find 
it  galling  that  lesbians  who  have  been 
part  of  heterosexual  marriages  are 


7  was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the 
Yale  Women's  Alliance,  was  active  in  the  HEW 
suit  against  Yale,  co-authored  a  model  affirma- 
tive action  plan  distributed  by  WEAL,  co- 
founded  a  consciousness-raising  group  in  New 
Haven,  started  and  co-chaired  the  Women's 
Caucus-Religious  Studies,  and  consistently 
speak  up  for  women  wherever  I  am. 


now  taking  a  holier-than-thou  atti- 
tude toward  me.  Even  lesbian  couples 
are  conforming  to  a  societal  pattern, 
and  are  deriving  social  approval  and 
psychological  support  for  being  part 
of  a  couple,  which  I  do  not  have.  I 
make  this  point  not  to  suggest  that  the 
suffering  of  a  heterosexual  single 
woman  is  greater  than  that  of  a  les- 
bian, though  in  some  cases  it  may  be, 
but  rather  to  point  out  the  insuffi- 
ciency of  "heterosexism"  for  defining 
the  basic  forms  of  alienation  in  our 
society. 

I  acknowledge  the  personal  tone  in 
my  remarks.  On  a  theoretical  level,  I 
believe  the  opposition  of  "hetero- 
sexism" to  "feminism"  is  too  narrow  a 
focus  to  encompass  the  multiplicity  of 
oppressions  from  which  women  suf- 
fer. But  I  also  feel  personally  excluded 
and  hurt  by  this  analysis.  It  pains  me 
a  great  deal  to  be  rejected  by  sisters 
with  whom  I  have  identified  and 
struggled  for  many  years.  I  believe  it 
is  extremely  important  for  all  women 
to  tell  our  stories,  and  I  applaud  les- 
bians who  are  articulating  their  strug- 
gles. I  believe  separatism  has  an  im- 
portant place  in  the  women's  move- 
ment, though  I  myself  live  what  my 
friend  Marcia  Keller  calls  a  "semi- 
separatist"  life — most  of  my  closest 
friends  are  women,  I  belong  to  a  num- 
ber of  women's  groups,  I  teach  worn- 


Letters /21 


en's  studies  classes,  my  research  is  pri- 
marily in  women's  studies,  and  I  need 
space  apart  from  patriarchy  to  breathe 
in.  What  I  object  to  is  the  assumption 
that  lesbian  feminist  separatism  is  the 
most  courageous,  and  the  only  really 
authentically  feminist,  stance.  We  all 
live  our  lives  in  the  way  we  do  and 
can,  and  I  certainly  hope  the  women's 
movement  has  room  for  all  of  us  who 
are  struggling. 

I  am  certain  I  will  read  Quest  from 
time  to  time,  and  I  may  even  subscribe 
to  it  in  the  future.  However,  I  do  not 
feel  like  subscribing  to  a  journal  which 
rules  me  out  of  its  basic  feminist  ana- 
lysis at  this  time. 

Yours  sincerely, 
Carol  P.  Christ 
New  York,  New  York 


Dear  Quest  Women, 

I  feel  bad  to  know  I'm  writing  with 
complaints  when  for  so  long  I've  ap- 
preciated Quest  and  haven't  written 
to  send  encouragement.  However,  I 
want  to  go  ahead  and  write  now  and 
just  hope  that  you  will  realize  the  car- 
ing involved  in  my  writing  at  all. 

The  issue  of  Quest,  "Organizations 
and  Strategies,"  has  distressed  me  im- 
mensely. Quest  has  never  presented 
itself  as  a  forum  for  divergent  points 
of  view;  rather  it  has  sought,  as  stated 
in  the  preface,  to  find  a  "long-term  in- 
depth  feminist  political  analysis  and 
ideological  development."  I'd  learned 
to  expect  Quest  to  be  highly  selective 
of  its  articles  and  to  present  different 
points  of  view  that  supported  each 
other  and  which  sought  to  respond  to 


women's  situation  and  goals.  I  find 
Jean  Elshtain's  article,  "Alternative  to 
Individualism,"  very  out  of  place  in 
Quest.  Must  feminists  exist  in  an  am- 
bivalent relationship  to  the  family 
(p.  12)?  I  find  the  graphic  of  man, 
"wife,"  and  children  highly  offensive. 
As  for  "The  Family  is  the  only  place 
human  beings  find  whatever  continu- 
ing love,  security,  and  comfort  they 
know"  (p.  12),  such  a  statement  is 
highly  uncalled  for  in  Quest  since, 
though  it  may  have  been  quoted  from 
a  woman,  is  straight  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  system  that  oppresses  women 
unmercifully.  For  a  woman  the  family 
is  not  a  place  of  love,  security,  and 
comfort— rather  it  is  her  prison  where 
she  as  a  slave  provides  these  things  for 
others.  And  what  about  ".  .  .still  re- 
presents the  only  possibility  of  per- 
sonal life"?  This  is  directly  offensive 
to  me  as  a  lesbian.  It  is  men  and  their 
system  that  would  have  us  see  the 
family  as  we  know  it  as  the  only  pos- 
sibility when  certainly  as  women,  we 
have  just  begun  to  explore  what  the 
real  possibilities  are.  Even  I  personally 
have  explored  enough  to  know  that 
women  are  fully  capable  of  sharing 
their  lives,  providing  rich  personal 
lives  for  each  other,  and  having  to- 
gether a  real  chance  at  love,  security, 
and  comfort  that  women  associated 
with  men  will  never  even  see  the  ghost 
of. 

I  want  to  comment  on  Quest  in  gen- 
eral. I  feel  it  is  getting  too  far  away 
from  women.  In  reaching  for  an  ab- 
stract solution  Quest  is  failing  the 
basics — naming  the  enemy  and  listen- 
ing to  women.  If  Quest  shies  away 


22/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


from  these  essentials  then  what  can  it 
offer  except  co-optation  into  male  so- 
cialism at  best?  A  mythical  commit- 
ment to  all  women  results  in  no  real 
commitment  to  any  woman  except  as 
she  fits  into  a  male  system  of  revolu- 
tion. I'm  sick  of  white  women  copping 
out  and  using  the  excuse  of  being  con- 
cerned about  poor  women  (while 
keeping  all  the  money  I've  noticed). 
Women  with  privilege  don't  hold  a 
candle  to  poor  women — poor  women 
don't  need  or  want  any  pretty  phrases 
or  to  be  used  in  yet  one  more  way — 
this  time  as  an  excuse  for  white  wom- 
en not  to  be  for  women  really.  Why 
isn't  Quest  openly  lesbian,  openly 
separatist?  Name  the  enemy — men, 
their  system,  their  everything— take  a 
stand  against  it  and  them  and  in  so 
doing  create  a  situation  in  which  poor 
women  will  take  the  lead  and  don't 
kid  yourself  otherwise:  this  world  be- 
longs not  to  men  but  to  women  (and 
any  true  definition  of  women  means 
"woman-identified  woman"  and  that 
means  lesbian)  and  not  to  white  wom- 
en with  money  who  can  still  afford  to 
"work  with"  men  and  male-identified 
women  but  to  poor  women  black  and 
brown. 

The  best  article  in  "Organizations 
and  Strategies"  was  about  the  softball 
teams.  All  the  other  articles  were 
written  by  university  professors  who 
are  in  a  position  to  write  whether  or 
not  Quest  pays  them,  so  please  think 
twice  about  cutting  out  paying  writers 
as  the  first  cut  that  may  be  necessary 
in  your  budget.  I  would  even  suggest 
if  at  all  possible  instituting  a  plan  to 
pay  women  who  have  ideas  for  arti- 


cles which  aren't  written  yet  so  as  to 
provide  the  material  means  for  them 
to  write  them  and  to  serve  as  a  form 
of  encouragement  and  help — it  is 
many  days'  work  just  to  get  myself  to 
the  typewriter — I  need  more  help  get- 
ting here  than  I  need  after  I'm  here. 

One  more  complaint — Quest  is 
really  being  very  prejudiced  against 
separatism.  The  two  articles  that  have 
had  the  most  bearing  on  it— "The  Fu- 
ture of  Separatism"  in  the  "Theories 
of  Revolution"  issue  and  now  an  arti- 
cle by  an  ex-separatist,  "Reassessing 
Basics"  have  both  had  more  to  do 
with  discounting  separatism  than  with 
any  real  exploration  of  even  what 
separatism  is — of  which  I  didn't  feel 
either  writer  had  a  real  understand- 
ing. Separatism,  much  more  than  any 
particular  project  or  way  of  doing 
things  is  a  consciousness,  an  aware- 
ness into  the  depths  of  women's  op- 
pression as  women  and  a  commit- 
ment to  that  awareness  and  to  wom- 
en. The  war  is  already  being  waged  on 
every  level  of  our  lives  from  physical 
assault  and  fear  to  brain-washing  and 
co-optation:  now  is  when  we  must 
fight  back  with  all  our  strength,  must 
really  be  for  women  even  (especially) 
to  the  extent  of  being  against  men. 
Quest  seems  unwilling  (unable)  to 
even  name  the  enemy  much  less  offer 
women  weapons  or  even  a  real  ear. 

I've  tried  before  now  to  send  some- 
thing to  Quest  but  haven't  been  able 
to  see  through  the  kind  of  article  I 
thought  Quest  would  be  interested  in, 
so  I  have  written  this  letter. 

Sincerely, 
Flying  Clouds 


Letters/23 


Snuffing  Sexual  Violence 

By  DEB  FRIEDMAN  and  LOIS  YANKOWSKI     graphic  by  Sylvia  Wallace 


The  recent  controversy  over  Snuff, 
a  pornographic  film  which  depicts  a 
woman's  brutal  murder  and  dismem- 
berment, convinced  us  of  the  need  to 
develop  an  analysis  of  depicted  sex- 
ual violence.  As  feminists,  we  felt  un- 
comfortable with  the  civil  libertarian 
view  that  advocates  a  "hands-off" 
position  on  the  content  of  media. 
However,  we  realize  that  direct  cen- 
sorship is  a  dangerous  weapon  that 
can  be  used  against  us  as  well  as  for 
us.  While  there  is  no  easy  answer, 
feminists  must  begin  to  examine  the 
issues  involved.  The  members  of  the 


staff  of  the  Feminist  Alliance  Against 
Rape  [FAAR]*  held  several  discus- 
sions aimed  at  clarifying  our  views. 
The  ideas  contained  in  this  article  are 
the  result  of  those  discussions. 

Freedom  of  speech  is  deeply  in- 
grained in  our  concept  of  a  free  so- 
ciety, and  is  often  invoked  when 
issues  of  censorship  are  raised.  To 


*FAAR  is  dedicated  to  providing  a  forum  for 
discussing  and  developing  strategies  to  end 
rape.  The  FAAR  Newsletter  is  published  bi- 
monthly. Subscriptions  are  $5.00  per  year 
($10.00  for  institutions).  Write  to:  FAAR,  P.O. 
Box  21033,  Washington,  D.C.  20009 


lAlQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


safeguard  this  freedom  of  speech, 
some  people  argue  against  censoring 
portrayals  of  even  the  most  brutal 
acts  of  violence.  Others  argue  that 
violence  is  reality,  an  inevitable  part 
of  human  nature,  and  that  repressing 
it  will  only  cause  it  to  "spring  up  else- 
where like  groves  of  gray,  slimy 
mushrooms."  1 

Our  view  is  different.  Information 
and  communications  are  controlled  in 
many  ways.  Those  who  object  to  the 
censorship  of  depicted  violence  in  the 
name  of  freedom  of  speech  overlook 
the  other  ways  this  freedom  is  already 
controlled.  For  instance,  some  kinds 
of  information  are  omitted  or  rele- 
gated to  positions  of  obscurity,  such 
as  in  the  last  pages  of  a  newspaper. 
During  the  early  years  of  the  civil 
rights  movement,  Southern  newspa- 
pers contained  little  news  about  civil 
rights  activities,  and  mass  media  still 
give  only  token  coverage  to  black 
news  issues.  The  control  of  informa- 
tion may  take  the  form  of  blatant 
censorship  as  it  did  in  the  Massachu- 
setts banning  of  The  Titticut  Follies,  a 
film  which  revealed  the  mistreatment 
of  patients  in  a  mental  institution  in 
that  state;  or  it  may  take  a  less  visible 
form,  as  it  did  in  the  suppression  of 
information  about  the  U.S.  bombing 
of  Cambodia.  In  other  words,  the 
control  of  information,  either  in  the 
form  of  censorship  or  in  more  subtle 
forms,  is  a  daily  fact  of  life. 

Censorship  as  traditionally  defined 
is  not  the  only  issue  involved  in  judg- 
ing whether  movies  like  Snuff  should 
be  shown.  The  owners,  producers, 
and  writers  of  the  media  determine 
which  perspectives  or  images  will  re- 
ceive a  great  deal  of  exposure,  and 
which  will  receive  little  or  no  expo- 


sure. To  this  extent,  freedom  of 
speech  is  the  privilege  of  those  who 
have  access  to  the  media.  At  present, 
the  media  provide  us  with  a  steady 
diet  of  rape  and  murder  for  entertain- 
ment. Until  we  can  exercise  some  con- 
trol over  what  is  shown  as  news  and 
entertainment,  we  will  continue  to  be 
presented  with  these  images. 

Sex,  Violence,  and  Power 

Violence  and  sadistic  sex  are  the 
most  prevalent  trends  in  TV  and 
movie  entertainment  as  well  as  in  por- 
nography. At  the  same  time,  the  avail- 
ability of  non-violent  commercial  en- 
tertainment is  very  limited.  The 
media  do  not  merely  show  occasional 
images  of  violence  and  domination, 
but  inundate  and  overwhelm  us  with 
these  images.  It  is  particularly  relevant 
that  this  violence  is  predominantly 
violence  against  women.  Women  are 
constantly  massacred  and  brutalized 
in  every  conceivable  fashion  in  the 
media. 

The  actual  incidence  of  rape  and 
other  violent  acts  against  women  is 
rising.  We  feel  that  the  media's  casual 
attitude  toward  violence  not  only  re- 
flects this  increase,  but  is  a  contribut- 
ing factor.  The  media  confuse  violence 
and  sex  by  constantly  depicting  bru- 
tality and  domination  as  forms  of  sex- 
ual gratification.  At  the  same  time, 
women  are  portrayed  as  liking  violent 
or  forced  sex.  In  the  absence  of  more 
positive  portrayals  of  sexuality,  vio- 
lence becomes  increasingly  tolerated 
as  normal  sexual  expression. 

Obviously,  the  media  did  not  in- 
vent rape.  However,  the  media's  fre- 
quent repetition  of  themes  of  domina- 
tion and  violence  toward  women  rein- 


Snuffing  Sexual  Violence  125 


forces  attitudes  which  encourage  men 
to  rape  and  commit  acts  of  violence. 
While  movies  like  Clockwork  Orange 
or  Snuff  may  not  in  and  of  themselves 
influence  anyone  to  commit  rape  or 
murder,  such  pro-violence,  anti- 
woman  programming  promotes  the 
development  of  a  society  which  is 
casual  about  violent  acts,  especially 
against  women. 

Although  it  may  be  difficult  to 
prove  an  overall  cause  and  effect  rela- 
tionship between  media  violence  and 
real  violence,  there  are  individual  in- 
cidents which  do  show  a  direct  link. 
Some  unique  forms  of  violence  por- 
trayed in  the  media  have  been  re- 
enacted  shortly  afterward  with  real 
victims.  An  example  of  this  is  a 
broomstick  rape  that  was  shown  on 
television.  Not  surprisingly  for  televi- 
sion, the  perpetrator  was  a  lesbian, 
while  in  real  life  it  was  a  man.  An- 
other example  is  the  television  por- 
trayal of  a  gasoline  burning  of  a 
woman,  later  re-enacted  against  a 
Boston  woman.  It  is  hard  to  believe 
that  these  are  simply  bizarre  coinci- 
dences and  not  an  indication  of  the 
media's  ability  to  influence  behavior. 

An  important  aspect  of  the  media's 
effectiveness  in  promoting  violence  in 
general,  and  violent  sex  in  particular, 
is  its  refusal  to  show  alternatives.  Pro- 
moting alternatives  to  violent  sex  re- 
quires the  development  of  criteria  to 
determine  what  forms  of  sexuality 
should  be  portrayed.  ** 


**Our  guidelines  for  determining  destructive 
versus  nondestructive  forms  of  sexuality  are  in- 
tended for  application  to  the  media  only.  We 
do  not  advocate  censoring  individual  consen- 
sual acts  and  we  would  oppose  any  efforts  to 
do  so. 


The  first  criterion  we  agreed  on  in 
our  discussion  was,  not  surprisingly, 
that  the  relationship  should  be  con- 
sensual. This  definition  presupposes 
that  the  individuals  involved  are  cap- 
able of  giving  consent.  We  felt  that,  in 
general,  relationships  involving  non- 
peers  (children  and  adults,  for  exam- 
ple) create  problems  in  determining 
true  consent.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
are  certain  areas  where  it  is  clear  that 
there  is  no  possibility  of  true  consent 
(such  as  bestiality). 

The  media  have  typically  muddied 
the  issue  of  consent  by  fostering  the 
myth  that  women  like  being  forced.  A 
rape  scene  (such  as  the  one  in  Straw 
Dogs)  often  starts  out  with  the  wom- 
an fighting  and  screaming,  and  ends 
with  her  passionate  submission  and 
apparent  total  enjoyment.  Needless  to 
say,  women  only  react  this  way  in 
male  fantasies.  In  our  view,  consent 
means  more  than  acceptance  (appar- 
ent or  real)  of  an  all  but  completed 
act.  It  must  be  present  from  the  start. 

We  next  considered  whether  con- 
sent alone  was  sufficient  for  defining 
non-destructive  forms  of  sexuality.  In 
particular,  we  discussed  the  current 
trend  towards  sado-masochism.  Read- 
ing accounts  of  sado-masochism  made 
it  clear  to  us  that  the  crucial  ingredient 
is  control.  Pain  is  frequently,  but  by 
no  means  necessarily,  involved.  In 
many  types  of  sexual  activity  part- 
ners fluctuate  between  passivity  and 
aggressiveness.  With  sado-maso- 
chism, however,  the  roles  are  fixed 
and  extreme.  One  person  surrenders 
control  to  another,  often  irretrievably 
(for  example,  in  bondage).  Sado- 
masochism is  a  voluntarily  assumed 
condition  of  powerfulness  versus 
powerlessness.  There  is  a  strong  con- 


Ub/Quest 


nection  between  losing  control  to  an- 
other person  by  choosing  to  give  it  up, 
and  losing  control  because  it  has  been 
taken  away  forcibly.  Sado-masochism 
encourages  people  to  view  both  re- 
linquishing and  gaining  control  over 
others  as  pleasurable  and  desirable. 

The  expression  of  control  or  sub- 
mission as  a  form  of  sexuality  is  also  a 
result  of  sexual  repression.  Because  of 
our  patriarchal  heritage,  repression  of 
sexual  pleasure  runs  deep.  Women  are 
considered  dirty  and  unhealthy,  and 
sexual  contact  with  us  (to  say  nothing 
of  sexual  contact  between  us)  be- 
comes sinful  and  evil.  Because  our 
culture  represses  sexual  desires,  un- 
healthy and  dangerous  desires  such  as 
the  desire  for  control  or  submission, 
emerge. 

Models  of  powerfulness  and  power- 
lessness  pervade  our  society.  We  are 


taught  to  desire  power  over  others,  or 
to  submit  to  being  powerless.  The 
practice  of  sado-masochism  reflects 
the  adoption  of  these  models  as  a 
mode  of  sexual  behavior.  Powerless- 
ness  is  a  very  real  condition  in  many 
people's  lives.  To  voluntarily  place 
oneself  in  a  position  of  powerlessness 
mocks  those  without  power.  In  a  so- 
ciety characterized  by  self-determina- 
tion and  positive  attitudes  towards 
women,  controlling  others  or  surren- 
dering control  would  not  be  so  desir- 
able. Sado-masochism  is  a  product  of 
our  society,  but  it  also  perpetuates 
the  kind  of  power  relationships  that 
we  hope  to  eliminate. 

In  our  discussions,  then,  it  became 
clear  that  we  objected  to  violence, 
rather  than  to  explicit  sex.  This  is  con- 
trary to  the  traditional  approach 
which  glorifies  violence  and  represses 


Snuffing  Sexual  Violence /27 


non-violent  sexual  activity.  Explicit 
sex  is  not  inherently  demeaning.  It  is 
only  when  sex  is  portrayed  in  a  way 
that  promotes  the  sexual  objectifica- 
tion  of  women,  or  in  violent  and/or 
sado-masochistic  sex,  that  we  find  it 
offensive.  Most  pornography  dwells 
on  aspects  of  human  sexuality  which 
involve  domination  and  control,  and 
increasingly  relies  on  violence  to  sup- 
ply its  titillation. 


What  We  Can  Do 

As  we  discussed  what  kinds  of  ac- 
tions should  be  taken  against  por- 
trayals of  violence,  especially  violence 
toward  women,  we  felt  that  finding 
ways  to  eliminate  the  showing  of  films 
like  Snuff  is  a  priority.  Snuff  repre- 
sents the  epitome  of  glorified  violence 
because  its  filming  was  motivated  by 
actual  murders  of  women  committed 
for  no  other  reason  than  to  be  filmed 
as  pornography.  The  real  "snuff 
films,"  supposedly  based  on  actual 
murders  of  women,  are  being  shown 
"underground."  Snuffing  Snuff  and 
films  like  it  would  promote  efforts  to 
control  the  use  of  sexual  violence  as 
entertainment,  as  well  as  to  eliminate 
the  most  brutal  and  sensational  forms 
of  this  kind  of  film.  Such  films  serve 
only  to  heighten  both  the  degree  of 


violence  portrayed  elsewhere  in  the 
media,  and  the  level  of  violence  which 
is  accepted  by  movie-goers. 

In  discussing  specific  tactics  that 
could  be  used  to  combat  the  prolifera- 
tion of  sexual  violence,  we  decided 
against  working  for  new  censorship 
laws,  or  using  already  existing  laws. 
We  are  not  in  a  position  to  control  the 
ways  these  laws  are  used;  they  could 
be  turned  against  us.  We  do  not  want 
to  encourage  the  use  of  tactics  that 
could  be  expanded  and  used  to  control 
lesbianism,  or  feminist  or  radical  poli- 
tics. 

Theoretically,  the  use  of  adminis- 
trative regulations  would  be  a  more 
acceptable  strategy.  The  Federal  Com- 
munications Commission  has  some 
control  over  radio  and  TV  in  that  it 
grants  them  licenses  to  operate.  Con- 
cerned groups  can  file  petitions  with 
the  F.C.C.  to  deny  license  renewal 
applications.  In  order  to  be  successful 
in  challenging  the  license,  the  groups 
must  present  a  strong  case  that  the 
station  is  not  acting  in  the  public  inter- 
est and  is  not  responsive  to  commu- 
nity needs.  As  a  practical  matter  this 
is  difficult  to  do.  However,  sometimes 
the  threat  of  a  challenge  is  enough  to 
frighten  a  station  into  making  minor 
concessions. 

A  second  tactic  might  be  to  use  the 
guidelines  published  by  the  FCC  for 
stations  seeking  license  renewals. 
Women  could  work  to  have  some 
standards  about  violence  toward 
women  in  both  commercials  and  pro- 
gramming included  in  these  guide- 
lines. Obviously,  this  would  apply  to 
only  TV  and  radio,  and  would  not 
affect  other  media. 

We  could  work  through  anti-nui- 
sance laws  to  ban  hard-core  pornog- 


28/Quest 


raphy  book  stores  and  theaters  from 
the  community.  These  ordinances 
have  been  successfully  used  in  some 
communities  to  get  rid  of  objects  (not 
people)  which  are  considered  public 
nuisances.  This  tactic,  however,  can 
backfire.  Anti-nuisance  laws  have 
been  used  to  shut  down  massage  par- 
lors and  could  be  used  against  gay 
bars.  Again,  we  cannot  advocate  any 
tactic  that  could  be  directly  used  to 
limit  women's  ability  to  earn  a  living.2 
A  second  problem  with  this  tactic  is 
that  it  tends  to  force  such  book  stores 
and  theaters  to  concentrate  in  poorer 
and  powerless  sections  of  cities  which 
may  not  have  the  means  to  get  rid  of 
them. 

A  national  alert  system  that  focuses 
public  attention  on  offensive  pro- 
gramming, films,  magazines,  etc.,  is 
an  important  strategy.  The  National 
Gay  Task  Force  has  organized  such  a 
system:  members  are  encouraged  to 
write  letters,  make  calls,  join  demon- 
strations, and  organize  boycotts 
around  particularly  damaging  or  dan- 
gerous media  portrayals  of  gays.  They 
can  effectively  concentrate  pressure 
on  a  specific  target  instead  of  wasting 
energy  on  uncoordinated  efforts. 

Similar  pressure  tactics  (boycotts, 
for  example),  could  be  used  to  force 
newspapers,  TV,  and  radio  to  stop 
promoting  movies  like  Snuff.  While 
distributors  of  such  films  could  prob- 
ably find  new  ways  to  publicize  them, 
barring  advertisements  of  sexual  vio- 
lence from  the  mass  media  would  not 
only  help  reduce  the  number  of  peo- 
ple who  view  these  films,  but  would 
also  eliminate  one  way  in  which  sex- 
ual violence  receives  wide  exposure. 

The  best  general,  long-term  strategy 
is  re-education.  This  includes  tactics 


such  as  public  speaking,  editorial  re- 
sponses on  TV,  and  letters  to  the  edi- 
tors of  publications,  as  well  as  leaf- 
letting  viewers  as  they  enter  theaters, 
and  staging  speak-outs  and  demon- 
strations where  appropriate.  Demon- 
strations must  be  held  with  caution, 
however,  because  of  the  likelihood  of 
attracting  even  more  public  attention 
and  publicity  to  the  film  or  store  that 
is  being  protested. 

Finally,  there  is  the  possibility  of 
developing  our  own  "feminist  por- 
nography," that  is,  non-sexist  erotica. 
We  have  set  out  some  guidelines  for 
determining  what  forms  of  explicit  sex 
should  be  portrayed  as  alternatives  to 
the  current  violence  and  sado-maso- 
chism. Although  it  may  sound  far- 
fetched, developing  feminist  pornog- 
raphy would  help  demonstrate  what 
some  of  these  alternatives  could  be. 

We  do  not  see  the  tactics  we  sug- 
gest as  solutions,  but  rather  as  initial 
steps  to  be  taken.  Any  solution  to  the 
problem  of  media  control  will  require 
far  more  power  than  we  now  have. 
We  will  have  to  offset  the  interest  and 
control  of  sponsors,  advertising  agen- 
cies, publishers,  editors,  station- 
owners,  and  others  in  the  communica- 
tions industry,  their  friends  in  the 
FCC,  and  the  public  opinion  they 
have  helped  to  shape. 

In  the  long  run,  we  must  gain  ac- 
cess to  the  media,  either  through  own- 
ership and  promotion  of  our  own 
media,  or  through  regulations  that 
force  the  established  media  to  devote 
a  certain  percentage  of  space  or  air- 
time  to  programming  created  and  con- 
trolled by  women's  and  other  com- 
munity groups.  Until  we  have  such 
access,  and  even  after  we  do,  we  must 
develop  strategies  for  limiting  the 


Snuffing  Sexual  Violence /29 


ability  of  the  media  and  the  pornog- 
raphy industry  to  channel  the  public's 
tastes  in  entertainment  into  destruc- 
tive and  violent  forms. 

Footnotes 

1  Peter  Koper,  "Snuffing  'Snuff  Is  Not  The 
Answer,"  Washington  Newsworks  (March 
25,  1976),  p.  19. 

2  Limiting  a  woman's  ability  to  make  a  liv- 
ing through  professions  like  prostitution  has 
been  suggested  by  Susan  Brownmiller  and 
others  as  a  tactic  for  discouraging  violence 
against  women.  This  tactic,  however,  is 
based  on  faulty  premises.  This  is  a  complex 
issue  and  is  discussed  further  in  an  article, 
"Rape  and  Prostitution,"  (Jackie  MacMillan, 
FAAR  Newsletter  July/August,  1976). 

Debra  Friedman  is  a  co-founder 
and  staff  member  of  F.A.A.R.  (Femi- 
nist Alliance  Against  Rape),  and  a 
trustee  of  the  Rape  Crisis  Center, 
Washington,  D.C. 

Lois  Yankowski  is  a  staff  member 
of  F.A.A.R.  and  a  member  of  the 
Task  Force  on  Abused  Women,  of  the 
Women's  Legal  Defense  Fund,  Wash- 
ington, D.C. 


read 

off  our  backs 

the  feminist  news journal 
published  monthly 


Get  the  stories  that  most 
papers  wont  print--news  and 
analysis  from  a  feminist 
point  of  view. 

12  issues-$6  Canada-$7 
Insti tutions-$15    sample  copy-45tf 

off  our  backs,  1724  20th  St.  N.W. 
Washington,  D.C.  20009 


Douafctars,  Inc. 

Plainfield,  Vermont  05667 

IN  I  I  I  I  AT 


MIA  ttil  III  MS 

$4.50 


$4.50 


THE 

Opopcmax 

MOMQl  EWITTKi 

$4.50 

you  Can  Have  It  When 
I'm  Through  with  It 

Betty  Webb  /Vface 

$4.00 


To  order 
add  $0.35/book  handling 


30 /Quest 


<R  Critique  &  Commentary  El 


The  Female  Journalism  Debate 


Editors'  Introduction — 

Feminists  have  produced  masses  of  printed  material — newspapers, 
magazines,  journals,  books.  And  as  we  produced  this  mass  of  print,  we 
also  produced  a  great  deal  of  controversy  about  the  role  of  feminist  jour- 
nalism within  the  women's  movement.  Since  feminist  journalists  and 
publications  are  concerned  with  controversial  issues  (including  issues 
about  which  many  feminists  did  not  agree),  charges  of  bias,  or  of  poor  or 
unfair  reporting  have  been  frequent.  Publications  have  also  attacked  and 
trashed  particular  individuals — for  political  mistakes  or  differences,  but 
in  some  cases  for  personal  characteristics. 

Questions  about  issues  such  as  these  have  led  some  feminist  journalists 
to  ask  what  role  publications  play  in  the  women's  movement.  How  can 
publications,  and  especially  journalists,  contribute  to  the  feminist  strug- 
gle for  power?  What  kind  of  reporting  will  we,  as  opposed  to  the  estab- 
lishment press,  consider  responsible?  What  kind  of  editorial  comment 
and  criticism  do  we  want?  In  January  of  1976,  Media  Report  to  Women 
issued  a  paper  giving  their  definition  of  Female  Journalism.  Quest  asked 
both  Carol  Lease  and  Jeanne  Cordova  to  respond  to  that  statement  for 
this  issue.  Each  of  the  three  discussions  of  feminist  journalism  printed 
here  agree  that  the  standards  for  excellence  are  different  from  those  we 
are  used  to  seeing  in  the  New  York  Times,  or  the  Los  Angeles  Free  Press. 
But  they  do  not  agree  on  what  our  different  standards  should  be. 


Critique  and  Commentary /31 


Female  Journalism  is  Something  Different* 

By  DONNA  ALLEN  and  MARTHA  LESLIE  ALLEN 

Media  Report  to  Women  has  three  criteria  for  the  selection  and  pre- 
sentation of  its  news  information.  (We  have  also  found  the  three  criteria 
useful  as  a  standard  for  examining  the  performance  of  other  media  as  well 
as  our  own.) 

We  believe  that  journalism  based  on  these  principles  is  more  respectful 
of  people. 

Recognizing  that  people  are  capable  of  interpreting  news  information 
for  themselves,  we  see  our  function  as  supplying  factual  information  that 
is  not  easily  available  elsewhere,  and  we  leave  the  formation  of  opinions 
about  it  to  each  individual.  (We  do  not  consider  that  our  judgment  can 
be  better  for  another  person  than  her  own.) 

The  public  has  more  to  tell  newspeople  than  vice-versa,  we  have  ob- 
served— because  news  information  resides  in  people.  Therefore  we  be- 
lieve that  people  should  convey  their  information  to  the  public  as  directly 
as  possible. 

Our  criteria  would  redefine  "news"  and  redefine  the  role  of  the  news- 
person. 

Defining  the  word  "feminist"  here  as  "having  the  characteristics  of 
females,"  we  propose  a  new  set  of  standards  to  improve  or  replace  the 
existing  male  journalism.  The  following  are  our  Three  Principles  of  Femi- 
nist Journalism: 

1.  No  Attacks  on  People 

In  Media  Report  to  Women  we  do  not  attack  anyone,  call  names,  use 
opinion  nouns  or  adjectives  that  characterize,  label  or  pass  judgment  on 
the  opinions,  actions,  ideas,  or  attitudes  of  other  women — or  men.  We 
know  that  they  are  just  as  entitled  to  their  views  as  we  are  to  ours.  We 
also  know  that  media  characterizations  of  people  can  be  inhibiting  and 
restrictive— both  to  the  person  characterized  and  to  those  among  the 
public  who  may  wish  to  pick  up  on  an  idea  or  take  an  action — be  they 
children  or  adults.  To  the  contrary,  public  news  media,  we  believe, 
should  work  to  widen  the  social,  political,  or  economic  options  for  peo- 
ple, not  inhibit  them.  In  Media  Report  to  Women,  we  do  not  say,  for 
example,  that  a  book  or  speech  is  good  or  bad,  or  fair  or  biased;  rather 
we  report  what  is  in  it  and  let  each  woman  judge  for  herself. 

*  (Reprinted  from  the  January  1,  1976  issue  o/Media  Report  to  Women)  Media  Report 
to  Women  is  a  publication  reporting  on  what  women  are  doing  and  thinking  about  the 
communications  media.  It  is  available  at  $10  a  year  from  3306  Ross  Place,  N.  W. ; 
Washington,  D.C.  20008 


32/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


©1976  Media  Report  to  Women,  Inc. 


2 .  More  Factual  Information 


Priority  is  given  to  facts  over  opinion  in  Media  Report  to  Women.  We 
include  full  texts  wherever  possible.  Although  entitled  to  express  our 
opinions,  even  without  giving  the  facts  on  which  we  based  them,  we  be- 
lieve that  all  people  must  find,  as  we  do,  that  others'  conclusions  are 
nearly  useless  without  their  facts  to  enable  us  to  judge  the  opinion  s  merit 
for  ourselves,  or  to  form  our  own.  Conclusions  without  facts  keep  us 
apathetic,  powerless  to  act,  and  dependent  upon  the  decision-making  of 
others. 

We  emphasize  fact  over  opinion  in  Media  Report  to  Women's  limited 
space  also  because  the  existing  media  carry  so  little  information  from 
women,  for  or  about  women  (as  well  as  other  parts  of  the  public)— espe- 
cially compared  to  the  abundance  of  information  available  to  be  known. 
Therefore,  as  long  as  there  is  information  people  do  not  yet  know  about, 
we  cannot  justify  using  our  limited  space  for  our  opinions  of  the  informa- 
tion they  already  do  know  about.  We  thus  avoid  the  repetition  which  is 
customary  in  the  "issue-making"  of  convential  journalism — as  well  as  its 
emphasis  on  opinion. 

3.  People  Should  Speak  for  Themselves 

We  believe  that  the  surest  way  to  dispel  stereotypes,  to  achieve  ac- 
curacy, and  to  add  more,  new  factual  information,  is  for  the  people  to 
make  their  own  case  directly  to  the  public  and  thus  to  define  themselves. 
Therefore,  to  the  greatest  extent  possible,  in  Media  Report  to  Women  we 
do  not  tell  about  what  women  do  and  think,  as  we  would  in  conventional 
journalism,  but  we  let  them  tell  it  themselves.  People  know  their  own 
information  best,  and  we  believe  that  neither  the  person  with  the  infor- 
mation nor  the  public  needs  an  intermediary  reporter  to  be  an  inter- 
preter— but  only  to  help  the  person  get  her  own  account  down  on  paper, 
on  the  air,  or  into  some  other  medium. 

People  speaking  for  themselves  provide  not  only  more  accurate  infor- 
mation but  information  that  is  more  diverse,  complex,  direct,  honest  and 
reliable,  imaginative  and  lively  than  anyone  else  can  make  it  in  reporting 
it  second  hand.  Even  the  simplest  statements  of  information  are  better 
direct  from  the  source.  For  example,  "I  think  we  ought  to  have  more 
women  represented,"  is  far  preferable,  we  believe,  to  the  conventional 
journalism's  "She  said  she  thought  that  there  ought  to  be  more  women 
represented." 

These  three  basic  criteria  also  address  the  three  most  common  com- 
plaints women  have  about  the  communications  media,  as  we  at  Media 
Report  to  Women  hear  them,  and  we  believe  that  the  application  of  the 
Three  Principles  could  constructively  improve  the  conditions  that  give 


Critique  and  Commentary/33 


rise  to  each  type  of  criticism:  1)  that  the  image  of  women  in  media  too 
often  is  derogatory,  restrictive,  and  inaccurate;  2)  that  the  media  do  not 
carry  enough  news  coverage  of  women's  activities  and  issues,  especially 
in  light  of  the  proportions  of  the  public  that  are  women;  and  3)  that  in- 
sufficient employment  of  women  in  the  media,  particularly  in  policy- 
making positions,  results  in  men  speaking  for  the  female  53%  of  the 
population. 

Although  the  Three  Principles  of  Feminist  Journalism  may  help  in 
these  respects  to  improve  the  mass  media  as  a  means  of  communication 
with  others  both  at  home  and  abroad,  their  first  purpose  is  to  serve 
women  as  guidelines  for  our  own  media. 

The  Ethics  of  Feminist  Journalism 

By  CAROL  LEASE 

The  recognition  that  communication  is  essential  to  building  and 
strengthening  a  movement,  the  realization  that  the  mass  media  is  not 
only  inaccessible  to  feminists  but  actually  uses  its  power  to  distort  and 
discredit  the  image  of  feminism,  and  the  belief  that  feminists  needed  their 
own  means  of  communicating  led  to  the  birth  of  the  feminist  publications 
that  have  been  vital  elements  in  the  politicization  of  thousands  of  women. 

These  underground  newspapers  tended  to  be  heavy  on  rhetoric  and 
personal  experience,  to  give  women  facts  they  couldn't  find  elsewhere, 
and  were  published  irregularly  on  shoe-string  budgets.  They  gave  us  a 
sense  of  community,  of  mutual  support,  a  means  of  venting  anger,  and  a 
vision  of  sisterhood. 

But  we  no  longer  need  to  be  convinced  of  our  oppression.  The  feminist 
movement  is  populated  with  veterans  of  many  personal  and  political 
battles  who  now  need  accurate  information.  This  information  must  be 
provided  in  publications  with  well-defined  goals  and  purposes,  publica- 
tions which  aren't  in  danger  of  folding  overnight.  It  must  be  written  by 
journalists  who  know  the  tools  of  their  profession  and  whose  ethics  don't 
depend  on  the  latest  popular  feminist  theory. 

Media  Report  to  Women  defines  "feminist"  as  "having  the  character- 
istics of  females."  If  this  is  so,  then  which  socio-political  definition  of 
those  qualities  is  to  be  used?  A  sexist  interpretation  of  the  word  could  in- 
clude such  qualities  as  "weak,"  "dumb,"  "irrational,"  "impractical,"  "de- 
licate." A  feminist  definition  would  include  "intelligent,"  "strong,"  "inde- 
pendent," "intuitive,"  "resourceful,"  "visionary."  A  radical  definition 
could  transcend  all  political  definitions  and  be  so  intrinsic  and  common 
to  all  women  that  it  could  determine  our  attitude  and  behavior  through 
a  kind  of  female  cosmic  consciousness.  Would  feminist  journalism  then 
be  informational  writing  that  reflects  a  cultural /political  feminist  bias,  or 


34/Quest 


would  it  be  feminist  journalism  because  a  woman  who  is  a  feminist  writes 
it?  I  am  not  sure  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  feminist  journalism  or  that 
the  application  of  humane,  nurturing,  feminist  standards  would  create  it. 

It  is,  however,  important  to  discuss  the  role  of  journalism  in  both  femi- 
nist publications  and  in  the  feminist  movement,  whether  or  not  there  is 
or  can  be  feminist  journalism.  First,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between 
those  feminist  publications  whose  primary  goals  are  to  reach  women  who 
are  outside  the  women's  movement,  and  those  whose  focus  is  to  facilitate 
communication  within  the  movement.  Both  types  are  essential  to  femi- 
nism, but  they  are  completely  distinct  from  each  other.  The  role  of  jour- 
nalism in  the  latter  will  be  considered  here. 

The  primary  purpose  of  these  publications  is  to  provide  news,  infor- 
mation, analysis  to  women  who  already  identify  themselves  as  feminists 
and  participate  in  some  way  in  the  feminist  movement.  By  providing  ac- 
curate information,  analysis  and  criticism  within  the  movement,  these 
feminist  publications  could  perform  some  of  the  functions  of  leadership 
that  are  essential  to  the  growth  of  any  movement. 

Feminist  publications  tend  to  suffer  from  the  "failure  is  success"  syn- 
drome: the  feeling  that  if  you're  financially  solvent  there  must  be  some- 
thing wrong  with  your  politics.  We  have  yet  to  establish  a  functioning 
news  service,  and  publications  usually  have  enough  trouble  dealing  with 
one  staff  and  office  without  trying  to  establish  and  coordinate  branch 
offices  in  other  cities.  But  resistance  to  developing  practical  business  skills 
means  that  feminist  publications  are  unable  to  increase  the  quality  and 
quantity  of  news  coverage. 

As  feminists,  we  need  more  and  more  information  on  almost  a  daily 
basis  to  keep  ourselves  informed  and  able  to  make  intelligent  decisions. 
But  perhaps  more  importantly,  we  need  some  concrete  means  of  feeling 
connected  to  each  other  so  we  can  be  less  resistant  to  change  and  able  to 
make  our  leaders  more  accountable  to  us,  and  be,  in  turn,  more  responsi- 
ble to  them.  We  need  to  attain  a  vision  of  the  movement  as  a  whole  and 
not  as  isolated,  group-identified  segments.  Feminist  publications  need  to 
see  themselves  as  integral  to  but  independent  of  any  particular  feminist 
politics,  and  yet  responsible  and  accountable  to  feminists. 

No  Attacks  on  People 

Although  some  feminist  publications  have,  through  destructive,  de- 
moralizing political  attacks,  provided  readers  with  good  reason  to  fear 
criticism,  journalists  have  a  responsibility  to  comment  on,  question  or 
discuss  the  opinions,  ideas  and  actions  that  constitute  the  news  they 
print.  Because  the  press  has  been  abused  in  the  past  and  will  probably  be 
abused  in  the  future  does  not  mean  we  should  avoid  this  responsibility 
and  transform  publications  into  portraits  of  laissez-faire  journalism.  Of 
course,  feminist  diatribe  in  the  guise  of  analysis  does  not  give  readers  the 
information  they  need  to  make  decisions  that  can  be  acted  upon,  but  a 


Critique  and  Commentary /35 


"hands  off"  policy  of  refusing  to  "characterize"  or  "label"  what  other 
feminists  and  non-feminists  do  or  think  implies  that  journalists  are  only 
conduits  of  information  and  have  no  responsibility  to  their  readers,  and 
that  objective,  unbiased  reporting  is  possible  from  the  same  individuals 
personally  involved  in  any  given  event.  The  difficulty  has  always  been 
in  determining  when  personal  criticism  is  valuable  and  necessary. 

We  should  remember  as  well  that  when  unfair  criticism  is  published  it 
is  given  more  legitimacy  and  may  be  considered  more  "official"  because 
of  the  power  of  the  printed  word  and  the  mystification  associated  with  it. 
This  power  to  create  truth  (from  the  point  of  view  of  the  reader)  is  one 
that  journalists  treat  far  too  lightly.  Feminist  writers  often  have  no  con- 
cept of  the  ramifications  of  what  is  printed  and  therefore  tend  to  forget 
that  what  gets  put  on  paper  may  have,  as  Media  Report  to  Women  says, 
an  "inhibiting  effect"  on  the  free  flow  of  ideas.  So,  with  the  power  and 
consequent  control  that  criticism  allows,  journalists  must  determine 
when  an  individual's  beliefs  are  valid  areas  for  criticism  and  comment 
and  when  they  should  remain  purely  private. 

I  believe  that  an  individual's  personal  ethics  as  they  relate  to  her  atti- 
tudes, behavior  and  actions  can  be  defined  as  personal  politics,  and  are 
therefore  open  to  comment  and  criticism.  We  all  have  self-defined  duties 
and  obligations  that  are  a  reflection  of  how  we  view  the  world:  the  values 
our  parents /society  inculcate,  remnants  of  religious  fears,  irrational  be- 
liefs, defense  mechanisms,  "rightness,"  "wrongness"— morality.  These 
ethical  obligations  are  primarily  personally  determined  and  enforced, 
and  it  is  at  the  point  that  they  affect  other  people  that  the  blurring  of 
what  is  personal  and  what  is  political  occurs,  and  that  behavior  illustrates 
personal  politics.  For  rightly,  our  responses  to  others  spring  from  beliefs 
that  are  also  part  of  our  personal  identity  and  integrity.  These  forms  of 
behavior  show  our  respect— or  lack  of  it— for  others  by  the  way  we  see 
other  people,  both  in  relation  to  ourselves  and  as  entities  unto  them- 
selves. Viewing  others  honestly  and  directly,  i.e.,  not  seeing  them  as  util- 
itarian elements  in  a  personal /political  scheme,  is  an  example  of  one  kind 
of  behavior,  as  is  its  reverse. 

When  an  individual's  actions  or  behavior  reflect  or  seem  to  reflect  a 
classist  or  racist  attitude,  they  should  not  be  exempt  from  criticism  just 
because  the  rationale  for  these  actions  is  intertwined  with  personal  integ- 
rity. In  other  words,  the  ways  our  actions  affect  others  is  political  and  is 
therefore  open  to  criticism  and  comment. 

It  is  a  function  of  the  press  to  fairly  comment  on  a  woman's  ideas  and 
actions,  in  addition  to  reporting  them.  But  these  comments  should  not 
arise  solely  from  who  she  sleeps  with  and  how  they  make  love,  from 
whether  she  shaves  her  legs,  or  from  the  fact  that  she  has  a  working-class 
or  middle-class  background.  Too  often  the  line  between  valid  personal 
criticism  and  trashing  is  blurred  by  self-righteous,  judgmental  reporting. 

But  I  do  not  feel  that  a  set  of  all-embracing  standards  or  ethics  can 


36/Quest 


solve  the  problem  of  destructive  criticism  because  outer-imposed  ethics 
aren't  as  effective  as  those  we  impose  on  ourselves.  Thus,  if  a  particular 
set  of  standards  becomes  synonymous  with  political  commitment,  then 
what  happens  to  these  obligations  and  standards  when  that  commitment 
changes,  or  when  political  disagreement  occurs? 

More  Factual  Information 

An  eternal  battle  of  journalism  has  been  waged  over  the  distinction  be- 
tween "objectivity"  and  "subjectivity" — fact  vs.  opinion.  But  objectivity 
is  a  myth  because  it  is  relative  to  the  political  perspective  of  the  reporter. 
For  example,  a  reporter  covering  a  city  council  meeting  might  report  that 
the  council  voted  down  a  petition  requesting  a  zoning  change  so  that  low- 
income  housing  could  be  built  in  the  ghetto.  That  may  be  a  fact,  but  if  it 
is  also  a  fact  that  six  of  the  eight  council  members  are  slum  landlords  and 
wouldn't  want  to  see  alternative  housing  made  available  for  their  tenants 
shouldn't  that  be  reported  too?  It  depends  on  the  reporter's  political  inter- 
pretation of  the  story  whether  related  facts  are  to  be  published.  Objec- 
tivity, then,  cannot  be  equated  with  truth.  What  is  eventually  realized 
as  truth  comes  from  anything  but  objective  reporting.  Publishing  facts 
and  figures  without  challenge  gives  them  a  credibility  they  don't  deserve 
and  keeps  both  reader  and  reporter  from  a  complete  understanding  of 
what's  happening. 

People  Should  Speak  for  Themselves 

Certainly  to  allow  people  to  present  their  own  ideas  in  their  own  words 
would  eliminate  problems  with  inaccurate  reporting,  misquoting  and 
biased  coverage.  And  having  this  policy  as  a  function  of  a  feminist  pub- 
lication would  help  narrow  the  communication  gap  between  feminists. 
But  to  make  the  media  a  reprint  service  for  individuals  or  groups  could 
render  media  unaccountable  to  the  readers.  Journalism  involves  knowing 
how  to  use  certain  skills  and  techniques  that  are  independent  of  political 
orientation.  And  journalists,  who  by  definition  need  to  function  indepen- 
dently, can't  have  their  personal/political  reputations  tied  up  in  special- 
interest  groups  or  in  dogmatic  ideological  beliefs,  and  can't  be  afraid  to 
ask  hard  questions.  The  journalist's  job  is  to  give  the  reader  the  oppor- 
tunity to  convince  herself  of  the  validity  of  an  issue;  the  politician's  pur- 
pose is  to  convince  readers  of  the  Tightness  of  her  point  of  view. 

If  the  purpose  of  a  publication  is  to  be  the  technical  facilitator  for  all 
communication,  how  can  it  be  held  accountable  for  what  it  doesn't 
include  or  for  what  it  allows  to  be  printed?  If  a  group's  self-written  story 
involves  racist  or  classist  assumptions,  or  if  a  group  doesn't  want  its 
sources  of  money  to  be  revealed  or  its  policies  to  be  criticized,  what  is  the 
duty  of  the  publication  to  its  readers?  Although  freedom  of  speech  en- 
titles everyone  to  her  views,  a  free  press  does  not  guarantee  that  these 
views  will  be  free  from  comment.  To  withhold  comment  on  any  idea  as  a 


Critique  and  Commentary/37 


basic  principle  of  journalism  refutes  the  responsibility  that  media  have  to 
inform  readers,  and  by  doing  so  become  more  than  an  uninterested,  un- 
involved  observer  of  the  passing  political  scene. 

Carol  Lease,  a  struggling  feminist  writer,  lives  in  Denver,  Colorado. 

Advocacy  Journalism 

By  JEANNE  CORDOVA 

Reading  the  Los  Angeles  Times  today,  one  would  be  hard  pressed  to 
find  a  clue  to  the  once  proud  advocacy  heritage  of  the  American  press. 
The  truth  is,  however,  that  the  earliest  newspapers  of  our  country  were 
born  in  revolution,  their  pages  filled  with  advocacy  about  the  revolution- 
ary causes  of  separation  of  church  and  state,  and  national  liberation. 

Feminist  journalism  today  is  part  of  this  heritage.  It  is  neither  so 
unique  that  it  cannot  be  described,  nor  so  commonplace  that  it  cannot  be 
uniquely  defined.  Our  press  falls  squarely  (circularly?)  into  the  realm  of 
advocacy  journalism.  One  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  feminist  journal- 
ism is  that  we  do  have  an  ax  to  grind.  Feminist  journalism  does  attempt 
to  deflect  the  ax  of  oppression  that  has  for  thousands  of  years  ground  out 
the  existence  of  women  in  world  history.  Men,  and  especially  women, 
who  deny  that  our  press  is  biased,  who  strive  for  the  mythical  objectivity 
of  the  New  York  Times,  deny  feminist  journalism's  very  reason  for  exis- 
tence. 

Feminist  journalism  is  advocacy  journalism  which  champions  "the 
assumption  of  sisterhood."  What  distinguishes  us  from  other  advocacy 
presses  (Black,  Asian,  student,  and  so  on),  is  our  content,  form,  and 
unique  kind  of  advocacy.  The  lost  heritage  of  women,  the  experience  of 
domestic  captivity,  the  story  of  a  people  divided  throughout  history,  the 
great  veiled  force  of  women  loving  women,  the  evolution  of  a  human 
being  called  Woman,  this  is  the  content  of  feminist  journalism.  Although 
the  story  has  been  lived  for  centuries,  it  is  news  in  that  it  has  never  been 
told  or  shared. 

A  second  characteristic  of  feminist  journalism  is  the  validity  and  pri- 
macy given  to  personal  experience.  Where  men  and  the  male  press  define 
themselves  in  reference  to  the  world  of  objects,  materialism  and  events, 
women  seek  to  bring  our  realities  into  accord  with  our  inner  vision.  Con- 
sequently, the  feminist  press,  particularly  in  its  early  days,  was  filled 
with  personal  testimony,  emotional  outpourings  of  pent-up  rage,  grief, 
and  thwarted  ambition,  and  news  and  editorial  commentary  which  often 

*Special  thanks  to  Gahan  Kelley,  of  "Sisterhood  Bookstore, "  Sharon  McDonald  and 
Ann  Doczi,  of  The  Lesbian  Tide,  and  Penny  Grenoble,  of  The  Los  Angeles  Free  Press, 
I    for  stimulating  dialogue  and  conceptual  help  in  composing  these  thoughts. 


38/Quest 


combined  the  perspective  of  the  author  with  new  facts. 

Our  journalism  does  not  pretend  to  duplicate  the  male  myth  of  objec- 
tivity, does  not  attempt  to  dichotomize  the  brain  and  the  heart,  calling 
the  former  "fact"  and  the  latter  "opinion."  This  integration  of  the  per- 
sonal and  the  political,  while  often  assaulted  as  "emotional  journalism," 
reflects  our  knowledge  that  what  men  call  "fact"  is  merely  the  aggrandize- 
ment of  their  collective  opinion.  Journalists  like  Jill  Johnston,  Ann  Doczi 
and  author  Monique  Wittig  have  experimented  with  writing  which  trans- 
cends the  traditional  dichotomy  between  news  and  features,  weaving 
emotion,  facts  and  themselves  into  a  unique  piece  of  art  that  in  form  as 
well  as  content  is  closer  to  the  female  world  perspective. 

These  definitions  of  feminist  journalism  are  some  of  the  reasons  I  take 
issue  with  the  Media  Report  to  Women  statement,  "Female  Journalism  is 
Something  Different."  I  even  disagree  with  the  title.  What  is  "female" 
journalism?  The  authors  seem  to  see  the  word  "female"  and  "feminist"  as 
synonymous.  They  define  "feminist"  as  "having  the  characteristics  of 
females."  Exactly  what  are  these  characteristics?  The  characteristics  of 
females  are  breasts,  vaginas  and  uteruses — hardly  the  basis  for  any  kind 
of  journalism. 

No  Attacks  on  People 

The  slogan,  "No  Attacks  on  People,"  is  an  immature  interpretation  of 
feminism  in  print.  Does  Media  Report  to  Women  offer  no  opinion  nor 
interpretation  of  what  and  who  is  sexist?  Feminist  journalism  needs  to 
"pass  judgment"  on  men  and  the  world  of  men.  Feminist  journalism 
needs  to  label  sexism,  racism  and  classism  where  we  find  it.  Feminist 
journalism,  to  be  worthy  of  that  name,  must  have  an  opinion  about  the 
actions,  ideas  and  attitudes  of  men,  systems  and  countries  that  oppress 
women.  Not  attacking  ("trashing")  our  sisters  is  of  course  fundamental 
to  the  definition  of  feminist  journalism.  The  feminist  critic  in  particular 
knows  that  there  is  a  living,  breathing  woman  behind  the  product  she  is 
discussing,  and  is  aware  of  the  personal  impact  of  her  criticism.  This 
caring  approach,  which  is  founded  on  an  assumption  of  sisterhood,  pre- 
cludes trashing,  precludes  a  personal  attack  on  the  work,  motivations 
and  character  of  the  artist,  and  thus  provides  a  level  of  psychic  safety  un- 
available to  artists  reviewed  in  establishment  media. 

But  the  assumption  of  sisterhood  does  not  mean  that  feminist  journal- 
ism leaves  undefined  the  standards  we  as  feminist  women  have  a  right  to 
expect  of  our  artists;  there  is  nothing  "feminist"  about  unconditional 
support  for  a  product  just  because  it  was  created  by  a  woman.  Criticism, 
judgment  and  labels  are  necessary  tools  of  feminist  journalism.  In  the 
early  days  of  the  Women's  Movement,  feminists  thought  the  answer  to 
the  ills  of  male  structures  was  to  have  no  structure,  that  the  answer  to 
oppressive  male  leadership  was  no  leadership.  But  we  have  learned  that 
the  solution  to  male-created  ills  is  to  redefine  rather  than  deny  the  exis- 


Critique  and  Commentary /39 


tence  of  concepts  like  structure  and  leadership.  Similarly,  we  need  to 
redefine,  not  negate,  the  responsibilities  of  feminist  criticism  and  analy- 
sis. 

More  Factual  Information 

Media  Report  to  Women  gives  priority  to  facts  over  opinion  "because 
the  existing  media  carry  so  little  information  from  women,  for  or  about 
women."  While  there  is  certainly  a  great  need  for  news  and  factual  infor- 
mation about  women,  this  relegation  of  opinion  to  a  minor  role  reflects  a 
superficial  analysis  of  how  and  why  existing  media  do  (not)  cover 
women.  The  existing  media  do  not  have  only  a  news  blackout  on  wom- 
en. They  black  out  women's  news,  features,  analysis,  editorials,  reviews, 
poetry — in  short,  the  very  existence  of  women.  In  their  opinion,  women 
do  not  make  news:  women  do  not  write  well:  women  do  not  think: 
women  do  not  exist.  Hundreds  of  news  stories,  a  thousand  facts,  will  not 
convince  the  existing  media  that  we  are  newsworthy.  It  is  a  false  notion 
to  think  that  our  comparatively  small  national  press  will  ever  learn,  or 
print,  or  disseminate  the  scope  of  news  and  information  about  women  to 
the  millions  of  women  and  men  who  should  be  reading  it  on  the  front 
page  of  the  Los  Angeles  Times.  Feminist  journalism  can  correct  this  im- 
balance only  by  strengthening  a  movement  of  millions  whose  purpose  is 
to  challenge  sexism.  Confining  opinion  and  analysis  to  a  secondary  func- 
tion in  our  press  undercuts  this  potential  contribution  of  the  feminist 
press,  and  in  my  opinion,  destroys  the  uniqueness  of  feminist  journalism. 

People  Should  Speak  for  Themselves 

The  maxim,  "people  should  speak  for  themselves,"  is  certainly  a  fine 
idea  and  one  which  the  feminist  media  has  emphasized  perhaps  to  a  fault. 
I  disagree,  however,  with  Allen  and  Allen's  statement  that  "people  know 
their  own  information  best.  . .,"  that  ".  .  .neither  the  person  with  the 
information  nor  the  public  needs  an  intermediary  reporter  to  be  an  inter- 
preter." In  my  first  years  of  feminist  journalism  I  was  ready  to  believe 
that  every  individual  woman  could  tell  her  own  story,  and  tell  it  better 
than  her  sister  simply  because  it  was  her  own.  But  authenticity  does  not  a 
writer  make.  Just  as  most  singers  sing  better  than  writers,  most  writers 
write  better  than  singers.  Because  of  their  perspective,  background  re- 
search, writing  skills  and/or  experience,  journalists  often  do  have  a 
broader  scope  of  information  than  their  informants.  A  dozen  times  I  have 
read  the  same  story  written  by  three  different  women,  and  invariably  one 
version  is  more  imaginative,  more  capturing  and  more  accurate  than  the 
other  two.  Yes,  people,  and  women  particularly,  should  speak  for  them- 
selves, and  the  responsible  journalist  will  make  sure  her  sister  sources  do. 

Jeanne  Cordova,  former  Human  Rights  editor  of  The  Los  Angeles  Free 
Press,  is  an  editor  and  publisher  of  The  Lesbian  Tide,  author  of  Sexism: 
It's  a  Nasty  Affair,  and  is  a  lesbian-feminist  journalist-activist. 


AO/Quest 


WOMEN  &  i 
LITERATURE  jT 


a  scholarly  journal  of  women 
writers  and  the  literary 
treatment  of  women 


Forthcoming  issues  will  include: 

•  articles  on  known  and  lesser  known  women 
writers  such  as  Jane  Austen,  Charlotte 
Bronte  and  Mary  Leadbeater. 

•  articles  on  the  literary  treatment  of  women 
in  works  such  as  Christabel  and  Paradise 


•  book  reviews  and  notes  of  work  in  progress. 

•  annual  bibliography  of  women  and  English 
and  American  literature. 

Janet  M.  Todd,  Editor. 

Please  enter  my  subscription. 

Name  

Address  

Mail  with  check  of  $7  to:  The  Editor,  Women  & 
Literature,  Department  of  English,  Douglass 
College,  Rutgers  University,  New  Brunswick, 


Lost. 


N.J.  08903. 


The  following  is  an  interview  with 
three  members  of  Women  Make 
Movies  {WMM),  a  non-profit,  tax- 
exempt  educational  organization  in 
New  York  City,  which  teaches  16mm 
filmmaking  skills  and  produces  and 
distributes  films  made  by  women. 
The  three  members  are  Ariel  Dough- 
erty (AD),  Jean  Shaw  (JS),  and  Susan 
Eenigenburg  (SE).  Carol  Clement, 
also  a  WMM  member,  was  present  to 
sketch  the  interview.  The  interview 
was  conducted  in  the  spring  of  1976, 
by  Charlotte  Bunch  (CB),  transcribed 
by  Judith  Jones,  and  edited  by  Quest 
staff. 

CB:  To  begin,  I'd  like  each  of  you  to 
describe  how  you  first  came  to  Wom- 
en Make  Movies  and  what  you're  now 
doing. 

AD:  I  am  a  cofounder  of  WMM, 
with  Sheila  Paige.  In  the  spring  of 
1972,  we  submitted  an  application  to 
the  N.Y.  State  Council  on  the  Arts,  to 
start  our  own  storefront  workshop 
where  women  could  make  movies. 
We  received  $9,000,  largely  because 
we'd  had  three  years  of  experience 
teaching  filmmaking,  mostly  to  8-12 
year-olds.  Through  that  experience, 
we  realized  both  that  women  don't 
have  access  to  film  equipment,  and 
the  obvious,  that  film  images  of  wom- 
en in  society  are  terrible,  and  we  de- 
cided that  only  women  were  going  to 
improve  these  conditions.  Our  at- 
tempt, therefore,  is  to  encourage  a  lot 
of  women  in  an  everyday  situation  to 
make  films  about  their  own  lives. 

That  was  the  beginning.  Although 
we  retain  our  purpose,  recently,  how- 
ever, we  changed  our  structure.  I  am 
now  a  member  (as  opposed  to  admin- 


istrator),  and  my  major  role  is  to 
transfer  the  power  and  information 
that  I  have  acquired  over  3Vz  years 
through  the  new  structure  and  various 
committees  that  are  set  up,  to  the  new 
staff — to  disseminate  information  so 
that  more  people  have  the  power  and 
wherewithal  to  carry  things  out. 

JS:  The  summer  that  Ariel  and  Sheila 
moved  into  Chelsea  to  set  up  the 
workshop,  I  saw  a  note  at  my  com- 
munity center  job  that  said,  "Would 
you  like  to  make  a  movie?"  So  I 
called,  and  talked  to  somebody  who 
said,  "Well,  you  have  to  finish  the 
movie  that  you  start."  I  came  over. 
Right  away,  they  helped  me  get 
started.  I  wrote  a  two-hour,  feature- 
length  movie  script  that  we  together, 
cooperatively,  cut  to  seven  minutes 
with  no  dialog;  it  concerned  my  entire 
life  as  a  female  in  America!  What 
evolved  was  the  movie,  "FEAR,"  that 
came  out  of  my  rage  about  street  ha- 
rassment. After  that  I  drifted  for 
awhile  and  then  wrote  my  second 
script.  In  the  spring  of  1975,  I  started 
intern-teaching  a  script-writing  course 
under  Ariel's  supervision.  Now  I'm  a 
WMM  paid  staff  person — Workshop 
Coordinator.  Initially,  a  lot  of  my 
work  involved  organizing  the  office; 
now  I'm  doing  publicity  and  fundrais- 
ing,  and  general  workshop  adminis- 
tration. 

SE:  I'm  a  distributor  for  WMM.  This 
is  only  my  second  full  week  of  work. 
I  got  involved  with  WMM  through  an 
ad  at  Mother  Courage  that  said  "DIS- 
TRIBUTOR WANTED."  Camera 
lights  went  on  in  my  head!  I  applied 
mainly  because  I  found  out  it  was  a 
brand  new  job  and  I  liked  the  possi- 


bility of  doing  something  that  was  a 
first-time,  creative  job  and  something 
I  thought  I  could  do  well,  and  also  be- 
cause for  several  years  I've  had  an 
interest  in  filmmaking.  Since  it's  the 
first  time  WMM  has  had  a  distribu- 
tor, the  job  is  first  of  all  catching  up 
on  old  business  and  second,  drawing 
up  newer,  broader  possibilities  for  dis- 
tributing our  films.  So  far  the  films 
have  been  distributed  mainly  to  wom- 
en's groups;  now  we  want  to  get  in 
touch  with  film  libraries  across  the 
country  and  local,  public  libraries,  as 
well— to  make  as  many  contacts  as 
possible.  Also  I'm  developing  a  new 
brochure,  and  trying  to  find  addi- 
tional ways  for  groups  to  use  the 
films. 

CB:  Would  you  discuss  how  WMM 
can  employ  four  or  five  people  full- 
time  and  several  others  part-time? 
Has  this  always  been  the  case,  and 
how  do  you  deal  with  the  problem 
and  tensions  around  some  working 
full-time  and  others  volunteer  or  part- 
time? 

AD:  It  hasn't  always  been  the  case, 
and  we  haven't  come  up  with  the  solu- 
tion yet.  Our  hope  is  that  as  film  pro- 
jects become  more  ambitious  and  are 
staffed  full-time,  everyone  will  be 
paid  salaries  or  stipends.  The  health 
film  we're  doing  now  is  a  beginning; 
all  the  earlier  films  were  short,  narra- 
tive stories  that  people  worked  on  in 
their  spare  time.  We're  hoping  too 
that  the  organization  is  in  a  better 
fund-raising  position  now,  and  that 
we'll  make  money  from  increased  dis- 
tribution. Distribution  (which  has  al- 
ways been  sloughed  off)  came  out 
very  strongly  in  our  discussion  of 


Women  Make  Movies /43 


structural  changes  as  an  absolute 
priority;  it  is  probably  the  most  im- 
portant factor  in  our  becoming  self- 
sustaining. 

CB:  How  was  WMM  originally  struc- 
tured when  only  you  and  Sheila  were 
working  full-time? 

AD:  We  were  the  co-directors  and 
therefore  made  all  the  choices  about 
future  directions,  fund-raising  and 
spending,  as  well  as  about  who  would 
make  a  film.  This  was  largely  because 
it's  a  non-profit,  tax-exempt  corpora- 
tion and,  as  co-directors,  we  were 
legally  responsible.  At  any  rate,  in  the 
beginning  we  were  paid  a  little  bit  of 
money  and  Sheila  lived  off  unemploy- 
ment until  we  got  more  funding.  Then 
we  scrounged  around. 

CB:  What  led  you  to  change  your 
structure? 


AD:  The  conference  of  Feminist  Film 
and  Video  Organizations  in  New 
York,  in  February,  1975,  was  the  cat- 
alyst for  our  changing.  The  climate 
had  always  been  there,  but  we  had 
never  bothered  to  take  the  time.  We 
began  then  to  discuss  some  ways  to 
change  and  later,  the  six  of  us  receiv- 
ing some  stipend  or  salary  spent  a 
long  time  talking  about  how  to 
change,  but  couldn't  reach  any  agree- 
ment. 

We  found  ourselves  completely 
overextended  as  an  organization — a 
real  dilemma  of  women  in  general 
and  of  the  movement  in  particular. 
We  all  see  the  need  to  change  our  lives 
completely,  but  the  number  of  factors 
we  have  to  deal  with  in  order  to  do 
that  effectively  is  astronomical.  Sheila 
and  I  especially  were  caught  in  a  bind, 
still  loving  WMM,  but  not  having 
time  enough  to  work  on  something, 


4A /Quest 


after  all  the  day-to-day  chores,  that 
was  really  satisfying.  We'd  started  an 
organization  to  make  movies,  and  the 
end  result  was  that  we  had  no  time  to 
make  them. 

Eventually  we  decided  we  couldn't 
agree  on  structure  until  we  decided 
what  our  projects  would  be.  We 
agreed  that  some  should  be  postponed 
or  dropped,  while  a  few  continued 
through  the  summer.  But  another  part 
of  the  problem  was  that  since  we  were 
overworked,  there  had  not  been  time 
for  much  personal  contact,  and  a  tre- 
mendous personal  conflict  developed 
between  Sheila  and  me,  to  the  point 
where  we  stopped  talking  at  all.  Be- 
fore long,  we  really  didn't  even  know 
each  other,  and  so  there  was  no  way 
in  which  we  could  establish  any  pri- 
orities together. 

Ultimately,  we  looked  for  some 
mechanism  for  coming  to  some  con- 
clusion about  what  we  wanted.  It  was 
very  difficult  to  find  a  method  and 
make  it  work.  After  speaking  with 
lots  of  therapists  in  and  out  of  NYC,  I 
called  Judy  Freespirit,  of  the  Radical 
Feminist  Therapy  Collective,  who 
suggested  that  we  each  choose  a 
friend  who  would  be  somewhat  neu- 
tral, to  "represent"  us,  to  help  us  talk 
with  each  other ...  a  very  formal,  sim- 
plistic kind  of  situation,  but  it  really 
helped.  After  four  of  these  mediation 
sessions,  we  decided  we  wouldn't 
work  together  for  awhile,  that  we 
didn't  want  to  decide  what  the  other 
could  do.  We  agreed  to  take  separate 
leaves  of  absence,  something  we'd 
been  talking  about  for  a  long  time. 

JS:  Not  long  after  the  period  that 
Ariel  just  described,  they  decided  to 
have  a  conference  of  the  whole  WMM 


membership  in  October,  '75.  We 
spent  2  days  discussing  what  we 
wanted  from  the  organization,  what 
we  wanted  to  do  ourselves,  and  what 
we'd  like  the  organization  to  be. 
Everyone  who  had  been  involved  in 
WMM  for  the  past  year  and  a  half  was 
invited;  about  100  responded  in  some 
way,  and  about  25  women  went  away 
to  a  camp  in  New  Jersey  for  the  week- 
end. One  decision  was  to  open  up 
some  staff  positions;  we  needed  at 
least  an  administrator,  a  distributor, 
a  bookkeeper,  and  a  fundraiser.  An- 
other was  to  set  up  a  monthly  mem- 
bership meeting. 

CB:  Who  is  eligible  for  membership 
and  what  are  their  responsibilities  and 
privileges? 

JS:  All  of  the  people  who  attended 
that  conference  were  then  eligible  for 
membership  in  the  new  structure. 
Members  are  responsible  for  running 
the  organization;  every  member  has 
a  vote  and  all  decisions  are  made  by  a 
majority  vote  at  the  monthly 
membership  meeting.  Special  meet- 
ings can  be  called  if  there  is  an  emer- 
gency. Members  are  required  to  at- 
tend the  membership  meetings,  par- 
ticipate in  a  field  area  of  their  choice, 
and  help  in  the  organization's  gen- 
eral maintenance,  like  cleaning,  on  a 
cyclical  basis.  The  fields  are  adminis- 
tration, distribution,  production  and 
education.  The  production  field,  for 
example,  consists  of  all  people  who 
are  currently  working  on  a  film  pro- 
ject. The  privileges  of  membership  in- 
clude being  eligible  to  present  a  pro- 
ject for  approval,  having  access  to 
equipment  and  space,  and  participat- 
ing in  decision-making  for  the  organi- 
zation as  a  whole. 


Women  Make  Movies /45 


CB:  There  are  at  least  two  parts  to 
making  a  movie;  one  is  the  individ- 
ual's experience  of  creating  an  artistic 
product;  the  other  is  the  audience  you 
want  to  reach.  Where  do  you  hope  to 
distribute  the  films,  and  what  audi- 
ence do  you  hope  to  reach? 


AD:  From  the  beginning,  we  felt  that 
in  addition  to  a  commitment  to  finish 
her  film,  it  was  important  for  each 
filmmaker  to  commit  herself  to  pre- 
senting those  films  to  the  community. 
Originally  the  local  community  of 
Chelsea  was  the  audience.  Each  film- 
maker was  responsible  for  setting  up 
a  community  showing,  and  going  out 
with  the  film  and  talking  about  it. 
That  has  been  a  really  important  base 
for  us;  Chelsea  is  just  like  a  million 
communities  all  across  the  country 
and  in  that  sense,  this  was  a  model 


process  that  could  go  on  in  any  com- 
munity. It  is  also  valuable  for  the 
audience  within  the  neighborhood  to 
be  able  to  look  at  the  screen  and  say 
"Aha!  there's  the  local  laundromat,  or 
Sandra,  who  runs  the  store."  It  pro- 
vides a  kind  of  identification  that 
commercial  media  just  don't  allow. 

SE:  I  was  just  flashing  on  the  first 
time  I  discovered  WMM.  I  was  a  pro- 
jectionist at  a  Women's  Film  Festival 
and  I  remember  that  the  audience  was 
fascinated  by  hearing  filmmakers  talk 
about  the  process  of  making  the  film. 
That's  one  of  the  important  things 
that  WMM  has  done:  not  just  screen- 
ing the  film,  but  also  involving  people 
in  the  audience  in  it.  We  in  the  audi- 
ence had  never  had  access  to  filmmak- 
ing so  we  were  dying  for  that  infor- 
mation. In  terms  of  who  we  reach,  all 
the  WMM  films  raise  questions  about 
social  change,  women's  conscious- 
ness, and  other  issues  that  should  be 
reaching  audiences  around  the  coun- 
try. The  letters  in  our  files  indicate 
that  its  not  just  feminist  groups  who 
want  these  films;  we  get  letters  from 
universities,  from  individuals  and 
from  community-based  groups  all 
over  the  country. 

CB:  Well,  first  there  are  a  number  of 
problems  related  to  distribution.  For 
one  thing,  a  lot  of  the  films  at  WMM 
are  first  films,  films  that  are  not  tech- 
nically polished,  not  like  Hollywood 
films  at  all.  Most  places  don't  distrib- 
ute first  films;  your  film  has  to  be 
tops,  a  really  polished  product  to  be 
distributed.  Second,  the  entire  distri- 
bution process  is  a  problem.  Wom- 
en's organizations  have  focused  main- 
ly on  turning  out  products  and  con- 


46/Quest 


trolling  them:  on  the  process  of  mak- 
ing the  product,  like  newspapers  and 
films.  What  we  have  to  learn  now  is 
how  to  distribute  these  products  and 
that's  a  big  job  for  any  feminist  organ- 
ization. We  just  don't  have  adequate 
distribution  networks.  (Our  fantasy  is 
to  have  a  feminist  distribution  com- 
pany which  has  regional  offices  all 
over  the  country,  which  not  only 
could  use  regular  distribution  meth- 
ods but  also  could  develop  creative 
methods  from  the  feminist  commu- 
nity.) But  we  are  just  beginning  the 
process  of  developing  a  network,  and 
that's  going  to  take  a  long  time.  Third, 
at  WMM,  we're  distributing  women's 
films  from  Australia  and  London,  and 
hope  to  get  audiences  here  to  see 
women's  films  that  were  made  in  other 
parts  of  the  world,  so  we  need  an  in- 
ternational network,  not  just  a  na- 
tional one. 

CB:  What  are  the  biggest  problems 
that  you  and  other  women's  groups 
face  in  getting  a  real  national  distribu- 
tion going?  Is  it  money?  Is  it  public- 
ity? Is  it  breaking  the  hold  that  movie 
theatres  have  on  determining  which 
films  get  shown? 

SE:  On  a  really  elementary  level,  the 
biggest  problem  is  having  access  to 
contacts  and  mailing  lists.  We  need  an 
up-to-date  national  feminist  network 
containing  names  of  organizations,  so 
we  can  have  access  to  various  groups, 
and  money  is,  of  course,  a  problem. 

JS:  Money  is  certainly  a  large  issue, 
I  mean  living  in  a  capitalist  society 
makes  money  a  large  issue.  But  an 
even  more  critical  issue  for  distribu- 
tion is  something  the  women's  move- 


ment is  beginning  to  try  to  deal  with 
and  that's  culture.  For  example,  the 
enculturation  of  capitalism  in  this  so- 
ciety is  so  strong  that  we  can't  escape 
it.  Here  we  have  an  organization 
that's  involved  in  the  process  of  film 
and  in  the  process  of  people's  lives — 
what  we  see  as  being  the  valuable 
thing— while  the  system  sees  the  pro- 
duct as  the  most  important  thing. 
And,  unfortunately,  that  product  is 
judged  only  by  the  accepted  standards 
of  that  system.  That  product,  a  first 
film,  someone's  little  baby,  gets  seen 
by  someone  who  says  "Ugh,  it's  not 
technically  perfect,"  and  is  rejected 
accordingly.  Now  that  viewer  may  be 
a  right-on  feminist,  but  there's  an  atti- 
tude there  reflecting  values  that  the 
commercial  media  has  been  very  suc- 
cessful at  instilling:  destroying  peo- 
ple's ability  to  evaluate  and  react  to 
anything  that  gets  close  to  their  per- 


Women  Make  Movies/ 47 


sonal  lives,  and  emphasizing  instead  a 
technically  perfect,  bland  product. 
That's  probably  WMM's  hardest  role 
right  now — and  feminist  distribu- 
tion's— breaking  down  those  concepts 
of  what  a  "good"  or  "important"  pro- 
duct is.  I  think  it's  probably  the  cen- 
tral role  of  any  feminist  involved  in 
distributing  information,  but  I  think 
it's  particularly  difficult  with  movies. 
Audiences  are  not  used  to  seeing  or 
discussing  the  different  contexts  and 
goals  of  different  films. 

AD:  People  are  used  to  seeing  Holly- 
wood movies — going  to  a  theatre,  sit- 
ting there  for  two  hours  and  then 
leaving,  no  matter  how  they  feel 
about  the  movie.  They  might  mumble 
something  afterwards  but  it's  a  pro- 
cess that  separates  you  from  other 
people  in  the  audience  and  from  the 
filmmaker.  You  never  have  a  chance 
to  say  to  the  filmmaker,  "You  know, 
that's  kind  of  weird  how  you  have 
this  guy  beating  her  up,  and  then  she 
turns  around  and  falls  in  love  with 
him.  That  doesn't  go  down  so  well 
with  me.  .  ."  and  so  on. 

JS:  Personally  I'd  like  to  demystify 
the  filmmaking  and  film- viewing  pro- 
cess. I  really  have  a  thing  about  the 
film  elite,  the  people  who  end  up 
making  "The  Movies."  They  don't  use 
film  as  a  communication  medium; 
they  use  it  as  a  rip-off  medium.  It's  an 
industry.  It's  something  to  sell  some- 
thing. The  industry  makes  you  feel 
unimportant  because  the  people  it 
portrays  are  rarely  people  who  have 
anything  to  do  with  you.  It's  fine  to 
have  idealizations,  but  there  needs  to 
be  a  greater  variety  of  ideals  and  more 
variety  in  kinds  of  films  and  film- 


makers. This  is  crucial  because  film  is 
a  very  powerful  medium.  It's  the 
medium  of  our  time.  When  you  have 
no  control  over  it  or  understanding  of 
it,  it's  like  everyone  else  is  writing 
with  pen  and  ink  and  you're  still  carv- 
ing your  name  in  stone.  Women  real- 
ly have  to  have  access  to  this  medium 
if  they  want  to  survive,  period. 

CB:  Even  though  this  is  a  small  out- 
fit compared  to  Hollywood,  you  have 
a  lot  of  resources  compared  with 
what  women  generally  have.  How  do 
you  decide  which  women  will  have 
access  to  your  resources? 


AD:  Initially  Sheila  and  I  put  up  fliers 
throughout  the  community — in  the 
supermarket,  beauty  parlor,  the  local 
community  action  group  and  the  local 
clinic — and  through  that  we  got  the 
first  people  coming  to  make  a  film. 
Since  then,  we've  also  tried  to  recruit 
specialized  groups  to  work  on  various 
projects,  but  it's  been  very  frustrating. 


48  /Quest 


For  instance,  there  are  several  women 
who  are  single  mothers,  and  the  odds 
against  them  are  just  enormous  in 
terms  of  being  able  to  have  time  by 
themselves  to  work  on  a  film.  Also 
we  have  done  several  projects  with 
Spanish  women  in  the  community, 
but  the  cultural  attitudes  within  their 
families  are  against  their  being  in- 
volved. There  are  a  lot  of  factors  that 
work  like  these  against  our  really 
opening  WMM  to  a  broad  range  of 
women.  Now,  on  the  whole,  the  aver- 
age age  of  our  filmmakers  is  25  to  35, 
and  if  they  are  married,  they  tend  to 
have  no  children,  and  on  the  average, 
our  filmmakers  are  pretty  much  mid- 
dle-class, and  white.  However,  out  of 
our  active  membership,  we  have  sev- 
eral women  with  children,  an  older 
woman,  a  Black  woman,  and  several 
married  women  and  working-class 
women. 

CB:  How  do  you  decide  who  makes  a 
film  and  what  happens  once  that's 
decided? 

SE:  The  first  requirement,  which  is 
crucial,  is  that  a  person  have  enough 
time;  then  we  can  give  her  access  to 
equipment  and  the  money  for  film.  I, 
personally,  feel  that  criteria  are 
needed  to  evaluate  whether  a  woman 
should  study  here  for  free  or  whether 
she  should  study  at  a  regular  film 
school  if  she  can  afford  it.  We  want  to 
serve  those  with  the  least  access  to 
filmmaking.  But  we  also  realize  that 
women  studying  in  regular  film 
schools  often  have  difficulty  getting 
"hands-on"  experience  and  the  oppor- 
tunity to  work  in  a  supportive  en- 
vironment. 


JS:  One  process  that  we  are  develop- 
ing is  a  short-term,  basic  skills  course 
where  women  can  learn  all  the  pro- 
cesses of  working  on  a  movie.  We 
have  done  this  for  women  who  live 
and  work  in  the  Chelsea  neighbor- 
hood where  we  are  located — a  racially 
and  economically  diverse  neighbor- 
hood, and  for  a  fee,  for  women  out- 
side the  neighborhood.  When  I  helped 
teach  this  course  each  woman  wrote  a 
script,  directed  and  shot  footage, 
edited,  and  so  on.  We  then  asked  if 
they  wanted  to  take  part  in  "phase 
two,"  which  would  be  to  produce 
their  first  film.  Only  two  women  re- 
sponded, but  they  knew  what  would 
be  required  to  do  it. 

Furthermore,  in  choosing  projects 
now,  we  ask  a  series  of  questions: 
Would  it  be  something  that  is  really 
going  to  provide  a  service  to  women 
everywhere?  Is  it  something  we  want 
to  distribute?  Is  it  too  ambitious  or 
not  ambitious  enough?  Previously, 
deciding  what  films  to  do  was  sort  of 


Women  Make  Movies /49 


haphazard.  Now  we  are  developing  a 
system.  In  general,  the  membership 
meeting  tries  to  decide  whether  a  film 
is  a  good  project  for  us  at  this  time.  It 
works  because  we  trust  everyone  to 
come  to  a  good  decision,  so  whether 
or  not  I  make  a  film  at  a  particular 
time  is  not  an  issue  of  personal  rejec- 
tion. 

AD:  In  the  October  meeting  we  rec- 
ognized that  one  of  the  most  valuable 
qualities  about  WMM  is  people— the 
support  and  sharing  process  that  we 
go  through  together  is  probably  the 
one  common,  most  important  ele- 
ment that  we  have.  I  think  the  second 
thing  that  WMM  provides  is  a  home 
base;  it  is  important  to  go  out  from 
the  organization  and  develop  skills 
outside,  but  it  is  a  place  to  come  back 
to  as  well.  It's  a  process  of  developing 
your  skills  and  using  them  in  the  in- 
dustry, and  then  coming  back  to  do 
the  kinds  of  things  only  a  feminist  or- 
ganization can  do. 

CB:  I'd  like  you  to  talk  about  the 
financial  and  fundraising  aspects  of 
the  organization,  particularly  the  pro- 
gression from  a  co-directorship— a 
structure  that  outside  institutions  can 
relate  to  fairly  easily— to  a  group 
structure.  How  do  you  fund-raise 
now? 

AD:  First,  without  the  New  York 
State  Council  on  the  Arts,  we 
wouldn't  be  here;  it  has  been  our  pri- 
mary source  of  funding.  That  funding 
has  increased  every  year  (except  for 
this  year,  when  we  got  the  same 
amount  we  had  gotten  the  previous 
year).  Recently,  with  a  lot  of  hard 
work,  we  also  got  a  grant  from  the 


National  Endowment  for  the  Arts, 
which  was  important,  because  for  the 
first  time  we  were  recognized  beyond 
N.Y.  State. 

Foundation  fundraising  has  been 
enormously  frustrating.  They're  no- 
toriously bad  in  funding  women's  in- 
terests, and  even  worse  in  terms  of 
funding  film  projects.  Another  thing 
we  learned  while  trying  to  design  a 
rationale  for  why  foundations  should 
support  us  is  that  foundations  don't 
really  fund  adults  to  do  much  at  all, 
at  least  in  terms  of  teaching.  Their 
concept  is  that  adults  are  the  main- 
stream of  society  and  should  be  work- 
ing, not  still  in  the  learning  process. 

Finally  we  began  to  get  corporate 
support.  The  conference  of  Feminist 
Film  and  Video  Organizations  that  we 
sponsored  was  funded  by  a  bank;  the 
First  National  City  Bank  also  gave  us 
money  for  the  film,  "Healthcaring 
From  Our  End  of  the  Speculum." 

Sheila  and  I  did  all  the  fundraising 
in  the  past.  Now  we're  trying  to  hire 
a  fundraiser,  so  it  would  still  be  a  job 
essentially  done  by  one  person,  but  it 
would  be  her  primary  responsibility, 
not  one  of  22  other  things.  At  this 
point,  we  have  to  figure  out  whether 
distribution  can  be  a  viable  way  of 
sustaining  the  organization.  We  did 
virtually  no  promotion  or  distribu- 
tion last  year  and  so  we  didn't  make 
as  much  as  the  year  before  when  we 
did  some  promotion.  I  think  that  our 
best  market  is  those  groups  of  women 
who  are  just  getting  into  conscious- 
ness raising  and  are  not  attached  to 
an  institution.  The  problem  is  how  to 
reach  our  market. 

CB:  What  you're  talking  about  is 
distribution  as  a  larger  source  of  sup- 


50 /Quest 


port,  but  not  as  an  exclusive  source. 
Do  you  see  a  point  at  which  it  could 
really  sustain  the  whole  outfit? 

AD:  I  would  be  surprised  if  it  ever 
could.  The  whole  process  of  teaching 
is  much  more  expensive  than  the  or- 
ganization can  ever  afford.  The 
NYSCA  and  the  Arts  Endowment 
funded  us  primarily  because  it  was 
teaching,  not  just  making  films.  I 
think  that's  important,  because  most 
women's  projects  have  tried  to  get 
funding  for  products  but  even  when 
they  were  teaching  they  did  not  de- 
velop or  promote  the  teaching  aspect 
of  their  work  as  a  fundraising  idea. 

JS:  Personally,  I  envision  it  all  run- 
ning smoothly,  efficiently.  We  run  a 
workshop  phase  where  we  teach  all 
those  wonderful  workshops;  then  we 
go  into  the  production  phase  where 
we  just  produce  movies;  then  we  have 
a  distribution  phase,  and  finally  we 
go  into  a  tremendous  fundraising 
phase:  all  of  that  in  the  space  of  one 
year!  It  would  be  nice  to  put  full  force 
into  each  phase  so  that  when  people 
are  learning,  everyone  who  is  in- 
volved could  be  there  as  an  extra 
teaching  resource.  We  also  want  to 
create  an  atmosphere  where  energy 
and  service,  as  well  as  money,  flows 
two  ways.  For  example,  if  we  let  a 
women's  group  use  the  films  at  a  re- 
duced rental  according  to  their  needs 
and  means,  we  would  ask  in  return 
that  they  invite  their  local  librarian  to 
come  view  with  the  possibility  of  buy- 
ing the  film,  or  that  they  do  some 
kind  of  research  for  us.  That  brings 
energy  back,  so  it  goes  full  circle. 

SE:  I'd  like  to  discuss  the  whole  area 


of  respect,  because  when  I  came  to 
this  job,  I  discovered  WMM  has  lost 
over  $1,000  just  on  unpaid  invoices 
for  renting  films.  I  think  this  whole 
area  of  mutual  respect  between  femi- 
nist groups  is  really  important.  Wom- 
en must  understand  and  respect  us 
and  not  come  to  us  with  this  cul- 
turally-instilled vision  that  we're  part 
of  capitalism,  and  that  therefore,  it's 
o.k.  to  rip  us  off.  We're  trying  to  de- 
velop some  kind  of  mutual  respect 
and  a  new  relationship  within  the  tra- 
ditional ways  of  doing  business.  Dur- 
ing the  first  part  of  the  Women's 
movement,  we  got  into  this  attitude 
that  a  lot  of  women  still  have— we 
share  everything,  everything  is  free 
and  wonderful — BUT  somebody  spent 
years  learning  those  skills,  and  they 
cannot  be  given  away  for  more  than 
a  short  period  of  time  without  any 
kind  of  recognition  or  remuneration. 
Some  women's  groups  approach  us 
that  way.  They  think  that  because 
we're  all  in  the  movement,  they  don't 
have  to  pay  us;  in  fact,  we're  so 
limited  in  our  resources  that  we  need 
even  the  little  money  they  could  have 
paid  to  keep  us  going.  We  must  rec- 
ognize that  we  don't  have  much 
money,  but  that  we  both  have  some- 
thing to  offer  each  other. 

CB:  I  think  that's  crucial.  It's  not  only 
that  we  get  respect  in  new  terms  but 
also  that  feminist  businesses  aren't 
given  respect  as  businesses  in  old 
terms.  For  example,  some  women 
complain  about  paying  two  dollars  to 
go  to  a  feminist  film  festival,  and  then 
pay  three  dollars  to  see  "Dog  Day 
Afternoon"  without  a  thought.  Until 
that  consciousness  changes,  whether 


Women  Make  Movies /51 


it's  about  women's  films,  women's 
publications  or  women's  services  of 
any  kind,  until  that  expectation  that 
they're  free,  should  be  free,  and  there- 
fore aren't  worth  much  changes,  we're 
not  going  to  have  any  serious  wom- 
en's culture. 


AD:  That  ties  in  immediately  with 
the  fact  that  we  are  not  known  in  the 
terms  by  which  "Dog  Day  After- 
noon" is  known;  that  is,  we're  not  ac- 
cepted even  by  feminists.  It's  a  very 
frustrating  process. 


JS:  Also,  we're  not  used  to  feeling  im- 
portant. If  someone  says  "Would 
you  please  come  speak  to  our  group," 
I  say,  "Oh  sure,  I  would  love  a  chance 
to  speak."  It  wouldn't  even  occur  to 
me  to  ask  for  a  speaker's  fee.  I  spent 
years  studying  all  kinds  of  stuff  that 
gives  me  special  skills  in  speaking  to 
groups — skills  that  they  would  pay 
for  if  they  went  to  film  school  or  any- 
where else.  Women  need  to  help  each 
other  in  terms  of  saying  "you  are  im- 
portant, I  respect  you."  It's  not  only 
our  projects,  it's  also  our  own  self- 
images  that  are  at  stake. 


Healthcaring  from  Our  End 

of  the  Speculum 
The  Amazing  Equal  Pay  Show 
Livia  Makes  Some  Changes 
The  Women's  Happy  Time 
Commune    and  more. 


WOMEN  MAKE  MOVIES,  INC. 
Distributes  Films 

by,  for,  and  about  women 
for  rental  and  sale 

Write  for  our  catalog.  WOMEN  MAKE  MOVIES,  INC. 
257  West  19th  Street   New  York,  N.Y.  1001 1  (212)  929-6477 


52/Quest 


New  from  ABC-CLIO 


Women  in  the  World 

A  Comparative  Study 

Lynne  B.  Iglitzin  and 
Ruth  Ross,  Editors 
Afterword  by  Alva  Myrdai 

The  25  essays  contributed  by  leading 
scholars  describe  the  struggle  of  women 
throughout  the  world  to  gain  a  voice  in 
the  political,  religious,  business,  and 
social  life  of  their  countries.  Alva  Myrdai 
discusses  the  implications  of  women's 
increased  longevity,  calls  for  a  new  policy 
direction  in  regard  to  human  time-use, 
and  outlines  other  areas  in  which  further 
research  will  be  undertaken.  Subject 
index,  xvii,  427  pages.  1976.  $19.75 
casebound,  $6.50  paper. 


The  American  Search 
for  Woman 

H.  Carleton  Marlow  and 
Harrison  M.  Davis 

This  meticulously  researched  and  docu- 
mented work  traces  the  history  of 
American  thought  on  the  nature  of 
woman  from  the  18th  century  to  the 
present.  By  identifying  and  analyzing  the 
historical  roots  of  American  attitudes, 
Marlow  and  Davis  make  a  valuable 
contribution  to  the  literature  on  the 
present  women's  movement.  They  place 
the  work  of  Benjamin  Rush,  Frances 
Wright,  Lucy  Stone,  Mary  Wollstone- 
craft,  Elizabeth  Stanton,  Ashley  Mon- 
tagu, and  many  others  in  historical  perspective.  Bibliography.  Index, 
xiv,  539  pages.  1976.  $21.75  casebound,  $6.75  paper. 


American  Bibliographical  Center  -  Clio  Press 
Riviera  Campus,  2040  A.P.S.,  Box  4397  i — i     ■  i 
Santa  Barbara,  California  93103  |  A  |  B  |  C  | 


53 


Images 
Functioii 


By  NELLE  MORTON 

graphics  by  Nancy  Myron 


The  following  was  originally  pre- 
pared for  a  United  Presbyterian  Com- 
mission on  Abortion,  but  they  found 
it  "unacceptable. "  Nelle  Morton  is  a 
retired  theologian  now  living  in  Cali- 
fornia, where  she  is  finishing  a  book 
in  the  area  of  women  and  language. 

It  is  now  becoming  clear  that  any 
conversation  or  discussion  is  affected 
by  images  that  function  as  ways  of 
perceiving,  evoking  and  even  con- 
structing reality.  In  discussing  the  im- 
portance of  images  in  a  child's  devel- 
opment, Jean  Piaget,  the  genetic  epis- 
temologist  from  Switzerland,  obser- 
ved that  the  formation  of  an  image  in 
a  child  grows  out  of  the  child's  imita- 
tion of  that  outside  which  imposes  a 
concrete  value,  style  of  life,  or  percep- 
tion of  reality  on  the  child.  In  time, 
the  image  shaped  within  the  child  may 
begin  to  have  a  life  of  its  own.  If  the 
image  becomes  conscious,  it  may  be 


said  to  have  become  part  of  the  child's 
own  self.  But  if  the  image  remains  in 
the  unconscious,  which  often  it  does, 
it  may  arise  unexpectedly  in  the  life  of 
the  child,  take  control  of  a  situation 
and  even  control  of  the  child  in  such  a 
way  that  the  child  cannot  distinguish 
self  from  that  which,  foreign  to  the 
self,  dominates. 

When  an  image  remains  an  uncon- 
scious part  of  a  person's  self,  the  in- 
nerness  of  the  self  (that  which  flows 
innately  out  of  the  rhythms  of  the  uni- 
verse) is  denied.  Piaget  holds  that  for 
health,  an  equilibrium  between  the 
inner  and  the  outer  must  be  achieved. 
Since  images  may  be  set  permanently 
long  before  persons  reach  the  age  of 
conceptualization,  many  adults  are 
controlled  by  images  which  formed  in 
their  psyches  when  they  were  chil- 
dren. And  since  image  operates  on  a 
different  level  than  concept,  it  cannot 
be  so  easily  corrected  or  changed  or 
even  detected  when  persons  are 
grown. 

In  the  same  manner  that  image  for- 
mation has  been  observed  in  a  child, 
it  may  be  observed  in  a  culture  or  so- 


54/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


How  Images  Function  /55 


ciety.  Over  the  thousands  of  years  a 
culture  is  shaping  itself,  certain 
images  force  themselves  into  the  com- 
munity's psyche  and  become  set.  A 
consciously  growing,  aware,  ques- 
tioning community  will  intentionally 
internalize  some  images  and  exorcise 
others  from  its  corporate  life  so  that 
its  spirit-life  retains  a  dynamic  and 
vibrant  ferment,  ever  renewing  itself, 
yet  maintaining  continuity  with  its 
past.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  images 
have  continued  over  the  centuries  to 
operate  in  the  community's  uncon- 
scious only,  they  may  be  said  to  have 
frozen  the  community's  growth.  Then 
they  become  demonic  and  with  a  life 
of  their  own,  rise  within  the  body 
politic  dominating  a  political  action 
or  affecting  (even  distorting)  the  intel- 
ligent inquiry  into,  or  a  courageous 
move  on,  an  issue. 

Nowhere  has  the  power  of  images 
become  more  evident  in  the  past  few 
years  than  in  the  heated  and  persistent 
discussions  on  abortion.  For  this  rea- 
sion,  I  choose  abortion  as  the  example 
in  my  treatment  of  image. 

Since  the  word  "abortion"  triggers 
off  uncalled-for  emotion  both  in  those 
who  favor  it  and  in  those  who  oppose 
it,  and  apparently  even  in  those  who 
claim  objectivity,  one  is  compelled  to 
look  for  some  hidden  power  function- 
ing at  a  subliminal  level.  Such  a  force 
that  has  surfaced  so  much  emotion, 
that  appears  to  act  on  its  own,  that 
clouds  issues,  and  that  misplaces  the 
focus  of  discussions  may  safely  be  de- 
signated as  an  image. 

In  the  abortion  issue,  there  appear 
to  be  two  foci  around  which  images 
function:  (1)  the  right  to  control  one's 
own  body,  and  (2)  what  has  come  to 
be  called  "the  right  to  life." 


Women  who  assert  their  right  to 
end  an  unwanted  pregnancy  (and  sup- 
porters of  this  position)  do  so  on  the 
basis  of  a  woman's  responsibility  to 
own  and  control  her  own  body.  They 
view  both  men  who  oppose  this  right 
and  women  who  have  internalized 
men's  consciousness  of  them,  as  oper- 
ating out  of  a  patriarchal  perception 
which  claims  the  right  of  men  to  con- 
trol women's  bodies  and,  incidentally, 
that  within  a  woman  which  has  not 
yet  made  its  appearance  as  viable  life. 
On  the  other  hand,  men  and  women 
who  oppose  abortion  base  their  views 
on  the  right  of  "a  person"  to  have  its 
own  chance  to  life.  They  view  any 
who  oppose  them  as  potential  mur- 
derers and  renunciators  of  mother- 
hood. 

Of  the  many  images  operating  in 
abortion  discussions,  it  appears  that  a 
single  myth  may  be  their  source.  That 
is  the  myth  that  the  male  is  the  sole 
parent  of  the  child,  thus  defining  the 
woman  as  the  nurturer  of  the  male's 
babies  (both  before  and  after  birth). 
This  myth  gives  rise  to  such  images  of 
women  as  incubator,  sex  object, 
breeder,  and  housewife.  The  man  is 
then  seen  as  the  authority  of  a  family, 
the  ruler  of  the  household,  the  deci- 
sion-maker, provider,  and  owner  of 
the  woman  and  the  child  as  property. 
From  these  images  have  spun  all  sorts 
of  laws  restricting  woman's  owner- 
ship of  property,  her  freedom  of  oper- 
ation in  a  public  sphere,  the  classifica- 
tion of  certain  children  as  "illegiti- 
mate," the  construct  of  the  institution 
of  prostitution,  and  the  double  stan- 
dard, as  well  as  the  definition  of  sex- 
uality and  legislation  governing  it. 
Furthermore,  the  image  of  rulership 
in  family  and  civic  affairs  has  ex- 


56/Quest 


tended  to  world  political  systems  in 
which  men  have  usurped  power, 
dominate  or  keep  at  the  bottom  of  the 
hierarchical  ladder  the  poor,  the  not- 
white,  the  hungry,  the  colonized,  the 
exploited,  the  oppressed  and  all  those 
who  may  be  lumped  as  "the  other" — 
as  woman. 

The  history  of  the  myth  of  the  male 
as  sole  parent  roots  in  the  earliest 
dawn  of  patriarchy.  With  the  first 
knowledge  of  paternity  on  the  part  of 
men,  the  male's  ego  consciousness 
began  its  ascendency.  In  time,  it  ex- 
pressed itself  as  a  system  in  patri- 
archy, recasting  many  of  the  earlier 
mother  myths  in  order  to  support  men 
as  the  superior  sex  and  to  establish 
the  priority  of  the  male  as  the  pro- 
genitor of  life.  A  function  which,  up 
to  then,  had  been  seen  primarily  as 
women's  alone,  suddenly  was  claimed 
by  men  alone.  The  man  constructed  a 
myth  that  life  actually  originated 


within  himself.  In  the  act  of  inter- 
course, he  came  to  believe  that  he 
placed  a  minuscule  baby  into  the 
womb  of  the  woman — reducing  the 
woman  to  the  role  of  nurturer  of  his 
babies  (nurse  of  live  seed),  *  and  using 
her  for  breeding  purposes  since  she 
was  seen  as  unable  to  pass  on  blood 
strains  from  her  own  body. 

This  concept  and  practice  led  to  the 
man  claiming  as  his  property  any- 
thing that  was  born  of  woman.  There- 
fore, he  considered  it  his  right  (re- 
flected in  early  Greek  and  Roman  his- 
tory) to  kill  all  defective  children,  any 
female  children  he  chose,  all  children 
he  suspected  were  not  of  his  own  loins 
(illegitimate),  and  even  the  woman 


*Seed,  itself,  is  another  false  image  out  of 
the  natural  world  which  men  made  synony- 
mous with  sperm,  in  that  seed  contained  all 
properties  for  sprouting.  Note  the  myriad 
biblical  references  to  this  false  image  as  in, 
"your  seed  shall  inherit  the  earth. " 


How  Images  Function/57 


who  secretly  aborted — for  if  left  to 
natural  birth,  her  fetus  might  have  be- 
come a  male  baby. 

The  symbols  that  support  and  per- 
petuate the  myth  of  the  male  as  the 
sole  parent  have  been  kept  alive 
through  the  centuries,  particularly 
through  biblical  and  theological  lan- 
guage, language  of  liturgy,  and  the 
church's  and  synagogue's  hierarchical 
ecclesiology.  Here  and  in  the  lan- 
guage and  history  of  the  western 
world,  men  are  perceived  as  inher- 
ently superior  and  more  powerful 
than  women,  with  the  right  to  rule  the 
earth  and  its  people.  Patriarchal  social 
systems  creating  their  own  forms  of 
ruling  and  competition  have  pervaded 
and  shaped  the  entire  western  civiliza- 
tion and  even  the  world.  They  have 
led  to  a  universal  oppression  of 
women. 

Once  sexism  is  seen  as  patriarchy  in 
all  its  subtle  and  overt  forms,  one 
may  readily  observe  how  the  early 
myth  of  man  as  the  sole  parent  (with 
its  many  images  and  language  expres- 
sions) has  not  yet  been  put  to  rest. 
Women  fighting  for  their  right  to  end 
an  unwanted  pregnancy  on  one  hand, 
and  men  fighting  equally  hard  to 
maintain  the  right  to  make  the  deci- 
sion regarding  it,  both  appear  to  be 
operating  out  of  the  ancient  myth. 
Women  fighting  to  free  themselves 
from  the  control  of  men  in  order  to 
make  the  decision  about  their  own 
bodies  are  in  reality  still  fighting  the 
myth  of  the  male  as  the  sole  parent. 
A  recognition  of  the  real  issue  could 
focus  debate  and  avoid  much  lost 
energy  on  peripheral  matters.  Men 
(and  men's  women)  fighting  to  keep 
the  control  whether  through  religion, 
legislation,  the  home,  or  social  cus- 


tom, reflect  a  reluctance  to  give  up  the 
ancient  myth  which  continues  to  func- 
tion in  their  psyches. 

The  right-to-life  argument  is  a  bit 
trickier.  But  it,  too,  appears  to  derive 
from  the  same  myth.  The  man  does 
not  identify  with  the  dilemma  of  the 
woman,  but  instead  with  the  fetus, 
which  he  sees  as  part  of  himself.  He  is 
forced  to  go  through  the  woman's 
body  to  reach  the  fetus,  morally  com- 
pelling him  to  the  same  concern  for 
the  woman  as  for  the  fetus  (which  a 
woman  considers  as  part  of  herself). 
But  when  the  woman  can  be  viewed, 
even  in  the  remotest  sense,  as  the  nur- 
turer  of  the  man's  minuscule  baby,  or 
the  egg  can  be  viewed  primarily  as 
nutrient  for  the  sperm  in  which  real 
life  resides,  then  the  man  could  logi- 
cally claim  the  right  to  make  the  deci- 
sions regarding  the  welfare  of  that 
which,  as  part  of  himself,  has  gone 
from  him. 

But  to  be  consistent,  men  would 
have  to  be  equally  concerned  with  all 
the  minuscule  "babies"  lost  in  every 
ejaculation  spilled  out  on  the  ground 
and  all  ejaculations  with  prostitutes 
from  whom  they  walk  off.  (In  this 
sense  the  prostitute  becomes  a  symbol 
for  every  woman.)  The  man  actually 
concerned  with  right-to-life  would  be 
compelled  to  an  equal  concern  for 
every  pregnant  woman  (or  every 
human  being,  for  that  matter)  ex- 
posed to  and  even  killed  in  famine, 
war,  prisons,  and  so  on,  lest  any  of 
them  contains  a  "seed  of  life." 

Throughout  patristic  writings,  in 
early  Greek  and  Roman  classical  liter- 
ature, as  well  as  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, the  image  of  the  sole  parent  be- 
gins to  take  on  Cosmic  dimensions, 
for  in  the  potency  of  the  semen  the 


58/Quest 


The  Quest  issue  on  spirituality 
was  the  beginning. . . 

Let  Companions 


for  the  Journey 


For  your  copy 


COMPANIONS  FOR  THE  JOURNEY, 

An  Anthology  of  Women  and 
Spirituality,  edited  by  Juanita  Weaver, 
send  your  name,  address,  and  $4.50 
(no  CODs,  please)  to: 
COMPANIONS,  1710  19th  St.,  N.W., 
Washington,  D.C.,.  20009. 


Spirit  of  Life  resides.  And  the  Spirit  of 
Life,  capitalized,  can  only  mean  that 
divine  spark  which  originates  life.  No- 
where does  this  become  clearer  than 
in  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Jesus  when 
God  became  the  sole  parent  and 
Mary  the  instrument  which  pro- 
duced God's  son,  his  only  son,  and 
only  his  son.  To  preserve  the  myth, 
the  body  of  Mary  was  denigrated  to 
the  extent  she  was  elevated  as  God- 
dess of  Heaven  (otherwise  she  would 
have  been  an  adultress  or  prostitute), 
and  when  her  Assumption  was  de- 
clared, she  was  described  as  "taken" 
into  heaven  in  bodily  form.  But  note 
how  her  son  was  said  to  have  as- 
cended into  heaven  "all  by  himself." 

When  life  is  absolutized  and  sym- 
bolized in  semen  and  in  a  fetus,  one  is 
confronted  with  many  knotty  and  un- 
answerable questions.  Psychologi- 
cally, the  deep  anxiety  of  women  over 
abortion  derives  from  living  in  a  pa- 
triarchal society  in  which  guilt  is  pro- 
duced by  the  way  they  are  forced  to 
get  an  abortion,  rather  than  in  the 
event  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
anxiety  of  men  over  abortion  derives 
from  the  possibility  of  losing  control, 
and  hence,  male  ego  consciousness.  In 
order  to  maintain  control,  the  man 
identifies  with  the  fetus  instead  of  the 
woman,  for  in  the  fetus  no  mutuality 
is  called  for.  Here  we  see  that  the  issue 
is  not  the  right  to  life  but  the  right  of 
the  male  parent  to  determine  life,  who 
shall  live,  and  when  life  begins.  Thus 
in  the  abortion  debate  as  in  many 
other  instances,  a  myth  out  of  an  an- 
cient culture  continues  to  organize  us, 
fix  our  relationships,  determine  our 
actions,  and  inform  our  communica- 
tions to  this  day. 


Colorful  Silk- 
screened  Femrn- 
ist  Posters  zwrite 

for  free  brochure 
to:  Dana  Bass 
P.O.Box  23801 
Oakland,Ca.946Z3 


How  Images  Function /59 


The  American  Father 


Like  an  anxious  mother 

listening  to  her  kids  breathing  in  their  cribs  at  night, 
I  check  on  the  memory  of  my  father. 

Tiptoe  up  to  the  snore  between  the  slats,  to  where  he  crouches 

like  a  giant  red  frog  who  has  eaten  a  giant 

hog  who  ate  an  American  flag. 

He  is  the  American  father,  stuffed 

with  corn  and  basted  in  bourbon,  squatting  in  the  crib. 

I  used  to  work  him  over  like  a  whore 

with  an  impotent  customer  who's  very  rich,  sweat 

pouring  off  me  in  my  effort  to  be 

a  daughter  in  the  way  that  would  do  it  for  him,  make 

his  hand  soft  on  my  head  just  for  a  moment. 

Lying  in  wait,  leaving  notes,  praying, 

bringing  home  report  cards,  folding  my  hands,  sitting 

stock  still  at  the  table,  a  robot 

of  respect  and  attention,  I  wasted  my  childhood 

trying  to  please.  And  sometimes 

being  a  devil — he  liked  me  a  little  then. 

The  red  rubber  lip  would  curl 

up,  the  boiled  eye  swivel  to  rest  almost  in  recognition. 

Sometimes  my  courting  eye  would  rove 

to  Patty  Goodwin's  father  or  Susan  Warner's  father 

with  their  living  eyes  and  soft  faces  of  thought, 

but  they  hadn't  signed  the  bloody  pact, 

hadn't  been  jammed  into  Mother  or  burst, 

not  touched  the  totem  of  the  martyr  cult 

celebrated  behind  red  drapes  on  our  quiet  street. 

They  moved  in  that  other  world  of  light, 

America  dreamed  by  its  victims,  pale 

pastels  of  sherbet  and  cool  vistas  of  park 

dotted  with  acacia,  fuzzy  as  baby  chicks 

whose  necks  will  never  be  wrung. 

Their  world  of  no  blood, 

no  midnight,  no  rape,  no  nightmare,  no  brave  smile. 


60/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


My  heart  peeled  like  the  sycamore  tree. 

My  glasses  got  thicker  &  thicker,  I  refused 

to  focus  on  such  a  world.  My  face 

exploded  in  furious  pimples,  a  war 

of  shells  burst  beneath  the  skin. 

My  armpits  smelled  of  death,  I  braced 

myself  against  the  iron  railings. 

Down  he  hurled  past  me  in  a  red  mask. 

His  nose  popped  on  the  cement.  Just 
a  drunken  fall,  and  said  the  young  cop 
as  I  stood  shivering  and  weeping 
in  my  shortie  nightie. 
Just  a  fall.  He'll  be  fine 
in  the  morning. 

She  left  him  that  morning. 
That  night 

like  a  breath  released, 
like  a  held  sigh 

finally  exhaled  as  safe  and  easy 

as  warm  milk,  my  blood  came  down.  I  bled  and  bled 

my  childhood  away,  I  opened  the  red 

EXIT  door  to  the  American  movie, 

and  backed  in. 

I'd  only  missed  half. 


By  SHARON  OLDS 


The  American  Father/61 


til 


By  CHRIS  MURPHEY 

graphics  by  Marianne  Lieberman 

What  happens  to  us  when  we  sit  in 
front  of  a  TV?  Some  of  us  stare  blank- 
ly in  passive  blob  positions,  allowing 
our  passivity  to  feed  on  itself  and  the 
TV  to  stay  on  for  hours.  Some  eat, 
from  habit,  or  from  the  enticement  of 
its  pretty  pictures  of  food.  Some  of  us 
bite  our  nails,  smoke  endlessly,  or 
scratch  our  bodies.  Most  of  us  don't 
want  to  miss  what's  happening,  and 
many  of  us  fall  asleep  to  the  program 
sounds.  Even  our  dreams  are  plagued 
by  the  emotion-packed  images  we  see 
on  the  screen. 

Turning  on  the  TV  is  like  inviting  a 
patriarchal  hypnotist  into  our  room, 
who  sits  in  a  corner,  sending  out  his 
constant  stream  of  tightly-packaged 
programming,  in  an  attempt  to  influ- 
ence our  behavior  whether  or  not  we 
are  consciously  aware  of  him.  Even 
when  we  just  have  it  on,  not  really 
watching  it,  we  allow  the  TV  to  exert 
its  influence. 

TV  is  a  hazard  to  our  health.  Its 
influence  takes  a  physical  toll,  affects 
our  ability  to  communicate  with  each 
other,  and  works  a  subtle  influence  on 
our  behavior.  Our  attention  is  di- 


vided; we  relate  to  each  other  through 
the  TV  rather  than  independently  of 
it.  Have  you  ever  noticed  the  change 
in  a  room  and  in  your  own  percep- 
tions when  a  TV  is  turned  off?  Even  if 
no  one  was  particularly  paying  atten- 
tion to  it  when  it  was  on,  the  change 
in  space  is  present. 

TV,  because  of  its  content,  its  prev- 
alence and  its  accessibility,  is  rich  ter- 
ritory for  analyzing  the  ways  in  which 
the  patriarchal  culture  business  shapes 
our  consciousness  according  to  its 
own  ends.  How  does  it  work?  Why 
are  we  susceptible  to  its  influence? 
What  happens  to  us  when  we  watch 
TV? 

The  Culture 

People  seek  out  art  and  entertain- 
ment as  part  of  their  culture.  Ideally, 
culture  is  an  organic,  human  process 
where  there  is  room  for  everyone  to 
perform,  and  to  which  the  individual 
can  look  for  food  for  growth  and 
strength.  But  our  20th  century  patri- 
archal culture  represents  something 
quite  different:  it  is  a  business  for  pro- 
fit that  capitalizes  on  the  cultural 
voids  we  feel.  Its  intent  is  not  to  make 

*Thank  you,  Shirl  Smith  and  friends. 


62/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


us  strong  individuals;  it  is  to  make 
corporate  profits.  People  no  longer 
participate  in  our  culture  as  we  once 
did:  we  buy  it.  In  short,  we  fill  a  pas- 
sive, accepting  role  which  the  indus- 
try calls  the  "audience." 

The  patriarchal  media  culture  to 
which  so  many  of  us  are  exposed  day 
after  day,  acts  as  a  primary  point  of 
reference  in  our  lives.  We  spend  most 
of  our  time  being  entertained  and  in- 
formed by  it,  hearing  the  media  hyp- 
ing books,  programs  or  movies  they 
want  us  to  know  about.  Their  first 
priority  is  presenting  us  with  things 
they  define  as  "safe"  and  "unthreaten- 
ing"  to  most  of  the  public,  and  there- 
fore most  profitable.  The  result  is  that 
few  of  us  have  access  to  information 
which  presents  alternatives  or  pro- 
vides us  with  choices,  and  most  of  us 
don't  even  expect  our  media  cultural 
experience  to  challenge  us,  to  stimu- 
late our  growth,  or  to  provide  changes 
in  our  consciousness. 

The  Death- Versus-Life  Formula 

Thus,  since  the  era  of  corporate 
technology,  at  least,  a  patriarchal 
world  view  can  be  pushed  at  much 
more  intimate  levels  than  ever  before 
—through  television.  Ninety-six  per- 
cent of  U.S.  homes  are  equipped  with 
at  least  one  set;1  the  average  person 
watches  it  over  six  hours  a  day.2  For 
these  reasons  among  others,  it  is  the 
spearhead  of  the  patriarchal  culture 
industry's  assault  on  our  life  view, 
and  acts  as  the  prime  instrument  for 
management  of  consumer  demand.  It 
works  to  define,  reinforce  and  pre- 
serve a  life  concept  compatible  with 
the  needs  of  corporate  profits  and  pa- 
triarchal culture. 


Our  present  day  patriarchal  cul- 
ture makers  represent  the  continual 
evolution  of  the  patriarchal  spirit  and 
politics.  The  male  principle  is  death. 
The  female  includes  the  male  and  cre- 
ates a  whole  principle  of  life.  Patri- 
archy is  the  domination  of  the  male 
over  the  female,  of  death  over  life.3 
The  patriarchal  culture  attempts  to  in- 
stitutionalize definitions  of  life  and 
death  for  the  people.  The  patriarchal 
tendency  is  to  define  life  and  death  as 
opposites,  much  like  the  institution- 
alized female  and  male  definition.  The 
female  principle  of  wholeness  is  de- 
nied, and  life  suffers  from  the  retard- 
ing effects  of  male  principle  rule  in  the 
hands  of  a  patriarchal  spiritual  politi- 
cal system.  It  is  the  role  of  the  media 
— and  particularly  of  TV— to  push 
this  life  view. 

Patriarchal  culture,  handed  down 
to  the  people  through  mass  media, 
speaks  a  language  of  death  versus 
life.4  Death,  as  defined  by  the  media, 
is  violence,  aggression,  coerced  sub- 
mission, forced  exclusion.  The  weap- 
ons used  by  TV— the  programs  and 
the  interplay  among  programs,  com- 
mercials and  the  news— are  meant  to 
enforce  this  definition  of  death  and  to 
produce  a  fear  which  forces  our  con- 
formity to  patriarchal  expectations. 
In  short,  instead  of  portraying  death 
as  part  of  the  whole  evolution  of  life, 
it  is  isolated,  and  lodged  securely  in 
the  context  of  fear.  That  fear  is  a  con- 
stant reinforcement  of  our  need  of  the 
"good"  things  of  life. 

The  patriarchal  concept  of  life  re- 
volves around  the  boundaries  of  uni- 
form male  supremacist  family  struc- 
tures and  the  sex  roles  necessary  for 
maintaining  them.  Life,  as  patriarchy 
defines  it,  is  expressed  in  heterosexu- 


The  Shadow  Box/63 


ality  and  in  mother,  father  and  child 
roles.  Such  a  definition  denies  the 
power  of  ever-changing  life  by  chain- 
ing it  to  predictable  conformity.  In 
addition,  individuals,  who  always 
differ  somehow  from  the  media's 
norm,  fear  they  are  never  quite  good 
enough,  and  thus  "life"  is  lived  in  per- 
petual fear  of  not  belonging,  not  fit- 
ting in.  But  of  course  TV  gives  us  a 
way  out,  a  means  for  reducing  our 
fears:  the  "good  life"  of  patriarchy 
can  be  bought  if  we  behave,  if  we 
make  the  right  purchases.  The  result 
is  that  the  individual  is  locked  into  an 
on-going  struggle  with  the  self,  out  of 
which  individuality  is  sacrificed  as  the 
ransom  against  the  fears  of  loneliness, 
of  being  different. 

We  see  this  life-versus-death  con- 
cept played  out  continuously  on  TV, 
in  separate  shows  and  commercials 
and  in  the  interplay  of  program-com- 
mercial-program .5 

Cop  shows  (taken  as  a  representa- 
tive of  all  sex-violence  shows)  provide 
a  blatant  version  of  life-versus-death 
in  the  sex-and-violence  formula;** 
they  concentrate  on  the  hunt,  and  cli- 
max with  the  kill.  Sex  (the  symbol  for 
life)  is  either  one  means  for  the  hero 
to  achieve  his  ends,  or  else  is  a  prize 
for  his  efforts,  and  often  it  is  deprived 
of  its  life  symbolism  by  being  steeped 
in  violence  (death).  Somewhere  in  the 
program,  an  intense  build-up  of  fear 
leads  potentially  or  directly  to  the 
actual  occurrence  of  death,  and  the 
audience's  response  is  manipulated  to 
fit  the  build-up  through  the  plot,  the 
visual  and  the  audial  program.  Its 
music  and  sounds  keep  us  in  constant 
anxiety,  on  the  edge  of  the  chair,  and 

**One  show  was  even  plugged  with  the 
hype,  "Dope,  dames  and  death!" 


the  fast-paced  visual  images  keep  us 
glued  to  the  tube  in  tense  concentra- 
tion on  what  will  happen  next. 

The  soap-opera  formula  is  another, 
perhaps  more  subtle  example,  since  it 
includes  a  more  tempered  version  of 
sex  and  violence.  Here  the  function  of 
the  patriarchal  family  structure  de- 
fines life  as  it  should  be  under  the 
guise  of  life  as  it  is.  Like  all  TV  pro- 
gramming, the  soaps  come  equipped 
with  formula  plots  and  formula  roles 
portraying  the  various  patriarchal 
categories  of  people:  race,  sex,  class 
and  age.  They  teach  us  the  winners 
and  losers,  the  rights  and  wrongs,  and 
the  paths  to  follow.  The  soap  audi- 
ence response  is  designed  to  be  in  a 
state  of  defenseless  empathy  with  the 
characters'  hop2s  in  love  and  life.  This 
is  insured  through  a  standard  script 
which  calls  for  a  lot  of  fear  and  de- 
pression, and  perhaps  even  a  death 
scene  or  two. 

Not  only  does  the  life-versus-death 
concept  permeate  the  individual  tele- 
vision show.  It  also  exists  in  the  inter- 
play between  the  programs  and  the 
commercials.  The  commercial  break 
often  occurs  at  some  particularly  tense 
moment.  The  viewer  is  still  wrapped 
up  in  emotional  response  to  the  death- 
oriented  show  when  she  or  he  is  sub- 
jected to  a  mini-drama  in  which  the 
"death"  of  uncleanliness,  bad  breath 
or  thirst  is  conquered.6 

This  concept  is  also  clearly  illus- 
trated in  the  interplay  of  the  "objec- 
tive" newscast  and  its  punctuating 
commercials.  News  programs  devote 
a  sizeable  proportion  of  their  air  time 
to  crime  and  terror  stories,  constantly 
feeding  our  learned  hate  and  fear. 
Updates  on  the  latest  disasters  are 
brought  to  us  by  our  authority  figures 


64  /Quest 


Shadow  Box /65 


66 /Quest 


in  solemn,  priestly  tones.  In  the  mid- 
dle of  the  death  reports,  "life"  bursts 
through:  we're  "feeling  free,"  motor- 
cycling through  the  mountains  drink- 
ing RC  Cola.  Here,  as  in  entertain- 
ment programming,  the  change  is  so 
quick  that  the  viewer  is  often  unaware 
that  the  commercial  is  even  on,  and  is 
"programmed"  by  the  rapid  transfor- 
mation into  unprotected,  subcon- 
scious receptivity. 

Commercials  themselves,  apart 
from  that  interplay,  tend  to  rely  on 
the  subtle  emotional  association  of 
patriarchal  life  concepts  and  specific 
products.  For  instance,  a  man's  ar- 
thritis kicks  up  at  his  daughter's  wed- 
ding, so  he  takes  a  simple  but  effec- 
tive pain  reliever  and  rejoins  the  cele- 
bration. A  toothpaste  commercial 
fade-out  shot  captures  a  touching 
mother-daughter  embrace,  and  the 
product  thus  promises  a  meaningful 
emotional  life  as  well  as  clean  teeth. 
While  happy  workers  work  and  happy 
consumers  consume,  the  spirited 
Amoco  chorus  sings,  "it's  a  great 
country,  pass  it  on!"  praising  the 
status  quo  and  promising  satisfaction 
if  only  we  will  buy. 

The  technique  of  using  fear  and 
death  juxtaposed  with  life  and  the 
product  within  the  commercial  is  also 
used.  The  automobile  is  sold  through 
the  male  trip  of  speed  and  reckless- 
ness. The  commercial  aggressively  in- 
vites us  to  court  death,  and  shows  our 
triumphant  survival  of  its  challenge 
—all  this  in  "Death  Valley,"  the  "hot- 
test place  in  the  world." 

Again  and  again  this  formula  shows 
up.  A  woman's  razor  blade  commer- 
cial in  animated  form  picks  up  on  the 
very  real  threat  of  violence  in  shav- 
ing, through  a  roaring  chorus  of  angry 


lions  and  tigers  (threatening  violence) 
and  then  miraculously  saves  us  as  the 
cage  door  slams  down.  A  waterfall 
appears,  accompanied  by  soft  music, 
and  runs  into  a  calm  pool  of  water 
where  a  woman  is  spacing  out  on  the 
beauty  of  it  all  while  she  effortlessly 
shaves  her  legs.  We're  rescued  from 
the  threat  of  violence  (death) — if  we 
only  buy  that  blade. 

The  Symbols 

All  these  life-versus-death  tensions, 
whether  presented  to  us  in  the  enter- 
tainment programming  itself,  in  the 
commercials  or  in  the  interaction  be- 
tween the  two,  serve  to  keep  us  want- 
ing more  of  what  patriarchy  wants  us 
to  want.  This  daily  diet  teaches  us  two 
things:  to  behave  according  to  so- 
ciety's rules,  and  to  buy,  buy,  buy. 

In  the  service  of  this  life-view,  the 
media  has  incorporated — and  sub- 
verted for  its  own  ends — a  great  deal 
of  the  positive  life-oriented  imagery 
derived  from  the  ancient  matriarchal 
symbols  and  visual  language.7  In  ma- 
triarchal times,  the  four  elements  of 
nature— water,  earth,  air  and  fire- 
formed  the  basis  of  science,  art  and 
spirituality.  Too,  plant  and  animal 
and  universe  imagery  grew  organi- 
cally from  our  inner  forces;  they  were 
not  coerced  or  artificially  imposed. 
Colors  and  numbers  also  came  to  be 
recognized  as  having  an  inherent  sym- 
bolic value.  But  as  patriarchy  and 
the  repression  of  the  subconscious 
evolved,  so  did  the  cultural  meaning 
and  context  of  the  language. 

What  has  happened  is  a  distortion 
of  ancient  matriarchal  symbology, 
and  a  perversion  of  the  matriarchal 
view  of  nature  as  a  means  for  selling 


Shadow  Box/67 


the  patriarchal  view  of  life.  The  pen- 
tangle,  for  instance,  is  a  universal 
symbol  passed  on  to  us  today  through 
sources  like  witchcraft,  the  tarot,  or 
the  art  of  matriarchal  cultures.  But 
twentieth-century  technology  also 
passes  it  on,  this  time,  however, 
through  the  Texaco  Corporation  and 
the  "man  who  wears  the  star."  Simi- 
larly, the  bull,  symbol  of  the  matri- 
archal Taurean  Age,  today  charges 
into  suburban  kitchens  when  a  can  of 
Schlitz  is  opened.  The  patriarchal 
communicators  in  the  advertising 
business  couldn't  possibly  know  the 
full  meaning  of  these  tools.  All  they 
know  is  that  people  recognize  them. 

Close  to  the  co-optation  of  matri- 
archal symbols  is  the  co-optation  of 
nature  for  the  purpose  of  the  sell.  Pa- 
triarchy's products  are  enhanced  and 
sold  by  nature  settings.  Here,  what 
they  sell  isn't  as  important  as  the  set- 
ting they  use  to  sell  it.  For  instance, 
a  couple  walks  down  the  beach  at 
sunset;  he's  happy  because  his  den- 
tures are  clean.  Bing  and  his  family 
walk  through  the  orange  grove,  com- 
plete with  birds  and  sun,  chattering 
about  Minute  Maid.  How  many  TV 
commercials  start  off  with  the  sun 
shining  gloriously,  or  with  a  close-up 
of  a  fire  being  lit?  The  power  of  iced 
tea  is  so  great  it's  like  falling  into  the 
ecstacy  of  water.  Howling  wolves 
bring  our  attention  to  a  dogf  ood  com- 
mercial. In  other  words,  patriarchy 
continues  to  co-opt  nature  and  matri- 
archal symbols  that  hold  the  power  of 
life,  in  order  to  sell  its  culture. 

The  Wrap-Up 

Through  the  use  of  the  death- 
versus-life  concept,  the  co-optation  of 


matriarchal  symbols  and  nature,  tele- 
vision works  to  force  us  into  passive 
acceptance  (at  conscious  or  uncon- 
scious levels)  of  the  patriarchal  life 
view.  But  it  doesn't  work  alone.  TV 
feeds  into  the  whole  of  the  media  cul- 
ture. Recognition  that  it  is  one  frac- 
tion of  the  industry  is  critical  to  un- 
derstanding the  force  and  extent  of  its 
powers  in  molding  our  life  views. 

The  majority  of  profit-oriented  cul- 
ture is  controlled  by  the  same  small 
number  of  corporations  which  con- 
trol TV  network  programming:  RCA 
owns  NBC-TV  which  provides  pro- 
gramming to  215  affiliates.  In  addi- 
tion, it  owns  12  radio  stations  and  5 
TV  stations,  RCA  records,  as  well  as 
the  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  Pantheon  and 
Modern  Library  publishing  enter- 
prises. One  of  many  diverse  activities 
of  ABC-TV  is  owning  and  operating 
the  largest  movie  distribution  and  the- 
atre chain  in  the  U.S.  And  this  kind  of 
corporate  control  isn't  limited  to  the 
popular  and  literary  media:  the  cul- 
tural influence  of  the  networks  also 
reaches  into  the  more  specialized  edu- 
cational fields.  CBS,  for  instance, 
owns  W.  B.  Saunders  Company,  the 
world's  largest  publisher  of  scientific 
textbooks  and  audio-visual  learning 
aids.8  All  this  at  the  very  least  sug- 
gests that  TV  is  merely  a  hint  at  the 
role  of  the  patriarchal  culture  indus- 
try in  shaping  and  controlling  who  we 
are. 

Women's  Work 

Men  might  have  gotten  is  into  pa- 
triarchy, but  women  have  made  pos- 
sible humanity's  survival  in  it.  Wom- 
en sustain  life.  The  polarities  of  life 
and  death,  female  and  male,  are  bal- 


68/Quest 


anced  within  us,  and  within  the  fe- 
male principle.  The  meaning  of  strug- 
gle, growth,  emotions  and  survival  is 
knowledge  buried  in  our  womanspirit 
and  in  our  culture.  The  struggle  of  the 
present  feminist  movement  is  to  re- 
store the  power  of  women.  The  strug- 
gle to  restore  the  power  of  life  within 
ourselves  gives  hope  to  this  process. 

Women  have  unlimited  potential  to 
create  life-oriented  communications. 
Images  and  symbolism  rising  out  of 
our  subconscious  can  begin  to  waken 
the  inner  forces  of  women.  Our  com- 
munications and  cultural  events  can 
produce  magical  changes  in  con- 
sciousness. An  initial  step  in  reshap- 
ing the  television  influence  on  cultural 
definition  is  awareness  of  its  power 
and  of  the  ways  that  power  is  exer- 


cised. This  awareness,  if  possessed  by 
enough  women  and  if  articulated,  can 
begin  to  create  a  new  definition  of  cul- 
ture. Returning  to  and  recreating  life 
consciousness  can  release  the  power 
of  women:  the  culture  we  create  can 
be  a  source  of  life. 

When  you  open  up  your  life  to  the 
living,  all  things  come  spilling  in  on 
you 

And  you're  flowing  like  a  river,  the 
Changer  and  the  Changed. 
You  got  to  spill  some  over,  spill  some 
over,  spill  some  over,  over  all. 

Lyrics  by  Chris  Williamson, 
from  her  alburm,  "The 
Changer  and  the  Changed," 
©1975,  Bird  Ankles  Music 


Footnotes 


1  Nicholas  Johnson,  "The  Crush  of  Televi- 
sion," from  R.  J.  Glessing  and  W.  P.  White, 
editors,  Mass  Media:  The  Invisible  Environ- 
ment (Chicago:  Science  Research  Associates, 
Inc.,  1973),  p.  6.  (Science  Research  Asso- 
ciates is  a  subsidiary  of  IBM.) 

2  According  to  the  A.  C.  Nielsen  Com- 
pany, individuals  in  the  U.S.  watched  TV  on 
the  average  of  six  hours  and  seven  minutes 
a  day  in  1975.  See  Norman  Mark,  'The 
Seven  Minutes,  or,  Has  TV  Passed  the  Satu- 
ration Point?"  Washington  Star  (February 
22,  1976),  pp.  J-5  and  J-8. 

3  See  Z.  Budapest,  "Politics  of  Women's 
Religion,"  The  Feminist  Book  of  Lights  and 
Shadows  (Venice,  Calif.:  The  Feminist 
Wicca,  1975). 

4  See  Wilson  Bryan  Key,  Subliminal  Se- 
duction (New  York:  Signet  Books,  1973),  for 
detailed  research  on  this  concept. 

5 Ibid.,  pp.  156,  158.  A  one-minute  TV 
commercial  cost  between  $50,000  and 
$200,000  to  produce,  and  the  network  price 
for  running  it  ranges  from  $25,000  to 
$150,000. 


6 Ibid.,  pp.  163-64.  Commercials  capitalize 
on  the  state  of  anxiety  the  programs  already 
have  us  in.  Desperate  itching  or  painful 
headaches  elaborately  illustrated  on  the 
screen  are  highly  contagious  suggestions. 

7 See  Subliminal  Seduction,  op.  ext.,  espe- 
cially Chapter  III,  for  detailed  research  on 
this  concept. 

8  See  Directory  of  the  Networks  (New 
York:  The  Network  Project,  1973),  for  de- 
tailed research  on  the  scope  of  corporate 
network  holdings.  (At  the  time  of  this  writ- 
ing, the  Directory  was  obtainable  through 
The  Network  Project,  104  Earl  Hall,  Colum- 
bia University,  New  York,  NY  10027,  at  a 
cost  of  $2  for  individuals  and  $5  for  institu- 
tions.) 


Chris  Murphey  has  worked  in  femi- 
nist radio  for  the  past  four  years, 
helped  start  the  Feminist  Radio  Net- 
work, and  is  an  ex-media  junkie. 


Shadow  Box/69 


Lifting  the 


Veil  of  Is  is 


By  DANIELA  GIOSEFFI 
and  ESTHER  SWARTZ 

graphics  by  Cynthia  Gair 


The  following  is  an  interview  with 
poet/ dancer  Daniela  Gioseffi,  by  Es- 
ther Swartz. 

Daniela  Gioseffi  is  published  in  nu- 
merous anthologies  of  poetry  (Rising 
Tides,  20th  Century  American  Wom- 
en Poets)  and  in  periodicals  (The  Na- 
tion, Ms.,  The  Paris  Review).  She  has 
read  widely  at  colleges  and  universi- 
ties, most  recently  presenting  her 
"Birth  Dance  of  Earth, "  her  tribute  to 
women  and  the  earth  in  poetry  and 
dance. 

Esther  Swartz  is  Presidential  Assis- 
tant for  Cultural  Affairs  at  the  State 
University  of  New  York,  in  Buffalo, 
where  she  has  her  own  radio  inter- 
view program. 


ES:  Belly  dancing  would  seem  to 
suggest  the  stereotypic  image  of  the 
harem  or  the  nightclub,  Daniela.  How 
do  you  reconcile  this  with  your  femi- 
nist approach? 

DG:  It's  unfortunate  that  this 
dance,  once  a  sacred  ritual,  a  mystery, 
and  an  enactment  of  birth  created  by 
women,  for  women,  as  a  celebration 
of  fertility  and  the  Earth  Mother  God- 
dess, has  become  the  cafe"  spectacle 
that  it  has.  That's  why  I  like  to  take 
what  seems  to  be  the  epitome  of  a  sex- 
ist phenomenon  and  show  how  it  is 
really  part  of  women's  cultural  heri- 
tage— how  the  devolution  of  her  an- 
cient rituals  parallels  the  evolution  of 
the  female's  role  in  our  civilization. 

ES:  Have  you  traced  the  dance's 
origins  in  a  fairly  scholarly  way,  so 
that  you  can  talk  about  its  cultural 
devolution? 

DG:  When  I  first  took  up  the  dance, 
I  did  so,  like  so  many  women  in 


70/Quest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  2,  fall,  1976 


Lifting  the  Veil  of  Isis/71 


America,  because  I  was  interested  in 
an  enjoyable  form  of  exercise.  A  writ- 
er's life  is  very  sedentary.  But  I  guess 
that  because  I'm  a  writer,  I  couldn't 
resist  researching  the  origins  of  it.  I 
discovered  that  it's  portrayed  on  the 
ancient  burial  chambers  of  Thebes 
(c.  1400  B.C.).  It's  probably  what 
archaeologists  called  the  post-glacial 
"Women's  Dance,"  the  oldest  repre- 
sentation of  dance  known  to  civiliza- 
tion—the imprints  of  a  woman's 
dancing  feet  in  glacial  sand,  dating 
from  about  40,000  B.C.  It's  related  to 
the  ancient  dance  of  the  Greek  Mae- 
nads as  well.  I  also  found  that  the 
belly  dance  very  possibly  stems  from 
an  ancient  matriarchal  fertility  ritual. 
In  any  case,  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  is 
one  of  the  oldest  dances  known  to 
civilization.  In  the  Middle  East,  even 
in  this  century,  it  is  understood  to  be 
a  dance  created  by  women  for  women 
in  imitation  of  birth  contractions.  If  I 
say  that  the  so-called  "belly  rolls"  are 
imitations  of  birth  contractions,  then 
people  see  very  clearly  what  I'm  talk- 
ing about. 

ES:  And  is  that  how  it  is  a  prepara- 
tion for  childbirth? 

DG:  Yes.  It  is  an  exercise  of  the 
female  torso  for  natural  childbirth.  In 
obscure  areas  of  the  Middle  East,  as 
late  as  this  century,  it  was  still  per- 
formed by  tribeswomen  around  a 
woman  in  labor  to  hypnotize  her  into 
relaxing  with  her  birth  contractions. 
We  know  from  a  study  of  the  history 
of  obstetrics  that  primitive  women 
often  give  birth  in  the  kneeling  or 
squatting  position,  in  full  control  of 
their  abdominal  muscles.  When  you 
watch  the  cafe'  version  of  the  dance  as 


it  is  performed  today,  you  will  see 
what  I  mean.  When  the  contemporary 
belly  dancer  descends  to  her  knees, 
leans  back  and  works  her  stomach  in 
numerous  contractions,  she  calls  it 
"the  floor  work."  I  theorize  that  the 
floorwork  is  actually  a  remnant  of  the 
ancient  birth  mime. 

ES:  Is  that  how  you  see  it  as  a 
woman's  ritual  dance? 

DG:  Yes.  To  the  primitive  mind, 
the  involuntary  rolling  stomach 
movements  were  very  likely  thought 
of  as  the  magic  hocus  pocus  that 
brought  forth  life.  Very  early  peoples, 
unsure  of  what  part  the  male  played 
in  conception,  worshipped  woman  as 
the  divine  deliverer  of  life.  No  doubt 
early  woman  created  her  magic  mys- 
tery dance  of  worship — what  I  like  to 
call  a  "birth  dance" — in  much  the 
same  way  as  primitive  peoples  create 
rain  dances  or  war  dances.  As  a  mat- 
ter of  fact,  I  see  my  "Birth  Dance  of 
the  Earth"  as  a  counterpart  to  the 
male  war  dance  of  death  and  destruc- 
tion. War  dances  or  dances  of  the 
hunt  were  meant  to  rally  the  com- 
munal energies  of  men  just  before  the 
"big  kill."  Well,  my  birth  dance  is  a 
life  dance  meant  to  rally  the  com- 
munal energies  of  women.  It's  a  cele- 
bration of  female  freedom,  pride, 
potency— a  tribute  to  the  anima  and  a 
counterpart  of  the  male  war  dance, 
the  dance  of  the  animus. 

ES:  Has  anyone  discovered  at  what 
point  the  "birth  dance"  changed  from 
a  sacred  folk  ritual  celebrating  female 
fertility,  into  the  kind  of  sultan's  de- 
light, or  the  erotic  dance  that  we  see 
in  the  cafes? 


72/Quest 


DG:  Well,  first  I  should  say  that  I 
don't  deny  the  eroticism  of  this  dance, 
because  it  is  truly  erotic,  in  the  most 
sublime  sense,  having  to  do  with  birth 
and  life  and  celebration  of  the  female 
body.  Her  body  is  the  first  link  in  the 
food  chain  that  connects  us  to  the 
nutrients  of  earth.  We  all  pass  through 
the  body  of  the  mother  to  enter  the 
world;  we  come  from  her  womb,  her 
belly.  But  I  like  to  show  how  the  dance 
portrays  the  female  as  active  rather 
than  passive  sexual  object,  a  free  being 
rather  than  a  subject  of  the  42nd  Street 
mentality  of  smut.  We  in  the  western 
world  tend  to  equate  the  birth  dance, 
or  danse  du  ventre,  as  the  French  call 
it,  with  burlesque.  However,  it  was 
only  after  the  French  invaded  the 
Middle  East  that  it  became  a  wide- 
spread cafe*  spectacle.  Before  that,  it 
was  really  a  ritual,  or  folk  art,  prob- 
ably originating  as  a  sacred  dance  to 
the  various  earth  and  moon  fertility 
goddesses  of  pagan  religion— Isis, 
Ceres,  Demeter,  and  so  forth. 

ES:  But  then  how  does  it  become 
associated  with  the  harem  or  slave 
dance  of  Salome?  Or  the  dance  of  the 
seven  veils? 

DG:  We  know  that  the  harem  is 
characteristic  of  pre-Biblical  and  early 
Biblical  times.  Many  archaeologists 
theorize  that  at  the  fall  of  the  matri- 
archate,  and  with  the  advent  of  purely 
patriarchal  religions,  women  were  en- 
slaved in  harems.  Just  as  American 
Indians,  for  example,  came  to  perform 
their  sacred  rituals  on  the  reservation 
in  order  to  attract  the  tourist  trade 
and  survive  in  an  alien  culture,  so 
woman  was  forced  to  perform  her  an- 


cestral dance,  her  sacred  mystery,  for 
the  sultans  in  the  harems  of  old. 
Throughout  the  history  of  art,  reli- 
gious rites  became  mere  entertain- 
ments and  need  to  be  resurrected  back 
to  art.  It's  very  possible  that  the  cafe 
belly  dance  was  once  one  of  the  Eleu- 
sian  mysteries. 

ES:  I  know  that  the  dance  you  per- 
form is  always  preceded  by  a  recita- 
tion of  your  poetry,  especially  your 
poem  called  "Birth  Dance,  Belly  Dan- 
cer." But  if  you  didn't  explain  the 
dance's  history,  would  an  audience  be 
able  to  discern  the  difference  between 
the  consciousness-raising  birth  dance 
of  liberation  that  you  do  and  the  cafe 
belly  dance?  Have  you  taken  the  exact 
same  form,  or  is  it  just  that  you  have 
a  different  psychological  approach? 

DG:  I've  changed  the  basic  struc- 
ture of  the  dance  seen  in  the  cafe".  If 
you  go  back  to  ancient  mythology, 
you  find  a  great  deal  about  the  veil  of 
Isis.  To  lift  the  veil  of  Isis,  the  Egyp- 
tian Earth  Mother,  meant  to  discover 
the  secret  of  life.  I  enter  completely 
veiled  to  a  slow  tempo  in  order  to  in- 
dicate the  mystery  of  life,  that  which 
is  beyond  life,  rather  than  to  a  fast 
tempo  as  does  the  cafe' dancer.  Next,  I 
go  into  what  I  think  of  as  the  joy 
dance  of  woman's  body.  Then,  I've 
choreographed  the  floorwork  part  of 
the  dance  to  indicate  an  orgasmic 
birth  mime.  As  we  know,  the  final 
moment  of  natural  childbirth  is  for 
the  woman  an  orgasmic  one.  I  have 
tried  to  express  the  double  meaning  of 
woman  in  control  of  her  own  body 
and  sexually  free  and  potent.  The  final 
part  of  my  dance,  just  after  the  ec- 


Lifting  the  Veil /73 


IMQuest 


static  birth  mime,  is  a  celebration,  not 
only  that  the  child  is  born  and  life 
continues,  but  that  woman  is  free  and 
an  active  principle  in  the  universe,  the 
Earth  Mother.  That's  my  favorite  part 
of  the  dance — when  I  get  all  those 
women  up  on  their  feet,  joining  me  in 
a  celebration  of  their  own  bodies, 
alive  and  free  in  the  present,  dancing 
the  joy  of  being  women,  paying  ec- 
static tribute  to  the  life  force  which  is 
archetypically  feminine. 

ES:  Is  your  costume  the  same  as 
that  of  the  cafe  dancer? 

DG:  The  basic  costume  of  a  skirt 
worn  low  on  the  hips  is  as  old  as  the 
wall  paintings  of  Thebes,  but  I  don't 
wear  the  usual  costume  seen  in  the 
cafe's,  costumes  which  include  sequins 
and  gold  lame,  harsh  colors  and 
fringes.  I  have  tried  to  make  my  cos- 
tume more  classic  and  simple.  I've 
used  very  earthy  colors:  yellow, 
ochre,  green,  brown.  But  I  think  the 
flowing  skirt  is  important.  It  adds 
grace  to  the  dance,  as  does  the  veil. 
That's  probably  why  it  was  invented 
by  some  woman  so  long  ago.  I  think 
of  this  dance  as  a  quintessentially 
feminine  one. 

ES:  So  your  dance  is  really  quite 
different  from  the  usual  cafe'  belly 
dance,  isn't  it? 

DG:  Yes,  but  I  should  add  that  the 
basic  movements  are  the  same— the 
abdominal  rolls  and  flutters,  the  shim- 
mies, the  gliding  walk,  the  use  of  the 
finger  cymbals.  The  basic  movements 
that  survive  in  the  cafes  are  probably 
the  very  same  ones  created  by  women 
so  many  centuries  ago.  They  are  very 


much  the  same  movements  found  in 
primitive  dance  all  over  the  world. 
That's  why  I  like  to  think  of  my  "Birth 
Dance  of  the  Earth"  as  bridging  cul- 
tures. There  are  ancient  birth  dances 
in  many  different  cultures — African, 
Spanish,  Etruscan,  Hawaiian,  Persian 
—all  over  the  world. 

ES:  How  do  you  explain  the  current 
widespread  interest  in  the  belly  dance 
as  a  form  of  exercise  among  Ameri- 
can women?  It  seems  to  be  something 
of  a  rage  throughout  the  country. 

DG:  It's  an  interesting  phenome- 
non. Partly,  I  believe  it's  got  to  do 
with  the  loosening  of  Puritanical 
mores  and  the  demise  of  patriarchal 
religions,  where  the  idea  of  The  Virgin 
being  worshipped  supercedes  the  idea 
of  the  lusty  Earth  Mother.  Or  it's  just 
because  people  in  our  sedentary  cul- 
ture are  looking  for  various  forms  of 
exercise  and  the  belly  dance  is  very 
joyful  and  frees  the  body.  Unlike  bal- 
let, which  attempts  to  transcend  the 
body  and  rise  above  the  earth,  the 
belly  dance  admits  to  the  force  of 
gravity  and  uses  it.  It  is  easily  learned 
at  any  age.  I've  danced  for  women's 
organizations  and  college  students 
and  in  cultural  centers  for  women  of 
all  ages  and  backgrounds,  from  radi- 
cal feminists  to  extremely  conserva- 
tive housewives,  and  they  have  all  re- 
sponded favorably,  joining  me  in  the 
dance  and  feeling  a  sense  of  com- 
munal life  spirit.  It  has  been  very  re- 
warding and  proves  that  it  is  possible 
to  return  an  ancient  folk  art  to  its  ori- 
gins as  a  ritual  celebration.  My  theory 
is  that  women  always  have  been  at- 
tracted to  this  dance  and  that  their 
new  developing  freedom  has  given 


Lifting  the  Veil  /75 


them  the  opportunity  to  explore  it. 
Often,  men  have  joined  in,  celebrating 
the  anima,  the  life  force  of  the  femi- 
nine that  is,  or  can  be,  in  all  people 
to  one  degree  or  another.  But  I  feel 
there  is  an  almost  pre-cognitive  sense 
within  women  that  this  is  their  dance 
and  a  dance  that  belongs  to  them. 
That  is  why  I  like  to  refer  to  it  as  the 
Birth  Dance  of  Liberation  and  want  to 
return  it  to  its  rightful  place  as  part  of 
feminine  cultural  heritage.  For  me, 
feminism  has  become  a  spiritual  ideal, 
a  need  to  balance  the  destructive  ten- 
dencies of  the  technocratic  war  ma- 
chine with  the  constructive  urges  of 
the  procreative  earth.  I  want  to  revive 
the  spirit  of  earth  worship,  of  Mother 
Earth  as  life  giver.  That's  what  my 
belly  dance  is  all  about.  We  are  all  of 


us  the  orgasmic  fruit  of  Her  womb. 


BOOKS 

THE  FEMINIST  BOOK  OF  LIGHTS  AND  SHADOWS 

by  Z  Budapest 

$5.00 

A  FEMINIST  TAROT 

by  Sally  Gearhart  &  Susan  Rennie 

$3.00 

POSTERS 

by  Carol 
Clement 

SUSAN  B.  ANTHONY  COVEN  #1 
THROUGH  THE  LOOKING  GLASS 

$1.50 
$3.00 

NOTECARDS 

by  Carol 
Clement 

THE  BEGUINES   pkg.  of  5  cards  for 
MOONDANCE         pkg.  of  5  cards  for 

$2.00 
$2.00 

N.Y.  State  residents    A              PERSEPHONE  PRESS 
add  8%  sales  tax.            rffiSi        A  BRANGH  OF 

BS\           POMEGRANATE  PRODUCTIONS 

Bulk  prices  avail-         IK         r.f.d.  no.  i,  box  98a 
able  upon  request.          '  XVVw       monticello,  n.  y.  12701 

76/Quest 


w1 


1 


By  SHERI  MAEDA  &  JILL  SHAPIRO 


graphics  by  Josie  Cook 


Make  music 
Make  music 

Make  music  for  the  sake  of  the 

summer  sunshine 
Make  music  for  the  sake  of  the 

birds  high  fly  in'  yeah,  yeah 
Make  music  for  the  sake  of  people 

try  in' 

Make  music  for  the  sake  of  people 
dyin,  dyin,  dyin ,  dyin ,  aaahhh, 
hmmmmmm,  mmmmm 
Make  music  for  the  sake  of  the 

ocean  sighin , 
Make  music  to  calm  the  babies  cry  in  , 
Hush  little  baby,  don't  you  cry, 
I  will  sing  you  a  lullaby,  lullaby, 
lullaby,  lullaby. . . . 
"Make  Music"  by  Rena  Sinakin 
©1973,  Silk  Productions,  Inc. 
ASCAP 


Music,  the  healer  of  our  spirits,  was 
once  an  integral  part  of  our  collective 
and  private  celebrations  and  mourn- 
ings. Often  mythically  personified  as 
a  female  figure,  music  arises  out  of 
our  feelings— from  shouts  of  joy  to 
moans  of  sorrow.  It  encompasses  all 
emotion;  it  can  move  us  to  embrace  a 
communal  "high"  or  to  moments  of 
meditation.  Music  remains,  as  it  was 
for  our  ancestors,  a  primal  need.  And 
because  music  can  fulfill  many  spiri- 
tual needs,  it  is  infinitely  marketable. 

Carla  Bley,  innovative  jazz  musi- 
cian, composer  and  arranger,  ex- 
plains, "Ever  since  businessmen  dis- 
covered that  they  could  make  an  over- 
night fortune  by  gambling  on  which 
pop  group  would  appeal  to  the  largest 
segment  of  the  teen  audience,  record- 


Put  Another  Nickel  In/77 


ing  has  become  less  a  means  of  pre- 
serving great  moments  of  music,  and 
more  a  rat  race."1  Today,  the  music 
business  is  a  large  conglomerate  in- 
dustry. Commercial  music  involves 
performances;  the  production,  distri- 
bution and  promotion  of  records;  and 
innumerable  "satellite"  interests  such 
as  the  marketing  of  "star"  parapher- 
nalia. The  business  fills  our  ears  with 
this  year's  sound,  and  promotes  this 
year's  stars  to  the  tune  of  about  two 
billion  dollars  in  the  United  States 
alone.2  In  its  lust  for  profits,  it  ma- 
nipulates us  to  feel  we  should  buy 
whatever  it  markets.  Instead  of  re- 
cording music  that  is  as  varied  as  the 
individuals  or  cultures  who  create  it, 
commercial  music  offers  us  a  limited 
selection  of  items  that  have  been  pro- 
grammed to  sell.  It's  like  choosing 
among  shades  of  gray  and  being  told 
that  we're  seeing  the  entire  color  spec- 
trum. 

Money  and  Music 

As  with  all  patriarchal  corporate 
institutions,  the  motivating  factor  in 
today's  music  industry  is  money; 
money  corrupts  all  aspects  of  music, 
and  has  deleterious  effects  on  per- 
formers and  consumers  alike.  The 
search  for  profit  has  led  to  musical 
forms  determined  by  financial  or  pro- 
motional trends;  to  lyrical  content 
that  reinforces  individualism  and  con- 
sumerism, and  to  a  "bigger-is-better" 
mentality  about  technology.  Markets 
are  assessed,  and  then  bombarded 
with  music  and  advertisements  de- 
signed to  sell:  if  one  prepubescent, 
androgenous  male  vocalist  breaks  in- 
to the  pre-teen  market,  many  of  the 
same  mold  will  follow.  Many  pop 


performers  have  completely  revamp- 
ed their  images  to  cash  in  on  the  disco 
market.  If  a  performer  fall  into  such  a 
frenetic  search  for  hits,  the  result  is 
swift  and  simple:  her  contract  is  not 
renewed.  One's  right  to  record  one's 
music  is  based  solely  on  sales.  Com- 
mercial music,  "like  any  other  enter- 
prise motivated  by  competition  and 
income  .  .  .  is  run  by  numbers,  by 
sales  figures."3 

Carla  Bley  experienced  this  bias 
against  music  which  was  not  "hit" 
material.  "It  brings  tears  to  my  eyes, 
this  music,"  said  one  executive  after 
hearing  her  demo  tape,  "but  it  won't 
sell."4 

The  profits  in  the  music  industry 
are  split  almost  in  half— with  CBS 
(Columbia)  and  WEA  (the  Warner- 
Elektra-Atlantic  company)  taking  in 
about  50%  and  20  other  well-known 
corporations  sharing  almost  all  the 
rest.  The  remaining  5%  of  the  busi- 
ness of  recording  music  is  split  up 
among  the  approximately  2,500 
smaller  companies.5 

In  1973,  Country  Joe  McDonald  re- 
leased an  album  called  Paris  Sessions, 
with  a  mostly  female  band  and  some 
strong  feminist  lyrics.  During  the 
Spring  of  1974,  in  an  interview  on 
WGTB-FM,  he  discussed  the  cycle  of 
control  that  a  corporation  like  CBS 
has  over  the  industry: 

"You  can  go  out  and  you  buy  a 
CBS  phonograph  record  and  you  put 
it  on  your  record  player  and  this  in- 
spires you  to  become  a  musician.  So 
you  go  out  and  buy  some  Fender  am- 
plifiers and  Fender  instruments  which 
are  owned  by  CBS  and  you  make 
some  music.  You  also  get  maybe  some 
Leslie  speakers,  which  are  those  Ham- 
mond organ  speakers — CBS  owns 


Put  Another  Nickel  In/79 


that.  Then  you  perform  around  and 
get  a  record  contract  with  CBS.  CBS 
has  written  in  their  contract  that  you 
have  to  record  at  their  studio.  So  you 
record  at  their  studio  and  pay  them 
money  for  the  privilege  of  recording 
at  their  studio.  They  take  the  tapes 
and  they  press  them  in  their  pressing 
plant,  which  is  the  largest  in  the  coun- 
try, located  in  central  California. 
Then  they  send  the  records  out  to  Dis- 
count Record  Stores,  which  are  owned 
by  CBS  all  over  the  country,  and  you 
buy  the  record.  But  by  this  time  the 
equipment  you  use  is  out  of  date  be- 
cause they  change  the  equipment  to 
force  you  to  buy  new  equipment.  So 
you  go  down  to  Pacific  Stereo,  which 
is  owned  by  CBS  and  you  buy  a  whole 
new  stereo  to  play  that  record  on. 
Then  in  order  to  get  your  break,  you 
appear  on  a  lot  of  CBS  television 
shows  and  CBS  radio  shows  and  you 
also  get  incredible  advertising  because 
the  CBS  conglomerate  or  whatever 
you  would  like  to  call  it  has  regular 
advertising  space  on  a  mammoth  level 
in  every  major  industry  publication  in 
the  country.  So  competing  with  that  is 
very  difficult  and  bucking  the  system 
in  any  way  is  very  difficult."6 

Thus  each  segment  of  the  recording 
industry  supports  each  of  the  others, 
and  the  industry  grows  on  its  profits. 

A  recording  artist  concerned  with 
the  integrity  of  her  work  has  few  op- 
tions. She  may  attempt,  as  Carla  Bley, 
Holly  Near,  and  members  of  the  Oli- 
via Recording  collective  have  done,  to 
start  a  recording  company  of  her 
own,  by-passing  the  large  recording 
studios,  which  have  little  or  no  inter- 
est in  an  artist's  musical  development. 
But  alternative  record  producers  must 
still  confront  the  long  arms  of  com- 


mercial distribution.  Bley,  co-founder 
of  the  JCOA  record  label  (which  re- 
leases complex  and  unique  jazz  and 
classical  music),  describes  her  difficul- 
ties and  frustration: 

"The  few  distributors  who  would 
accept  our  record  often  ended  up  not 
paying  us;  and  getting  the  records  into 
stores  directly  was  almost  impossible. 
We  ended  up  doing  most  of  our  sell- 
ing in  this  country  by  mail."  7 

On  the  other  hand,  if  an  artist  is  ac- 
cepted by  a  major  company  and 
chooses  to  take  a  recording  contract 
with  it,  she  loses  control  over  her 
materials.  Bley  states,  "Those  among 
us  who  had  been  blessed  with  a  hand- 
out record  date  by  an  adventurous 
executive  with  a  soft  spot  for  good 
music,  often  had  to  give  up  most  of 
our  rights  when  we  signed  up.  Like 
not  being  allowed  to  publish  our  own 
compositions,  thereby  cutting  our 
copyright  royalties  in  half  and  losing 
ownership  of  our  music  permanently. 
Or  suffering  the  frustration  of  having 
the  album  remain  unreleased  for  long 
periods,  badly  promoted  or  distrib- 
uted, or  discontinued  altogether.  Not 
to  mention  the  trauma  of  being  drop- 
ped when  contract-renewal  time  came 
around  again,  for  not  having  sold 
enough  records." 

Although  many  women  singers 
write  material,  their  producers  often 
choose  the  songs  of  successful  male 
songwriters  instead.  For  example, 
Emmylou  Harris  recorded  an  album 
called  Gliding  Bird  on  a  small  label, 
Jubilee.  Its  strong  point  is  five  songs 
she  wrote.  In  the  past  year  Warner  re- 
leased two  albums  by  her,  and  did  not 
include  any  song  she  wrote  alone  (al- 
though on  each  album  there  is  one 
song  she  co-wrote  with  men). 


80/Quest 


©JosieCook,  1976 


Put  Another  Nickel  In/81 


The  producer  selects  the  studio,  the 
musicians,  the  material,  all  related 
graphics,  and  oversees  all  musical  ar- 
rangements on  the  album.  The  per- 
former finds  herself  defined  as  a  com- 
modity; the  producer's  job  is  to  sell 
her. 

Corruption  of  the  Music 

Terry  Garthwaite,  guitarist,  com- 
poser and  singer,  argues  that  women 
can  make  "meaningful  statements 
about  women's  feelings  through  and 
around  music,  rather  than  the  tradi- 
tional statements  which  have  fre- 
quently been  put  in  the  mouths  of 
women  by  male  writers."  Although 
many  female  performers  write  mate- 
rial, their  producers  have  nothing  re- 
sembling Garthwaite's  statement  in 
mind  as  a  priority.  Maria  Muldaur's 
version  of  "I'm  a  Woman"  is  an  ex- 
ample of  the  female  experience  de- 
scribed by  one  of  the  industry's  most 
prolific  and  successful  male  song- 
writing  teams: 

/  can  wash  out  44  pairs  of  sox 

and  have  'em  on  the  line 
Starch  and  iron  2  dozen  shirts  be- 
fore you  can  count  from  1  to  9 
'Cause  I'm  a  woman,  W-O-M-A-N 
If  you  come  to  me  sickly,  you  know 

I'll  make  you  well 
And  if  you  come  to  me  all  mixed  up, 

you  know  I'll  break  the  spell 
And  if  you  come  to  me  hungry,  you 

know  I'll  fill  you  full  of  my  grits 
And  if  it's  lovin  you  want,  I  can 

kiss  you  and  give  you  the  shiverin 

fits— 

"I'm  a  Woman,"  by  Jerry  Leiber 
and  Mike  Stoller,  ©Triomusic 
BMI 

Industry  control  over  music  has  a 


second  effect:  the  pervasive  uniform- 
ity of  musical  structure  and  content  is 
reinforced  by  the  use  of  specialized 
mechanical  methods  to  "perfect"  the 
sound  of  each  cut  on  an  album.  To 
cut  down  on  possible  uniqueness  and 
idiosyncracies  of  style,  the  same  en- 
gineers, back-up  musicians,  and  re- 
cording studios  are  used  repeatedly 
for  all  manner  of  different  artists.  A 
distinguishable  voice  is  electronically 
processed  to  filter  out  rough  edges 
and  any  quirks  which  might  make 
that  voice  change  from  one  recording 
to  the  next.  Thus,  we  have  the  Linda 
Ronstadt  "voice,"  no  matter  what  she 
sings,  regardless  of  her  mood  that 
day.  The  "voice"  is  a  commodity  and, 
like  a  trademark,  must  be  instantly 
recognizable  with  each  record. 

Country  Joe  McDonald  summed  it 
up  when  he  said  that  the  control  of  the 
record  industry  leads  an  artist  to  feel  a 
cultural  oppression  that  defines  the 
music  in  length,  in  texture  and  in  sub- 
ject matter.10 

Some  smaller  companies  are  work- 
ing against  this  cultural  oppression. 
Mary  McCaslin  appeared  on  "So- 
phie's Parlor"  women's  music  show, 
WGTB-FM,  Washington,  and  talked 
about  her  contract  with  Philo  Rec- 
ords, a  company  that  believes  in  its 
artists  and  pays  them  to  record  in- 
stead of  charging  them  for  the  use  of 
the  studio.  Every  Philo  Record  cover 
states:  "Philo  Records  encourages  the 
artist  to  assume  full  creative  control 
of  his  or  her  album.  This  record  is  as 
conceived  of  by  the  artist.11 

Within  the  larger  record  companies 
it  is  true,  however,  that  artists  who 
play  instruments  well  and  who  are 
taken  seriously  as  musicians  have 
more  control  over  the  production  of 


82/Quest 


their  records.  Wendy  Waldman 
speaks  of  the  process  through  which 
she  gained  more  power  over  her  re- 
cording; during  the  recording  of  her 
first  album,  she  felt,  "I  had  put  all  my 
blood  and  all  my  soul  into  these  tracks 
and  into  these  vocals,  it  had  all  been 
under  my  control,  how  could  I  possi- 
bly turn  over  the  string  arrangements 
to  some  total  stranger?"12  Still,  we 
have  a  few  models  of  strong  women 
with  technical  knowledge  who  have 
had  some  personal  success  in  fighting 
for  control  of  their  own  work.  Inmost 
cases,  however,  commercial  music 
presents  a  formula,  a  tried-and-true 
method  for  making  money  through 
music.  If  it  made  a  hit  once,  it'll  make 
one  again. 

The  industry's  overriding  concern 
for  marketable  merchandise,  especial- 
ly where  it  concerns  women,  has  a 
third  result:  the  body  of  a  woman  art- 
ist, rather  than  her  music,  is  used  to 
sell  records.  For  example,  one  recent 
album  by  Carly  Simon  pictures  her 
wearing  a  flimsy  black  nightgown 
and  high  black  boots:  she's  on  her 
knees,  legs  apart.  The  title  of  the  al- 
bum is  Playing  Possum,  which,  some 
music  tabloids  tell  us,  is  an  "in"  joke 
(sexual,  or  couldn't  you  guess?),  be- 
tween a  sensual  Simon  and  her  hus- 
band, James  Taylor.  A  recent  album 
by  Elkie  Brooks  pictures  her  wrap- 
ping her  nude  body  awkwardly 
around  a  long  feather  boa;  the  album 
is  called  Rich  Man's  Woman. 

Recently,  some  women  have  taken 
steps  to  change  this.  The  Deadly 
Nightshade,  an  all-women  good-time 
music  band,  had  a  clause  in  their  rec- 
ord contract  with  Phantom  Records 
stating  that  no  pictures,  slogans,  pro- 
motional material,  etc.,  could  be  re- 


leased without  their  consent.  They 
would  not  allow  their  music  to  be  sold 
through  the  use  of  blatant  or  subcon- 
scious sexism.13  Still,  the  vast  majority 
of  records  are  the  total  or  near-total 
creations  of  male  consciousness. 

The  cooptation  of  political  music 
effects  the  corporate  control  of  the 
record  industry.  The  message  is  that 
the  records  we  buy  are  testimonials  to 
a  lifestyle  we  should  aspire  to.  In  the 
1960's,  for  example,  both  the  youth 
counterculture  and  those  enamored  of 
its  myth  adopted  the  music  of  the  pro- 
test movement.  Buying  an  album  by  a 
performer  marketed  or  billed  as  a 
"rebel"  became  for  many  the  sum  total 
of  their  own  political  or  social  insu- 
bordination. While  much  of  that  de- 
cade's music  was  written  to  rally  peo- 
ple around  causes  promoting  social 
justice,  the  industry  coopted  a  few 
political  "stars"  and  ignored  or  down- 
played the  vast  numbers  of  creative 
political  musicians.  The  mentality  of 
"there's  room  at  the  top  for  only  so 
many  'political'  stars"  prevails. 

Countless  fine  musicians  remain  in 
relative  obscurity  because  of  the  in- 
dustry's star  quota.  Some  survive 
well — they  move  to  smaller  labels, 
tour  smaller  circuits,  live  on  less 
money.  Often,  though,  they  suffer  the 
debilitating  anguish  of  believing  they 
are  not  "good"  enough;  of  believing 
in  (pardon  the  allusion)  Pie-in-the- 
Sky — Stardom. 

If  the  Pie-in-the-Sky  wedge  is  rela- 
tively small  for  political  musicians, 
the  wedge  allotted  for  women  is 
minuscule,  and  that  for  political 
women  is  hardly  discernible  in  the 
commercial  market.  The  industry 
doesn't  think  that  politics,  especially 
politics  coupled  with  women,  sells 


Put  Another  Nickel  In/83 


te/Quest  ©  Josie  Cook,  1976 


records.  The  industry  has  no  interest 
in  selling  records  calling  for  the  rever- 
sal of  a  system  that  proves  profitable 
to  itself.  They  respond  to  what  they 
call  "Women's  Lib"  by  recording  more 
women,  but  in  fact  they  are  simply 
creating  a  watered-down  version  of 
"women's  music"  for  an  expanding 
and  lucrative  market.  They  give  us 
our  "stars";  we  buy  the  records  as  if 
the  mere  act  of  purchasing  a  woman's 
record  is  a  political  act.  Fooled  again. 

Effects  on  Participants 

The  effects  of  commercial  music  on 
its  participants — performers  and  list- 
eners alike— are  alienation  and  pas- 
sivity. For  the  performer,  the  manic 
competition  for  "a  hit"  isolates  her, 
not  only  from  other  musicians,  but 
from  the  audiences  as  well: 
Stars,  they  come  and  go 
They  come  fast  or  slow 
They  go  like  the  last  light  of  the  sun, 
all  in  a  blaze  and  all  you  see  is  glory 
But  those  who've  seen  it  all 
They  live  their  lives  in  sad  cafes  and 
music  halls 

We  always  have  a  story 

"Stars,"  by  Janis  Ian, 
©1972  Mine  Music  Ltd. 
April  Music,  Inc.,  ASCAP 
Audiences  are  a  faceless  mass,  a 
market  one  must  please  or  appease  for 
a  hit.  The  faceless  mass  is  fickle— its 
pleasure  must  be  courted,  calculated, 
and  won  at  any  cost.  The  cost  for  the 
artist  consists  of  surrendering  her  con- 
trol over  her  career;  in  some  cases 
over  her  life.  The  musician  presents  a 
"star"  persona  to  the  audience.  Be- 
cause she  has  no  responsibility  for  her 
music,  she  is  cut  off  from  responsi- 
bility to  her  audience.  If,  after  paying 


dues,  a  woman  can  accrue  enough 
power  in  the  commercial  recording  in- 
dustry to  have  control  over  her  mate- 
rial, she  may  be  able  to  produce  po- 
litically responsible  material.  Yet  it  is 
unlikely  that  she  will  seek  ideas,  input 
and  feedback  from  a  political  com- 
munity, since  being  a  "star"  means 
being  separate  from  the  rest  of  us. 

Music  and  Politics — Solutions 

Throughout  our  past,  tunes  and 
lyrics  have  been  used  to  retell  stories 
that  passed  on  a  culture.  Songs  unify 
us  for  work,  for  struggle,  for  celebra- 
tion. Music  heals  the  body,  lifts  the 
spirits,  and  is  an  integral  part  of  all 
ritual.  Before  commercial  music  did  it 
for  us,  everyone  shared  in  the  making 
of  music,  and  in  some  cultures  and 
communities,  such  a  practice  still  pre- 
vails. Such  communities  can  show  us 
possibilities  for  music  that  once  again 
communicates  among  many  people. 
Well,  if  it  weren't  for  the  music  bring- 
ing us  together  in  a  natural  way.  .  .  . 

"If  It  Weren't  for  the  Music," 
by  Cris  Williamson, 
©Cris-Peter  Music,  BMI 

Recorded  music  can  be  used  to  do 
something  other  than  pacify  and  mis- 
lead the  masses.  Instead,  it  could  help 
awaken  new  ideas  and  feelings  lead- 
ing to  radical  changes  in  society.  A 
song,  because  of  its  emotional  power, 
can  evoke  a  level  of  energy  in  an  audi- 
ence unparalleled  by  any  article  or 
speech,  simply  because  music  speaks 
to  our  spirits  as  well  as  to  our  intel- 
lects. 

Feminist  musicians  have  only  be- 
gun to  tap  this  potential  power.  Mar- 
gie Adam,  for  example,  has  raised  the 
issue  of  what  a  performer  does  with 


Put  Another  Nickel  In/85 


the  energy  called  up  at  a  concert.  She 
feels  it  is  imperative  that  the  energy  be 
taken  by  the  audience  back  to  their 
communities,  and  directed  in  impor- 
tant work — perhaps  in  a  political  issue 
in  need  of  protest,  in  funds  for  a 
women's  center,  etc.  This  way,  the 
so-called  dichotomy  between  the  cul- 
tural and  the  political  ceases  to  exist; 
the  energy  swings  around  in  a  spiral 
connecting  them  and  creating  growth. 

As  audiences,  we  need  to  take  re- 
sponsibility for  our  part  in  the  rela- 
tionship with  a  performer,  so  we  can 
better  support  our  political  work  with 
the  strength  derived  from  communi- 
cative music.  Because  feminist  con- 
certs are  based  on  our  participation 
in  a  ritual  of  our  own  community, 
we  can  break  down  traditional  audi- 
ence alienation  from  the  star.  We  can 
encourage  circular  communication 
and  give  meaning  to  the  event. 

As  one  solution  to  the  commercial 
music  morass,  women  have  been 
forming  small,  accessible  recording 
companies,  such  as  Olivia,  Paredon, 
Lima  Bean,  and  Redwood.  Such  inde- 
pendent companies  allow  a  performer 
to  record  her  entire  dynamic  range- 
vocally,  musically,  spiritually  and 
politically.  Unlike  their  commercial 
counterparts,  they  concentrate  on 
content  and  expression  rather  than  on 
product  and  technology.  For  instance, 
the  all-woman-produced  Olivia  re- 
cordings of  Meg  Christian  and  Cris 
Williamson  were  labors  of  love,  not 
of  money,  and  women's  overwhelm- 
ingly joyous  reactions  to  them  bear 
this  out.  The  musician  can  be  nur- 
tured in  an  environment  over  which 
she  has  some  measure  of  control. 

We  cannot  expect  any  one  individ- 
ual within  the  commercial  system  to 


produce  music  that  is  politically  via- 
ble since  the  industry  isolates  and 
individualizes  all  musical  efforts. 
Consciousness  is  predicated  on  sup- 
port— something  a  performer  cannot 
find  if  she  is  isolated,  or  if  she  lacks 
the  power  of  control.  As  listeners,  we 
can  offer  support  and  criticism  in  an 
effort  to  break  down  artificial,  iso- 
lating barriers  between  performers 
and  audiences.  Most  importantly,  we 
can  listen  to  what  we  hear. 
Love  of  my  life,  I  am  crying,  I 

am  not  dying,  I  am  dancing 
Dancing  along  in  the  madness,  there 

is  no  sadness 
Only  the  song  of  the  soul 
And  we'll  sing  this  song,  why  don't 

you  sing  along, 
And  we  can  sing  for  a  long,  long  time 
"Song  of  the  Soul," 
by  Cris  Williamson, 
©1975  Bird  Ankles  Music,  BMI 


Footnotes 

1Carla  Bley,  "The  New  Music  Strikes  a 
Responsive  Chord,"  Unicorn  Times,  III:  8 
(Washington,  D.C.:  Unicorn  Times  Publish- 
ing Co.,  May,  1976),  p.  1. 

2  Standard  and  Poors  Industry  Survey, 
Vol.  I  (New  York:  Standard  and  Poors  Pub- 
lishing Co.,  Nov.  20,  1975),  p.L21. 

3Katherine  Orloff,  Rock'n'  Roll  Woman 
(Los  Angeles:  Nash  Publishing,  1974),  p.  7. 

4Bley,  p.  1. 

5  See  Billboard's  Annual  Talent  in  Action, 
(Dec.  28,  1974),  pp.  8,  16,  22,  26,  30,  32,  34; 
and  Billboard's  International  Buyer's  Guide, 
1973-74,  Section  2,  pp.  16-24. 

6  Country  Joe  McDonald,  interview  on 
Spiritus  Cheese  Show,  WGTB-FM,  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  Feb.,  1974. 

7 Bley,  p.  4. 

8  Bley,  p.  4. 

9  Orloff,  'Terry  Garthwaite  Interview,"  p. 
59. 


86/Quest 


i°  Country  Joe  McDonald,  WGTB-FM, 
interview. 

11  Mary  McCaslin,  interview  on  "Sophie's 
Parlor/'  WGTB-FM,  Washington,  D.C., 1 
Aug.,  1974. 

12Orloff,  Rock'n  Roll  Woman,  "Wendy 
Waldman  Interview,"  p.  186. 

13  Deadly  Nightshade,  interview  on  "Sop- 
hie's Parlor,"  WGTB-FM,  Washington, 
D.C.,  March,  1975. 

14  Margie  Adam,  interview  with  Feminist 
Radio  Network,  "Music  &  Feminism," 
Washington,  D.C.,  no  date. 

Sheri  Maeda  works  with  the  Femi- 
nist Radio  Network  (FRN),  a  national 
audio-tape  production  and  distribu- 
tion collective  in  Washington,  D.C., 
and  is  a  former  member  of  "Sophie's 
Parlor. " 

fill  Shapiro  is  a  member  of  "Sop- 
hie's Parlor, "  an  on-air  feminist  radio 
collective  on  WPFW,  Washington, 
D.C. 


books  for,  by,  and  about  women 
non-sexist  children's  books 
women's  records,  posters,  buttons 

TORONTO 

WOMEN'S 

BOOKSTORE 

85  Harbord  Street 
Toronto,  Ontario 
922-8744 

mail  order  catalogue  available 


Marge  Piercy  •  Judy  Grahn  •  Speakout  for  Economic  Justice 
Z  Budapest  •  Health  •  Franny  Chicago  Play  •  Mary  Daly 

Women  of  the 

Post,  Present,  and  Future 

speak  out  for  themselves  on 
the  Feminist  Radio  Networit 

Bessie  Lou  Cornett  •  Women  and  Alcoholism  •  Credit 
Classic  Blues  •  La  Belle  •  Prostitution  •  Bonnie  Raitt 
Waitresses  •  Tales  for  Children  •  Lesbian  Mothers 

A  nonprofit  organization  -  Catalog  of  tapes  available  on  request 

 Feminist  Radio  Network  

P.O.  Box  5537  Washington,  D.C.  20016  (202)  .244-2331 


Put  Another  Nickel  In/ 87 


A  ■•SIGNS 

BBH  Journal  of  Women  in  Culture  and  Society 

SIGNS:  JOURNAL  OF  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  AND  SOCIETY,  a  new 

quarterly  from  The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  is  an  international  voice 
for  scholarship  about  women. 

A  sampling  of  articles  from  the  first  volume: 

Carroll  Smith-Rosenberg,  The  Female  World  of  Love  and  Ritual:  Relations 
between  Women  in  Nineteenth-Century  America 
Helene  Cixous,  The  Laughter  of  the  Medusa 

Marnie  Mueller,  The  Economic  Determinants  of  Volunteer  Work  by  Women 
Janet  M.  Todd,  Images  of  a  Feminist:  The  Biographies  of  Mary  Wollstonecraft 
Nancy  Tanner  and  Adrienne  Zihlman,  Women  in  Evolution:  Subsistence  and 
Social  Organization  in  Early  Hominids. 
James  A.  Brundage,  Prostitution  in  Medieval  Canon  Law 

In  every  issue: 

REVIEW  ESSAYS.  Regular  assessments  of  research  and  publications  on 
women  in  the  various  disciplines  and  professions.  A  different  group  of  related 
disciplines  is  covered  in  each  issue;  each  group  is  treated  once  annually. 
ARCHIVES.  Important  documents,  essays,  and  fiction  retrieved  from  the 
past,  accompanied  by  historical  notes  and  commentary. 
REPORTS/REVISIONS.  Notes  on  research-in-progress,  meetings,  new 
periodicals,  programs,  etc. 

BOOK  REVIEWS.  Concise  reviews  of  current  titles. 

A  SUPPLEMENTARY  ISSUE  in  Spring  1976:  Proceedings  of  the  Conference 
on  Occupational  Segregation  held  at  Wellesley  College  in  May  1975. 

Editor,  Catharine  R.  Stimpson,  Barnard  College 

Associate  Editors,  Joan  N.  Burstyn,  Douglass  College,  Rutgers  University; 
Domna  C.  Stanton, Barnard  College    Managing  Editor  Sandra  M.  Whisler 


ORDER  FORM      A  SB  •  SIGNS 

Please  enter  my  subscription  for  one  year,  beginning  with  the  inaugural  issue, 
Autumn  1975. 

Institutions,  $16.00    Individuals,  $12.00    Students  (with  professor's 
signature),  $9.60     Outside  the  United  States,  add  $1 .00  to  cover  postage. 

Name  

Address   

City   State   Zip   

Mail  with  your  check  or  purchase  order  to: 

SIGNS:  JOURNAL  OF  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  AND  SOCIETY 

The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  11030  Langley  Avenue, 
Chicago,  Illinois  60628 

Que 


88/Quest 


Notes  About  Writing 

We  have  often  been  told  that  Quest  is  abstract  or  "too  hard  to  read." 
We  seek  concrete  suggestions  on  how  to  present  political  analysis  (which 
is  never  going  to  be  "easy  reading"),  more  clearly.  We  try  to  provide  a 
balance  of  different  styles  of  writing  in  each  issue,  but  often  we  do  not  re- 
ceive enough  variety  in  the  manuscripts  you  submit.  Our  goal  in  editing 
is  clarity;  whatever  the  author  is  saying,  we  work  to  make  it  as  clear  as 
possible. 

For  most  of  us,  our  writing  reflects  our  education.  We  were  trained,  if 
at  all,  to  write  "essays"  and  "papers."  It  has  been  suggested  that  women 
who  write  for  Quest  might  experiment  with  a  more  journalistic  style.  We 
don't  know  how  well  it  works  to  use  this  style  for  political  analysis,  but 
we  welcome  such  efforts.  Some  examples  that  might  be  useful  models  are 
articles  in  The  Progressive,  Social  Policy,  or  The  New  Republic. 

We  would  also  like  to  print  more  interviews,  and  we  encourage  you  to 
submit  them.  Another  suggestion  is  taping  a  discussion  and  making  that 
into  an  article.  Much  of  our  history  is  not  recorded  because  activists  sel- 
dom take  time  to  write.  But  it  is  important  to  exchange  our  stories,  our 
growth,  and  our  understanding.  We  would  like  to  create  new  ways  to 
share  this  learning,  since,  though  much  of  our  verbal  dialog  is  our  best 
analysis,  it  never  gets  on  paper. 

For  each  issue,  we  send  out  mailings  and  announcements  to  as  many 
women  as  possible  to  encourage  submissions  to  Quest.  We  also  intend 
the  back  cover  blurbs  as  an  open  invitation  for  articles.  Writing  is  not 
easy  for  any  of  us.  Our  challenge,  as  feminists,  is  to  find  new  ways  to  ex- 
press our  experiences  and  our  analysis  so  that  they  aid  us  better  in  chang- 
ing society. 


Articles  should  be  double  spaced  and  submitted  in  duplicate  (original 
plus  one  copy).  Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10 
typewritten  pages)  for  reviews,  responses,  and  short  articles,  to,  at  most, 
7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where  appropriate,  biblio- 
graphic footnotes  should  be  typed  at  the  end  of  the  article.  All 
manuscripts,  poems,  and  graphics  should  be  original,  unpublished  ma- 
terial and  must  be  accompanied  by  a  stamped  self-addressed  envelope. 


Future  Issues 

WORK,  WORK,  WORK 

Winter,  1976-77  Vol.  Ill,  No.  3 

Work  is  an  essential  part  of  our  lives:  of  our  survival,  our  self -identity, 
and  our  group  identification.  Crucial  to  feminist  vision  are  new  ways  of 
viewing  and  organizing  work.  Areas  for  articles  include:  What  is  defined 
and  rewarded  as  work — for  men  or  women;  how  does  work  affect  our 
self-concept,  especially  in  regard  to  class,  race,  and  sex;  what  are  feminist 
modes  of  organizing  work.  Copy  Deadline:  August  15,  1976 

RACE ,  CLASS  &  CULTURE 

Spring,  1977  Vol.  Ill,  No.  4 

While  feminists  create  a  "women's  culture,"  we  learn  about  our  differ- 
ences as  women;  we  must  examine  how  race  goes  beyond  the  color  of  our 
skin  and  class  means  more  than  just  the  money  we  make.  We  seek  articles 
for  this  issue  that  discuss  various  aspects  of  the  relationship  between  poli- 
tical development  and  culture,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  issues  of 
class  and  race.  Copy  Deadline:  November  15,  1976 

KALEIDOSCOPE  TWO 

Summer,  1977  Vol.  IV,  No.  1 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  three  years  of  publication  and 
for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics  and 
ideas  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous  articles. 

Copy  Deadline:  February  15,  1977 

INTERNATIONAL 

Fall,  1977  Vol.  IV,  No.  2 

Advances  for  women  demand  that  our  analysis  and  strategies  be 
drawn  from  different  angles,  from  different  cultural  and  national  set- 
tings. This  issue  will  be  devoted  to  international  perspectives  and  articles 
with  a  focus  on  varying  feminist  concerns  and  activities,  theoretical  and 
programmatic  developments,  and  how  these  are  affected  by  different  so- 
cio-economic and  governmental  factors.      Copy  Deadline:  May  1,  1977 


