QUEST    u" 

a  feminist  quarterly 


rhe  SELFHOOD  of  WOMEN 


f\J   TCCTT  vol.  I  no.  3 

w  LJ  L-ykj  1  winter> 1975 

a  feminist  quarterly 

The  SELFHOOD  of  WOMEN 

contents 

SELF  DEFINITION  and  POLITICAL  SURVIVAL 

Charlotte  Bunch  2 

CRITIQUE  and  COMMENTARY 

Thelma  Catalano  16 

MY  OTHER,  MY  MOTHER-A  Poem 

Martha  Courtot  20 

WOMEN  HEALERS  vs.  the  AMA 

Rosemary  Rodewald  21 

CLASS  REALITIES:  Create  a  New  Power  Base 

Karen  Kollias  28 

IT'S  ALL  DIXIE  CUPS  to  ME 

Rita  Mae  Brown  44 

SUZY  &  JANE  &  GREGOR  &  ME-A  Poem 

Naomi  Rachel  51 

IF  ALL  ELSE  FAILS,  I'm  still  a  MOTHER 

Lucia  Valeska  52 

WRITTEN  WORD: 

ANGELA  DAVIS-An  Autobiography 

Sandra  Flowers  65 

RESPECT-A  Poem 

Randy  Ross  71 

LOOKING  BACKWARD.  .  .BRIEFLY 

Gerri  Traina  72 

Copyright  ©  1975  by  Quest:  a  feminsit  quarterly, 
Inc.  All  rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission 
is  strictly  prohibited.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  pub- 
lished four  times  a  year  in  January,  April,  July,  and  Octo- 
ber by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  1909  Que  St., 
N.W.  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Application  to  mail  at 
second-class  postage  rates  is  pending  at  Washington  D.C. 

Printed  by  Diana  Press,  Baltimore,  Maryland,  U.S.A. 
Subscription  rates  are  $7.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 

.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $10.00/year  overseas; 

2.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.00/sample  copy.  Address 
all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box 
8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003. 


staff 


Copy  Editor 

Charlotte  Bunch 

Managing  Editor 
Beverly  Fisher 

Design  Editor 
Alexa  Freeman 

Promotion  Editor 
Karen  Kollias 

Editors 

Jane  Dolkart 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Mary-Helen  Mautne 
Emily  Medvec 
Gerri  Traina 

advisory 
committee 

Dolores  Bargowski 
Rita  Mae  Brown 
Jean  O'Leary 
Sidney  Oliver 
Juanita  Weaver 

production 
assistants 

Liz  Milbrandt 
Lee  Schwing 
Gaile  Toko 

Cover  design  by  Casey 
Czarnik. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua13wash 


Notes  on  reader  responses 

We  regret  that  this  issue  does  not  include  any  readers'  responses. 
We  are  eager  to  receive  more  feedback— letters  and  comments, 
in  all  forms— to  keep  us  in  touch  with  your  opinions  and  ideas 
about  Quest.  However,  we  do  not  plan  a  "Letters  to  the  Editors" 
section  and  should  clarify  the  kind  of  responses  that  we  will  print 
in  the  journal  itself.  We  seek  substantive  critique  and  commentary 
on  previous  articles.  We  want  to  print  readers'  analysis  and  ques- 
tions, both  long  and  short  responses,  which  are  themselves  the 
seeds  of  further  (future)  articles.  We  hope  that  this  kind  of  readers' 
response  will  further  debate  on  issues  raised  previously  as  well  as 
suggest  more  directions  for  future  debate  and  articles.  Write  us 
at  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington  DC,  20003. 


Change  of  Address 

For  change  of  address,  please  give  eight  weeks  notice  and 
include  the  mailing  label  of  your  most  recent  copy  of  Quest: 
a  feminist  quarterly.  Bulk  rates  available  upon  request. 
Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request. 


graphic   by  Cynthia  Gair 


Imagine  that  you  are  given  a  large, 
blank  piece  of  paper,  pencils  and  cray- 
ons, and  told  to  depict  your  self  in  30 
minutes.  You  are  to  demonstrate  who 
you  are,  what  you  do  and  feel,  who  and 
what  influences  you.  You  can  draw  a 
picture,  write  a  list,  make  an  airplane,  or 
whatever  you  want.  In  response  to  this 
assignment,  I  draw  a  multi-layered  pie 
with  slices  and  overlapping  circles.  In 
the  process,  I  discovered  a  lot  about 
how  I  saw  myself. 

There  were  some  things  about  my- 
self that  were  given,  out  of  my  control: 
my  sex,  race,  class  background,  family 
patterns,  childhood  turf,  and  general 
physical  make-up.  All  told,  these  social 
givens  constitute  a  large  part  of  my 
life.  In  another  layer  were  those  partic- 
ular characteristics  of  myself,  not  de- 
termined, yet  influenced  by  external 
conditions,  such  as:  my  talents,  skills, 
temperament,  likes  and  dislikes,  emo- 
tions, etc.  I  called  these  my  individual 
traits.  Overlaying  the  entire  drawing 
were  my  attitudes  and  actions  toward 
these  givens  and  traits.  I  discovered 
that  these  attitudes  and  actions  were 
the  most  important  in  determining  my 
self-concept. 

For  example,  I  am  a  female-that  is 
a  given.  But  what  is  most  crucial  is  my 
stance  toward  that  given-I  have  be- 
come a  feminist  and  a  lesbian  who 
loves  that  about  myself.  I  am  a  white 
middle  class  American  by  birth,  but 
most  importantly,  I  have  chosen  to  use 
those  realities  to  fight  what  they  stand 
for:  to  use  privileges  to  challenge  the 
classist  and  racist  system  (capitalism) 
in  the  U.S.  and  to  use  being  a  citizen 


SELF 
DEFINITION 

and 

POLITICAL 
SURVIVAL 


by 

Charlotte 

Bunch 

graphics  by  Ginger  Legato 

of  the  U.S.  empire  to  attack  its  inhu- 
mane policies  all  over  the  world.  Simi- 
larly, I  looked  at  my  training  and  indi- 
vidual traits  and  saw  how  I  had  or 
could  direct  them,  consciously  and 
unconsciously,  toward  certain  activi- 
ties such  as  political  organizing,  editing, 
etc. 

Our  attitudes  and  actions  toward 
the  givens  of  our  lives  are  the  primary 
means  we  have  of  starting  to  gain  con- 
trol over  our  own  selves  and  our  des- 
tinies. We  have  no  control  over  the  so- 


21  Quest,  vol.  I  no.  3,  winter,  1975 


cial  givens  of  our  birth.  We  have  limit- 
ed control  over  our  individual  traits. 
But  we  can  control  what  we  do  with 
those  givens  and  traits.  We  can  use  our 
privileges  to  change  society  or  to  main- 
tain it.  We  can  pity  ourselves  for  our 
oppression  or  we  can  embrace  its  good 
effects  and  struggle  to  change  those 
which  are  bad.  As  we  assert  this  con- 
trol over  our  selves,  we  confront  the 
society  that  has  determined  many  of 
these  givens.  We  cannot  alter  all  the 
ways  that  these  givens  control  us,  but 
we  can  begin  to  change  their  meaning 
and  impact  both  now  and  for  the  fu- 
ture. As  we  struggle  for  such  societal 
change,  that  very  struggle  alters  how 
we  see  ourselves,  thus  creating  a  con- 
tinuous process  of  change  and  growth. 
Two  years  from  now,  I  will  probably 
find  most  of  the  same  basic  elements  in 
my  self-drawing.  But  there  will  be  new 
aspects  and  emphases  resulting  from 
the  interaction  between  self-determina- 
tion and  the  political  struggle  to  change 
society,  which  in  turn  changes  me. 

The  purpose  of  talking  about  self  is 
not  to  advance  abstract  knowledge 
about  women,  but  to  understand  better 
our  strengths  and  weaknesses.  I  am  not 
a  psychologist  determining  motivation 
patterns,  but  a  feminist  seeking  to 
understand  how  we  can  improve  wom- 
en's lives  and  build  a  more  effective 
movement.  My  approach  to  the  politi- 
cal and  personal  question  of  self  is, 
therefore,  to  examine  the  factors  that 
affect  us,  to  uncover  the  elements  that 
hinder  us,  and  to  discover  those  things 
which  make  us  stronger  both  individ- 
ually and  as  a  movement. 


We  are  those  biological,  social,  po- 
litical, and  economic  givens  that  deter- 
mine the  objective  conditions  of  our 
lives;  we  are  the  various  individual 
traits  and  skills  that  make  us  distinct; 
and  we  are  what  we  do  with  and  think 
about  our  givens  and  traits.  These  fac- 
tors change  somewhat  over  time.  Still 
it  is  useful  to  be  clear  about  the  basics 
of  our  self-concept  in  order  to  direct 
further  change  that  makes  us  stronger 
women  who  live  fuller  lives  and  are 
capable  of  creating  a  better  society,  if, 
however,  the  search  to  understand  self- 
concept  becomes  self-indulgent,  con- 
suming all  our  energies,  then  we  have 
defeated  ourselves.  We  understand  and 
change  ourselves  not  in  isolation  but 
within  the  everyday  context  of  our 
female  existence— in  our  work,  play, 
love,  dreams,  actions  and  interactions 
with  others. 

An  Historical  Perspective 

The  question  of  self-concept  has  not 
been  a  conscious  issue  for  Western 
women  until  recently.  For  many  cen- 
turies, women's  identity  was  absolute- 
ly determined  and  circumscribed  by 
her  functions:  preoccupation  with 
childbirth  and  motherhood;  continual 
service  to  her  husband,  home,  and 
church;  and  political  and  sexual  passiv- 
ity. The  exceptions  to  this  were  few 
and  far  between.  These  functions  were 
rooted  in  the  assumption  of  male 
superiority  and  heterosexuality.  Socie- 
ty held  little  esteem  for  women  and 
women  held  little  esteem  for  self. 

The  Western  philosophical  tradition 


Self  Definition  and  Political  Survival/3 


of  "man's  search  for  identity"  was 
just  that— man's  search— the  prerogative 
of  males  only.  Even  among  men,  it  was 
the  luxury  of  the  privileged.  Of  course, 
the  natural  development  of  selfhood— 
of  the  strengths  of  survival,  pride  and 
self-respect,  took  place  for  all  peoples, 
rich  and  poor,  male  and  female.  But 
history  and  literature  have  obscured 
how  this  self-concept  developed  in  the 
on-going  struggles  of  everyday  people. 
We  can  learn  from  the  ways  that 
women  developed  strengths  for  survival 
under  patriarchy,  and  before  that,  of 
women's  selfhood  where  matriarchies 
existed.  But  we  should  not  romanticize 
these  as  the  answers  for  us  today.  In 
the  U.S.A.,  the  functions  that  women 
traditionally  performed,  their  context, 
and  the  accompanying  self-concepts 
have  been  breaking  down  over  the  past 
100  years.  While  women  still  perform 
most  of  the  family  and  menial  work, 
the  context  and  importance  of  the 
family  is  being  altered  radically  and 
women's  work  has  become  even  more 
marginal  to  the  centers  of  economic 
and  political  power.  Our  society  is 
still  based  on  male  superiority,  hetero- 
sexuality,  and  woman-hatred,  but  the 
forms  are  changing.  The  new  roles 
assigned  to  women  with  the  rise  of  the 
middle  class-sex  object,  isolated  moth- 
er/wife in  a  nuclear  family,  and  active 
consumer-are  not  taking  root.  In  less 
than  a  century,  they  are  being  exposed 
and  rejected.  More  and  more  women 
find  themselves  caught  between  old 
roles  that  no  longer  function  and  new 
ones  that  are  inadequate.  As  women 
caught    in    this   historical   process,   we 


face  both  crisis  and  opportunity.  The 
old  patriarchal  conditions  that  deter- 
mined women's  identity  are  changing; 
the  20th  century  middle  class  replace- 
ments are  also  failing.  The  resulting 
confusion  leads  to  crisis,  to  inner  tur- 
moil and  insecurity,  but  it  also  pro- 
vides opportunity  for  fundamental 
changes  in  the  images  and  self-concepts 
of  women.  Feminists  must  seize  this 
time  to  change  ourselves,  to  change 
the  position  of  women,  and  to  change 
the  society. 

Another  source  of  identity  for  wom- 
en, both  traditionally  and  today,  has 
been  through  identification  with  the 
place  of  "our  men"  in  the  hierarchies  of 
class,  race,  etc.  Many  a  woman  has 
gained  her  self-worth  not  from  herself 
as  a  woman,  but  from  her  "superiority" 
on  these  male  scales.  Accepting  such 
supposed  superiority  keeps  a  woman 
tied  to  the  man  who  gives  it  to  her 
(husband,  father,  brother),  and  divides 
her  against  other  women,  and  main- 
tains her  dependence  on  a  false  con- 
sciousness about  her  position  as  a 
woman.  Feminists  must  use  the  givens 
of  our  birth  into  these  male  hierarchies 
to  challenge  them  rather  than  depend 
on  them  for  our  self-esteem. 

We  can  and  must  define  female 
reality  for  ourselves  and  develop  what 
we  as  women  want  to  be.  But  we  can- 
not forget  that  a  male  supremacist 
society  is  threatened  by  independent 
females.  We  will  not  be  allowed  self- 
determination  without  a  struggle.  We 
must  develop  our  individual  selves  in  a 
political  context,  recognizing  that  our 
struggle  to  become  stronger  is  part  of 


4/Quest 


Self  Definition  and  Political  Survival/5 


a  larger  political  fight  to  end  all  female 
oppression.  If  isolated  from  the  poli- 
tical context,  our  self-development  will 
become  diluted,  individualistic,  and 
ultimately,  futile.  Our  survival  depends 
on  our  identification  with  other  wom- 
en; hence  a  group  identity  and  politics, 
as  well  as  a  personal  one,  must  develop. 
Too  often,  feminists  have  used  the  con- 
cept "the  personal  is  political"  to  de- 
fine all  of  our  personal  desires  and 
problems  as  political.  But  the  personal 
and  political  circles  overlap  only  as  we 
incorporate  a  political  analysis  and 
identity  into  our  personal  lives  and 
actions. 

Oppression  And  Self-Concept 

To  incorporate  a  political  under- 
standing into  our  view  of  self,  we 
must  analyze  the  effects  of  oppression 
on  self-concept.  While  race,  nationali- 
ty, and  perhaps  other  social  conditions 
are  equally  important,  I  will  focus  on 
aspects  of  class  and  lesbian  oppression 
since  I  am  most  familiar  with  these 
areas.  In  my  experience,  many  of  the 
women  with  the  strongest  self-concepts 
and  whose  identity  is  closely  tied  to 
the  political  interests  of  a  group  are 
lower  class  (used  to  include  lower  and 
working  class  women  of  all  races)  and 
lesbians.  I  have  tried  to  understand 
why  this  is  so. 

Selfhood  is  strongly  affected  by 
necessity.  What  we  must  do  in  order  to 
survive,  both  materially  and  emotional- 
ly, influences  us  deeply.  This  creates  a 
paradox  within  oppression.  On  the  one 
hand,  oppression  is  destructive  to  our 


self-worth;  we  are  taught  to  hate  our- 
selves, to  see  ourselves  as  personal  fail- 
ures, to  look  outside  for  approval,  and 
to  accept  that  much  of  our  life  is  out- 
side our  control,  determined  by  others. 
On  the  other  hand,  oppression  also 
brings  out  the  strengths  necessary  to 
survive  as  oppressed  peoples:  endurance 
and  ability  to  cope  with  changing  and 
difficult  situations,  less  obsession  with 
individual  ego,  and  more  focus  on 
group  survival. 

All  women  are  oppressed,  but  there 
is  tremendous  variety  in  the  forms 
oppression  takes  and  consequently  in 
the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  our 
self-concepts.  Conventional  liberal  wis- 
dom argues  that  lower  class  and  black 
women  are  the  most  oppressed  and 
need  the  "freedoms"  of  middle  class 
women  in  order  to  pursue  self-develop- 
ment. True,  but  not  true.  Lower  class 
women  of  all  races  are  the  most  mater- 
ially oppressed  and  consequently  do 
not  have  the  time,  money,  or  space  to 
pursue   many  individual   interests  and 


There  are  numerous  studies  on  the 
effects  of  oppression  on  self-concept  and 
behavior,  but  most  focus  only  on  the  nega- 
tive aspects.  The  paradox  created  by  op- 
pression has  emerged  in  women's  liberation 
primarily  in  the  recognition  of  positive 
characteristics  of  women  that  may  result 
from  our  oppressed  status.  The  debate  has 
been  over  whether  we  want  to  develop 
characteristics  labeled  masculine  (e.g.  aggres- 
siveness) or  retain  those  labeled  feminine 
(e.g.  sensitivity).  Still  we  have  not  suffi- 
ciently analyzed  what  is  behind  these  differ- 
ences or  looked  at  the  parallel  questions 
about  differences  among  women  that  result 
from  other  social  and  economic  oppressions. 


6IQuest 


talents  that  can  be  important  to  self- 
hood. For  example,  a  lower  class  artist 
rarely  has  the  resources  or  opportunity 
to  devote  as  much  energy  to  her  art  as 
a  middle  or  upper  class  woman. 

Yet,  the  very  demands  of  everyday 
survival  often  create  a  strength  of  self 
and  clarity  of  vision  almost  unknown 
to  the  middle  and  upper  classes.  Karen 
Kollias  describes  these  as:  strong  self- 
concept,  group  identity,  and  account- 
able leadership.  Without  glorifying 
oppression,  we  can  examine  the  so- 
called  advances  of  bourgeois  women 
and  ask  whether  these  are  really  ad- 
vances or  setbacks.  Have  the  legal  re- 
forms and  economic  and  social  changes 
in  women's  status  that  accompanied 
the  rise  of  the  middle  class  made 
women  stronger  and  more  self-loving? 
Or  have  they  further  weakened  us, 
made  us  more  passive  and  woman- 
hating,  made  us  sex  objects  and  desper- 
ate consumers?  Is  the  mother  in  a  male 
dominated  peasant  society  or  a  poor 
black  family  any  further  away  from 
power  and  control  over  her  life  than 
the  middle  class  housewife  in  suburbia? 
Is  her  route  to  liberation  through  bour- 
geois reforms  or  can  she  draw  on  other 
strengths  to  create  new  possibilities 
for  women?  These  are  some  of  the 
questions  we  must  ask  about  wom- 
en's selfhood,  feminism,  race,  and 
class.  The  point  is  not  which  group  is 


See  Karen  Kollias,  "Class  Realities: 
Create  a  New  Power  Base"  in  this  issue  of 
Quest  for  a  fuller  discussion  of  these 
strengths. 


the  most  liberated,  but  what  elements 
can  be  drawn  out  of  each  experience 
and  transformed  into  personal  and 
political  strengths. 

A  similar  paradox  exists  among  les- 
bians, whose  self-concept  is  affected 
by  oppression.  Our  strengths  are  par- 
tially based  on  the  awareness  that  we 
are  solely  responsible  for  our  survival 
all  of  our  lives.  Like  lower  class  wom- 
en, most  lesbians  must  depend  on  our 
selves  and  others  of  our  kind,  both 
economically  and  emotionally.  Except 
for  a  few  from  rich  families,  we  rarely 
can  fall  back  on  male  privilege.  The 
economic  reality  of  lesbianism  has 
pushed  middle  class,  previously  hetero- 
sexual women,  to  develop  strengths 
and  skills  seldom  encouraged  in  the 
middle  class.  This  process  has  created 
greater  clarity  concerning  self-concept 
and  direction.  Single  women,  even  if 
they  are  not  lesbians,  share  some  of 
this  experience  if  they  remain  unmar- 
ried and  do  not  depend  on  men  to  res- 
cue or  support  them. 

Some  have  argued  that  because  we 
do  not  have  male  support,  all  single 
and  lesbian  women  are  working  class. 
This  is  not  accurate.  While  we  are 
usually  closer  to  the  working  class 
reality,  there  are  still  class  differences 
among  us.  Supporting  oneself  with  a 
professional  degree  is  very  different 
from  working  at  jobs  available  without 
a  high  school  diploma.  It  is  true  how- 
ever that  the  economic  differences  are 
usually  narrower  when  women  are 
separated  from  men  and  this  fact 
affects  our  self-concepts.  Our  reality 
is  closer  to  what  lower  class  women, 


Self  Definition  and  Political  Survival/7 


S/Quest 


lesbian  or  heterosexual,  have  always 
known:  we  must  depend  on  ourselves 
for  survival;  weakness  and  passivity  are 
luxuries  we  cannot  afford. 

Our  survival  is  not  only  economic 
but  emotional  and  political  as  well. 
The  lesbian's  self-concept  is  shaped  by 
the  necessity  of  creating  our  own  ways 
of  living-systems  of  support  and  rela- 
tionships that  perform  the  functions 
of  the  traditional  family.  Since  out-of- 
the-closet  lesbians  face  active  hostility 
and  oppression  from  society,  we  must 
develop  group  identity  and  depend  on 
each  other  for  survival.  We  cannot  fit 
passively  into  society's  institutions 
(unless  our  whole  life  is  a  lie),  because 
these  were  not  made  to  accommodate 
us:  home,  school,  church,  nightclub, 
and  sex  itself.  The  process  of  creating 
one's  own  structures  and  ways  of 
relating,  constantly  sorting  out  old 
and  new  forms,  demands  an  active 
attitude  toward  one's  self.  This  is  a 
vital  part  of  self-determination  and 
the  experience  of  shaping  one's  own 
environment.  The  more  we  must  create 
the  structures  of  our  lives,  the  more  we 
learn  what  we  want  and  the  more 
we  confront  the  ways  society  denies 
that  to  us.  Thus,  the  process  of  self- 
definition  can  lead  to  greater  political 
awareness,  to  rebellion,  and  can  move 
women  toward  the  creation  of  a  dif- 
ferent society. 

We  must  learn  more  about  how 
race,  class,  heterosexuality,  and  other 
experiences  affect  us  differently  as 
these  are  complex  issues.  The  goal  is 
not  to  prove  who  is  best  or  to  wallow 
in  comparisons,  guilt,  or  navel-gazing. 


The  purpose  is  to  understand  how 
these  conditions  lead  to  different  needs 
and  strengths  among  women  so  that 
we  can  better  use  our  strengths,  learn 
how  to  develop  more  strengths  in  all 
of  us,  and  meet  one  anothers'  needs 
more  fully.  The  women's  movement 
has  made  some  steps  in  this  direction, 
and  in  the  process,  created  other 
problems. 

Substitutes  For  Self 

The  women's  movement  has  pro- 
vided some  ways  for  women  to  explore 
the  questions  of  self.  Through  con- 
sciousness-raising, individuals  see  how 
sexism  affects  each  woman's  self-con- 
cept. We  have  developed  analyses  of 
how  society's  attitudes  and  institutions 
cripple  us,  thus  freeing  women  some- 
what from  seeing  ourselves  as  personal 
failures,  from  blaming  ourselves  for 
self-hate,  insecurity,  or  lack  of  skills. 
Similarly,  particular  groups  have  exam- 
ined the  effects  on  women  of  class,  age, 
race,  and  heterosexual  oppression.  In- 
creased consciousness  has  helped  us 
understand  our  oppression  and  develop 
pride  in  our  womanhood,  lesbianism, 
and  other  identities. 

After  developing  initial  conscious- 
ness, the  movement  has  floundered  in 
its  efforts  to  create  self-determination 
among  women.  Often  we  have  con- 
fused feminist  consciousness  and  poli- 
tics with  the  ability  to  verbalize  about 
one's  self,  overlooking  women's  non- 
verbal strengths.  Consciousness-raising 
helped  us  to  verbalize  our  oppression, 
but  often  has  not  led  to  control  over 


Self  Definition  and  Political  Survival/9 


our  lives  and  change  in  the  conditions 
causing  our  oppression. 

What  are  the  steps  toward  self- 
development  that  have  come  out  of 
the  women's  movement  and  what  has 
gone  wrong  with  these?  I  have  seen 
four  sources  of  partial  identity  that 
have  become  substitutes  for  self: 
1.)  oppression,  2.)  the  movement, 
3.)  ideal  models  and  4.)  relationships.*** 

Building  Identity  Around  Oppression 

Starting  with  the  valid  assertion  that 
society  oppresses  us  because  we  are 
women,  lesbians,  lower  class,  etc.,  we 
become  proud  of  our  oppression  and 
can  get  stuck  there.  We  concentrate 
too  much  on  discovering  the  intricacies 
of  these  oppressions  instead  of  work- 
ing to  get  out  of  them.  We  may  wear 
them  as  a  chip  on  the  shoulder,  a  cross 
to  bear,  or  a  badge  of  honor.  In  so 
doing,  some  women  become  "profes- 
sional victims"  of  societal  givens.  We 
create  politically  legitimate  reasons  for 
untogetherness  or  lack  of  self  direc- 
tion, which,  as  victims,  we  use  to  ex- 
cuse us  from  responsibility  for  chang- 
ing ourselves  or  society. 

Both  oppressed  and  oppressor  can 
use  oppression  as  an  excuse.  The  op- 
pressed says,  "I'm  just  a  victim  of  so- 
ciety and  can't  fight  it."  Or  the  op- 
pressor claims,  "No  matter  what  I  try, 
somebody   says   I'm  being  oppressive, 


I  first  defined  and  described  these 
substitutes  in  an  earlier  article,  "Persever- 
ance Furthers:  Woman's  Sense  of  Self," 
The  Furies,  February,  1973.  Some  of  that 
previous  description  is  included  here. 


so  why  bother?"  Our  consciousness  of 
oppression  thus  becomes  an  excuse  for 
not  moving  forward,  crippling  our  self- 
development  instead  of  freeing  us  to 
assert  our  lives  in  new  ways. 

In  developing  self-respect  out  of 
our  oppression,  we  may  also  fall  into 
false  pride  and  arrogance.  Conscious- 
ness-raising leads  us  to  assert  pride  in 
our  oppressions  but  it  is  necessary  to 
have  a  self-concept  that  is  more  than 
that.  For  example,  I  am  proud  to  be  a 
lesbian  rather  than  ashamed  as  society 
would  have  me  be,  but  that  is  not  my 
only  source  of  self-identity.  If  we  fail 
to  develop  other  traits  as  well,  we  be- 
come dependent  on  oppression  for  self- 
respect  and  use  it  to  demand  power 
and  respect  from  others.  We  do  not 
ask  for  respect  for  our  particular  abili- 
ties but  simply  for  our  self  as  a  cate- 
gory of  oppression-a  token-woman, 
lesbian,  working  class,  etc.  If  our 
identity  remains  dependent  on  these 
categories  alone  and  not  on  other 
interests  as  well,  we  have  not  achieved 
liberation  but  remain  limited  and  de- 
fined by  the  categories  of  our  oppres- 
sors. We  stagnate.  Stagnation  leads  to 
false  pride  and  arrogance  toward  those 
supposedly  less  conscious  than  us. 
Such  arrogance  is  self-defeating  because 
it  cuts  us  off  from  other  women,  pre- 
venting a  real  examination  of  differ- 
ences which  could  lead  to  change  and 
growth  all  around. 

Building  Identity  Around  the  Movement 
Some  women  solve  the  crisis  of  self 
by  turning  our  beings  over  to  the  move- 
ment,   lock,   stock,   and  barrel.   While 


10/ Quest 


Self  Definition  and  Political  Survival/ 11 


making  us  aware  of  our  oppression 
and  giving  a  name  to  our  problems, 
the  movement  can  substitute  itself  for 
our  identity.  Hours  of  endless  meet- 
ings, offices  to  be  run,  conversations 
to  be  had,  articles  to  be  written,  good 
deeds  to  be  done  become  not  only 
what  we  do  but  who  we  are.  When 
something  goes  wrong  in  the  move- 
ment-someone  disappoints  us,  a  proj- 
ect fails,  an  office  closes  down,  a  new 
split  occurs-we  are  crushed  personally 
because  our  self  validation  is  totally 
dependent  on  the  movement. 

This  is  not  to  suggest  that  women 
cannot  do  movement  work  and  have  a 
clear  sense  of  self-definition.  We  can 
and  must.  The  danger  is  that  too  often 
we  allow  movement  life  to  overpower 
us,  especially  when  we  first  become 
involved.  Movement  work  often  can 
help  us  identify  and  develop  interests 
and  abilities  better.  But  when  the 
movement  becomes  a  substitute  for 
what  a  woman  doesn't  find  in  herself, 
eventually  there  will  be  a  break-down 
or  a  dead-end  and  her  work  will  no 
longer  be  useful  even  to  that  move- 
ment. For  all  its  political  and  personal 
importance  to  each  of  us,  the  move- 
ment cannot  suffice  as  our  only  source 
of  identity,  pride,  and  self-respect. 

Building  Identity  Around  Ideal  Models 
Sometimes  we  escape  self  know- 
ledge and  development  by  trying  to 
become  different  ideal  types.  We  are 
controlled  by  these  models  or  by  think- 
ing that  we  have  to  become  the  models 
in  order  to  be  accepted.  Most  feminist 
ideals  embody  good  things  that  women 


can  do  or  be,  but  they  are  destructive 
when  they  operate  as  the  only  accept- 
able standard.  Then  they  function  like 
the  traditional  ideals  of  beauty  or 
motherhood,  keeping  women  dissatis- 
fied with  ourselves  and  forcing  us  to 
look  outside  ourselves  for  standards  of 
what  to  be. 

Each  discovery  of  oppression  brings 
new  ideals:  as  we  learn  about  the  sup- 
pression of  women's  intellect  we  want 
to  be  writers;  as  we  learn  about  class 
we  try  to  act  like  the  "workers;"  as 
we  hear  about  matriarchies  we  must 
be  spiritualists  or  artists.  Each  dis- 
covery has  value  and  we  learn  about 
ourselves  by  trying  new  things.  But  if 
we  do  not  know  our  own  center,  we 
can  float  from  one  newly  discovered 
ideal  to  another  every  six  months, 
depending  on  what  is  premium  in  our 
group. 

Ideals  or  models  can  inspire  and 
challenge  us  but  often  we  do  not  know 
how  to  use  them  without  being  con- 
trolled by  them.  We  create  ideals  be- 
cause society  has  conditioned  us  to 
identify  with  external  models  rather 
than  to  develop  our  own  selves.  When 
we  do  think  of  "self-identity,"  we 
tend  to  romanticize  it.  We  think  that 
to  have  an  identity,  one  must  be  some- 
thing that  sounds  exotic  (an  artist), 
or  well-defined  (a  professional),  or  de- 
sired (a  knock-out  at  the  bar).  Because 
of  the  power  of  these  ideals,  women 
are  often  unable  to  see  that  a  sense  of 
self-worth  grows  out  of  what  we  do 
well  and  like,  and  not  in  trying  to 
copy  models. 

Feminist  ideals  are  determined  by 


\2IQuest 


A 

.     . 

,      !      •    - 

'SHj^^H 

>^Hi 

•^^^BT  4f  ,w    ISlr  *'            -    ^        ~*:^   "  "*  « 

>"';,>.•*',      ' , 

'M 

^4^  '*;' 

/.j 

ma-  ^#  ■■ 

^•t* 

WS'      ■  A&.    '  MM,  -•' 

-*-;>"'► 

p 

if 

*  '♦,  fcf        ^ 

Mr  WiK  -■' 

,i  Ij-s 

\i 

I    .m 

•      • 

i 

iH                 ■BP1^|»'i 

jfjjp 

£  ."■ 

It        "^3 

~      M 

■     I 

~c23 

■Bf 

'l 

X 

1>,^*i^                         ^. 

v  ^^   ♦  V-i**^ 

||P   ' 

Self  Definition  and  Political  Survival/ 13 


what's  accepted  in  the  movement  in- 
stead of  the  male  media.  This  is  an 
improvement.  But  often  we  are  still 
controlled  by  external  images  and 
group  approval  instead  of  by  our  own 
sense  of  self-worth  and  knowledge  of 
what  we  can  do  well. 


and  our  strengths  are  used  to  build, 
not  control,  each  other,  then,  they 
can  be  positive  ways  of  sharing,  push- 
ing, and  further  expanding  our  lives, 
personally  and  politically. 

Toward  The  Future 


Building  Identity  Around  Relationships 
Traditionally,  women  have  derived 
self-identity  from  relationships  to  oth- 
ers—family, husband,  children,  the 
women  in  our  social  or  work  circles. 
With  women's  liberation,  this  tendency 
has  continued.  Relationships,  whether 
heterosexual  or  lesbian,  non-sexual  or 
sexual,  are  often  the  primary  preoccu- 
pation of  women's  time  and  energy, 
at  the  expense  of  self-development  and 
other  political  work. 

Relationships  are  important.  Rela- 
tionships do  affect  us  deeply.  But  a 
woman  cannot  find  her  own  self  solely 
through  the  creation  of  a  lesbian  affair 
or  a  communal  family,  just  as  she 
cannot  through  the  traditional  hetero- 
sexual marriage.  Each  woman  must 
find  her  center  alone  as  well  as  in  rela- 
tion to  others.  We  must  stop  avoiding 
the  reality  of  our  aloneness. 

Overconcentration  on  feelings  and 
relationships  often  shields  and  diverts 
us  from  our  self  and  the  hard  but  cru- 
cial struggle  to  develop  what  we  can 
do.  Each  woman  needs  a  sense  of  self- 
worth  based  on  what  she  knows  that 
she  can  do  and  be.  Relationships 
among  self-defined  women  then  can 
be  the  gaining  and  giving  of  positive 
energy,  strength,  and  love.  When  rela- 
tionships   do    not    substitute    for    self 


Substitutes  for  self  reflect  part 
of  the  process  of  self-development  if 
they  are  seen  as  parts,  not  the  whole. 
We  are  significantly  affected  by  the 
givens  of  our  oppressions  and  privileges 
-by  where  we  fall  in  the  hierarchies  of 
sex,  class,  race,  etc.  So,  too,  we  are 
partially  determined  by  the  movements 
that  we  build,  by  the  ideal  models  that 
inspire  us,  and  by  the  relations  with 
others  that  we  experience.  But  we  are 
more  than  the  total  of  all  these.  We  are 
the  particular  things  that  we  do  and 
like  and  feel,  our  individual  traits.  We 
are  the  consciousness  and  attitudes 
that  we  develop  toward  these  things 
and  the  ways  that  we  change  ourselves 
and  the  world  because  of  that  con- 
sciousness. And  we  are  still  more. 

Each  of  us  is  a  variety  of  selves  that 
come  together  to  form  a  center  that 
is  solid,  yet  ever  changing.  It  is  ex- 
pressed in  the  way  we  live  our  lives-in 
what  we  do,  say,  think,  dream,  plan, 
love  and  feel.  And  in  the  end,  women 
must  explore  and  live  this  question 
daily.  Our  self-concept  becomes  strong- 
er and  clearer  through  our  life  acti- 
vities-in  the  struggle  for  survival,  in 
work  for  the  movement,  in  efforts  to 
express  our  own  talents  and  love,  and 
in  actions  that  change  the  world  as  it 
affects  us. 


14/Quest 


The  question  of  self  should  not  be 
approached  as  the  archetypal  roman- 
tic individual  search,  but  as  a  question 
that  moves  to  the  heart  of  the  prob- 
lem of  liberation  for  women.  Confi- 
dence and  strength  in  our  own  selves 
gives  us  the  ability  to  fight  for  change 
and  to  cope  with  the  problems  and 
instability  that  go  with  that  struggle. 
Only  those  who  are  taking  responsibil- 
ity for  their  own  selves  can  create  the 
enormous  changes  that  are  necessary 
in  this  society.  Only  a  movement  that 
understands  the  different  strengths  of 
women  and  supports  individual's  ef- 
forts to  grow  can  succeed  in  challeng- 
ing that  society.  The  development  of 
each  woman's  individual  self  and  the 
political  strengthening  of  the  feminist 
movement  should  therefore  be  mutual- 
ly reinforcing. 

Women  in  different  socio-economic 
situations  have  developed  different 
parts  of  the  strengths  that  we  all  need 
as  a  movement.  We  must  find  ways  to 
learn  from  each  other  and  move  on  our 
collective  power.  To  do  this,  we  must 
stop  being  afraid  of  conflict  with  each 
other,  stop  feeling  guilty  about  the  gi- 
vens  of  our  birth,  and  stop  trying  to 
prove  who  is  best.  There  will  be  con- 
flict because  women  do  still  oppress 
one  another  and  must  continue  to 
struggle  over  those  oppressions.  But 
as  we  develop  our  own  strengths,  we 
should  be  able  to  struggle  more  pro- 
ductively, to  accept  and  learn  from 
the  strengths  of  other  women. 

As  we  learn  from  each  other's 
strengths  and  weaknesses,  we  can  get 
beyond    talk    and    see   how   to   utilize 


these  in  common  efforts.  We  can  find 
ways  to  provide  less  privileged  wom- 
en with  time,  space,  and  money  to  pur- 
sue talents  and  work  that  is  important 
to  feminism.  We  can  and  must  fight 
women's  tendency  to  undermine  each 
other's  strength  and  to  impose  models 
of  correct  behavior.  We  seek  an  honest 
diversity,  one  which  encourages  indi- 
vidual difference  and  skills  but  still 
pushes  for  criticism  and  change.  This 
diversity  would  not  stop  our  efforts  to 
create  a  common  political  vision  but 
provide  a  broader  basis  for  it. 

We  have  taken  important  steps  to- 
ward developing  stronger  self-concepts 
as  women.  Analysis  of  our  mistakes 
and  successes  should  guide  us  in  what 
is  a  long  struggle  ahead.  All  of  our 
efforts  toward  self  clarity  and  growth 
must  be  seen  within  a  political  con- 
text. We  must  be  strong  women  who 
are  politically  tied  to  a  group  but  not 
held  down  by  it-who  recognize  the 
effects  of  oppression  on  us  but  do  not 
depend  on  either  oppressed  or  oppres- 
sor identities  or  behavior.  We  are  mov- 
ing on  an  uncharted  path  to  create 
something  new  for  women.  But  we  can 
also  build  on  the  best  of  our  past. 
We  cannot  expect  to  lose  all  negative 
traces  of  our  previous  lives.  We  can 
expect  to  keep  moving  forward  and 
to  change  and  examine  our  selves  as 
we  work  to  challenge  and  change  the 
society. 


Charlotte  Bunch,  a  lesbian /feminist 
organizer  and  writer,  is  a  fellow  at  the 
Institute  for  Policy  Studies. 


Self  Definition  and  Political  Survival/15 


Critique  &  Commentary 


by  Thelma  Catalano 

This  is  written  in  response  to  "Insanity  and  Control:  A  Class  Trap,"  by 
Alice  Quinn  in  Vol  I,  no.  2,  Money,  Fame  and  Power. 

One  nice  thing  that  comes  with  some  sense  of  psychological  well-being  is 
being  able  to  wade  through  the  bullshit  in  life.  And,  simultaneously,  to  cope 
with  the  real  "nitty  gritty"  issues  in  life. 

I'd  love  to  think  that  all  of  my  problems  were  of  a  social,  economic,  or 
political  nature.  In  fact,  if  I  could  sustain  such  an  illusion,  even  knowing  it 
was  an  illusion,  I'd  do  it.  Sometimes.  But  then,  sometimes,  I'd  do  anything 
to  avoid  my  pain.  The  only  thing  is,  I  don't  "get  off"  on  illusions.  So  be  it. 

Alice  Quinn  still  believes  that  all  of  women's  problems  stem  from  social, 
economic,  and  political  factors.  Solve  these,  solve  everything.  She  sells  wom- 
en short.  She  also  avoids  the  real  issues  connected  to  women's  problems. 

Many,  if  not  most,  of  women's  problems  stem  from  social,  economic,  and 
political  factors  in  our  lifetime— especially  problems  associated  with  women 
in  the  lower  class.  I  term  the  problems  stemming  from  these  factors  (which 
have  such  harsh  and  damaging  effects  upon  women)  as  "collective  pathology 
(ies),"  that  we,  as  women,  have  to  deal  with  constantly.  But  that's  only  half 
of  it.  The  other  half  is  that,  because  all  women  are  victim,  and  subject  to, 
collective  pathology  as  rooted  in  the  social,  economic,  and  the  political, 
these  have  additionally  created,  in  all  women,  individual  pathology  (ies). 

One  example:  I  was  born  female  (oppressed).  Raised  female  (oppressed). 
And,  now  let's  assume  I  have  just  been  elected  President  of  the  U.S.  Does 
Alice  Quinn  readily  assume,  then,  that  all  of  my  life-experiences  related  to 
oppression  disappear?  Even  diminish?  Bullshit!  The  real  tragedy  is,  that  be- 
cause I  was  born,  and  raised,  oppressed  I  will  experience  the  damaging  effects 
of  this  my  entire  lifetime. 

Alice  Quinn  is  only  partially  correct. 

She  is  correct  in  her  thinking  on  Psychiatry.  She  implies  that  it  is  destruc- 
tive to  women.  I  think  she's  right.  Psychiatrists,  male  or  female,  implement 


16/Quest.  vol.  I  no.  3,  winter,  1975 


theory  in  practice  that  is  entirely  patriarchal,  and,  therefore,  destructive  to 
women.  She  is  also  correct  in  her  views  on  State  Hospitals.  These  institutions 
are  also  rooted  in  patriarchy,  and  are  therefore  destructive  to  women.  And 
she  is  entirely  correct  in  assuming  that  Psychotherapy  is  ineffective  with  the 
lower  class.  Studies  in  Social  Psychology  revealed  evidence  along  those  lines 
years  ago. 

Alice  Quinn  is  also  correct  in  assuming  that  all  ac£s  are  political.  Including 
Psychotherapy.  Indeed!  Psychotherapy  was  originally  designed  and  establish- 
ed for  the  middle  and  upper  classes,  who  could  afford  to  pay  for  the  treat- 
ment of  their  illness,  or  better  yet,  utilize  the  therapeutic  modality  in  such  a 
way  that  it  became  a  means  of  social  conformity  for  society  at  large,  and 
worse,  validated  their  insanities  as  everyone  else's  "reality." 

Psychotherapy  is  political  when  it  comes  to  the  lower  class  but  not  solely 
as  Alice  Quinn  states,  that  "...specifically  oppresses  those  of  us  who  are  not 
white,  middle  class,  or,  heterosexual."  In  fact,  it  is  far  more  political  than 
that.  Psychotherapy  totally  excludes  the  lower  class.  When  you  consider  that 
the  major  sources  of  care  for  emotional  illness  for  the  lower  class  rest  with 
1)  State  Hospitals,  and  2)  (free)  rehabilitation-social  conformity-adjustment 
"therapy,"  that,  to  me,  excludes  the  lower  class  from  any  care  for  emotional 
illness. 

And,  if  anyone  really  needed  proof  of  the  "politics  of  Psychotherapy," 
take  a  look  around  us.  Traditional  and  classical  forms  of  Psychotherapy  have 
always  been  rooted  in  patriarchal  theory  and  practice.  Look  at  the  society 
we  live  in.  Patriarchal! 

So. 

Alice  Quinn  is  quite  correct. 

As  far  as  she  goes. 

She  doesn't  go  far  enough  for  me. 

If  I  had  never  known  pain  that  comes  from  individual  neurosis  and 
pathology  and  how  it  rots  your  gut  like  acid  when  you  continue  to  live 
with  it,  I'd  believe  Alice  Quinn  when  she  says: 

"Feminist  therapy  is  an  insidious  trend  within  our  movement  which  creates 
a  demand  for  individual  middle-class  emotional  solutions  and  denies  the  poli- 
tical and  economic  aspects  of  lower  and  working  class  women's  experience 
with  mental  illness. "  If  I  had  never  known  that  some  of  my  pain  stemmed 
from  my  having  been  raised  nine  years  (in  my  youth)  in  the  lower-class  cul- 
ture, I'd  also  believe  her.  And,  if  I  hadn't  spent  so  many  years  of  my  life 
attempting  to  solve  my  problems  racing  after  external  variables  (always 
meeting  myself  coming  in  the  other  direction),  I  could  believe  her. 

But  I  know  otherwise. 

Psychotherapy,  with  the  right  therapist,  works. 


Critique  and  Commentary/ 17 


Now  then,  Alice  Quinn.  You  not  only  sell  all  women  short,  by  implying 
that  dealing  with  collective  pathology  is  the  means  to  solving  all  women's 
problems,  you  have  done  the  same  thing  by  minimizing  the  impact  of  Femi- 
nism on  women,  like  myself.  And  others  like  me.  I  am  a  Feminist.  And,  I  am 
a  Psychotherapist.  In  my  work,  Feminism,  not  patriarchy,  is  my  reality.  And, 
where  I  assume  that  collective  pathology  must  largely  be  dealt  with  by  way 
of  collective  Feminist  action  in  society  at  large,  I  also  feel  that  there  is  the 
need  to  "neutralize  the  acid/rot  gut"  on  an  individual  therapeutic  basis,  in 
order  to  make  Feminism  work  both  individually  and  collectively. 

A  word  about  me  as  a  woman.  As  a  Feminist.  And,  as  a  Psychotherapist. 
(For  I  am  certain  of  others  like  me,  and  I  want  Alice  Quinn  to  know.)  For 
one,  I  am  a  "woman-identified-woman."  That  is  to  say,  the  basis  for  my 
identity  (yes,  still  in  struggle)  is  woman-defined.  I  am  not  a  male-defined- 
female,  nor  am  I  a  Freudian-female,  nor  am  I  a  "patriarch  in  disguise,"  i.e.,  a 
female  who  is  modeled  after  patriarchs  like  Freud,  and/or  behaves  in  accord- 
ance with  men's  wishes  and  desires  and  thus,  merely  a  projection  of  same.  I 
am  also  a  Feminist  Psychotherapist  who  uses  "political  clout"  if  you  will,  by 
way  of  utilizing  Feminist  theory  and  conceptualizations  as  a  basis  for  reality 
within  the  treatment  process.  I  practice  Psychotherapy  A.F.  (After  Feminism). 
Alice  Quinn  knows  solely  of  Psychotherapy  B.F.  (Before  Feminism). 

I  do  not  have  the  space  here  to  describe  my  own  theories  as  a  Feminist 
Psychotherapist,  and  practical  implications  thereof,  for  working  with  women.* 
As  such,  I  can  only  respond  briefly  to  some  of  the  comments  made  about 
Psychotherapy.  For  one,  what  Alice  Quinn  describes  in  the  way  of  therapeutic 
technique,  i.e.  "intense  feeling  therapy,"  sounds  to  me  much  like  Primal 
Therapy,  and  has  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  my  work  as  a  therapist.  For 
another,  where  she  describes  the  needs  of  the  lower  class  as  "concrete  aid, 
better  homes,  and  jobs,"  she  overlooks  the  fact  that  these  "collective 
pathologies"  are  not  the  direct  function  of  Psychotherapy.  They  are  the 
direct  function  of  collective  Feminist  action  within  society  at  large.  The  task 
of  Psychotherapy  is  to  work  through  the  emotionally  damaging  effects  of 
these  collective  pathologies  so  that  the  individual  can  do  something  about 
these.  And,  lastly,  where  Alice  Quinn  negates  all  therapy  as  useful  to  women, 
Feminist  Psychotherapy  is  most  useful.  If  effective,  Feminist  Psychotherapy 
cuts  across  all  class  lines.  There  isn't  a  single  woman  alive  today  in  America 
that  hasn't  experienced  the  damaging  effects  of  patriarchy.  All  women  are 
oppressed.  All  women  experienced  infant  vulnerability,  and  with  it  the  parallel 
experience  of  being  rejected  for  having  been  born  female.  And  all  women  have 
been  raised  to  form  an  identity  as  male-define d-female.  My  own  theories,  for 
example,  do  not  include  Freud's  theories  on  infantile  sexuality  as  the  basis  for 
neurosis  and  the  means  for  dealing  with  those  variables.  A  patriarchal  ploy  if 


18/ Quest 


ever  there  was  one!  Briefly,  my  own  theories  are  rooted  in  infant  vulnerability 
and  what  this  means  for  girl-children  having  been  rejected  by  mother  (and,  of 
course,  father)  and  later  as  woman,  rejected  by  society  at  large. 

When  Feminists  ask  me,  why  Psychotherapy  at  all?  Why  not  just  change 
society?  I  say,  we  need  both.  We  need  a  joint  operation  of  collective  Feminist 
action  within  society,  as  well  as  Feminist  Psychotherapy,  to  provide  a  dove- 
tail effect  for  change  in  all  women's  lives.  We  need  to  correct  the  collective 
pathology  of  our  times,  and  we  need  also  to  do  the  same  for  the  individual 
pathology  these  have  created  in  all  of  us.  As  women,  we  have  been  born  and 
reared  in  patriarchy.  For  richer,  or,  for  poorer.  It's  a  matter  of  degree,  in 
terms  of  how  this  has  affected  each  of  us.  As  such,  our  identity  as  woman  is 
firmly  rooted  in  patriarchy.  And,  in  terms  of  a  start,  for  women  being  able  to 
deal  with  the  individual  and  emotionally  damaging  effects  created  by  the 
collective  pathology  in  our  lives,  Feminist  Psychotherapy  has  much  to  offer. 
Yes,  Alice  Quinn.  Traditional  and  classical  treatment  modalities  are  a  dead 
end  for  women.  But  Feminist  Psychotherapy  is  not.  I  know  that,  personally. 
And,  I  know  that  professionally,  as  well. 

All  the  money  in  the  world  isn't  going  to  help  me  love  myself,  as  woman. 
Nor  others  like  me,  other  women.  Nor,  all  the  power.  Nor,  all  the  prestige  in 
the  world  either.  Nor  will  these  factors  enable  me  to  become  independent, 
sexual,  and  assertive  as  woman.  Oh,  yes.  It  would  help.  And,  with  enough 
illusions,  it  might  even  work.  Sometimes.  But.  Mostly,  this  must  come  from 
within. 

Yet,  I  know  that  I  must  have  a  society  that  validates  love  for  myself  as 
woman;  and,  others  like  self,  other  women;  my  own  independence,  sexuality, 
and  assertiveness.  That  requires  collective  Feminist  action  to  change  society. 
Just  as  Feminist  Psychotherapy  can  become  as  irrelevant  for  women  as  tra- 
ditional and  classical  treatment  forms,  without  collective  Feminist  action,  is 
it  not  possible  to  work  through  individual  pathology  without  adequate  pro- 
fessional assistance  whereby  women  can  unlearn  male-defined  oppressive 
behavior  patterns,  and  re-learn  "woman-identified-woman"  behavior  patterns? 
The  re-building  of  a  new  self  in  Feminist  Psychotherapy  without  collective 
Feminist  action  will  hinder  the  movement  the  same  as  the  loss  Alice  Quinn 
refers  to  when  she  speaks  to  the  lack  of  adequate  care  for  women  in  the  lower 
class  who  have  not  benefited  by  Psychotherapy.  But  the  movement  will 
crumble  if  the  selves  upon  which  it  is  built  are  patterned  after  the  selves  that 
have  been  reared  solely  in  patriarchy.  As  it  is  said,  "a  house  built  upon  sand..." 


^Request   copy  of  my  paper  entitled:  Thelma   P.    Catalano    is    a   psycho- 
Psychotherapy:  B.F/A.F  therapist    in   private   practice   in  New 
(Before  Feminism /After  Feminism).  r  r 
q  1974  York  City  and  Connecticut. 


Critique  and  Commentary/ 19 


my  other,  my  mother 


my  grandmother  laura 
had  black  indian  hair 
and  rough  hands 
a  country  woman 
everything  she  learned 
was  in  her  black  eyes 
when  she  looked  at  men 
they  cried 

i  used  to  sit  at  her  feet 

while  she  was  dying 

and  listen  to  her  made-up  stories 

they  were  so  good 

she  was  a  born  writer 

without  the  words  to  bring  her  home 

my  poetry  comes  from  her 

as  a  stream  from  a  hidden  source 

rich  with  her  wild  blood 

i  can  feel  her  everytime  i  write 

my  father  was  Irish  and  smart 
would  rather  talk  than  make  money 
would  rather  play  pinochle 
or  talk  politics 
or  bet  on  horses 
that  never  came  in 


i  loved  the  way 

the  veins  in  his  head 

moved  when  he  laughed 

because  he  died 

i  will  always  be  a  revolutionary 

but  my  mother's  life 
runs  over  me  like  rancid  water 
a  litany  of  work  and  curses 
against  life 

her  strong  face  set  against  the  sun 

from  my  mother  i  got  a  yearning 
for  tough  women 
a  terror  of  the  hungry  touch 
a  terror  of  the  mother  in  me 
the  mother  in  all  women 

from  my  mother  i  got  everything 
my  life,  my  laugh,  my  love,  myself 
and  when  a  woman  i  love  leaves  the  room 
a  pain,  that  never  goes  away 


by  Martha  C our  tot 


20IQuest,  vol.  I  no.  3, 


Health  care  and  nursing  as  they  are 
practiced  today  do  not  lead  to  posi- 
tive feelings  of  selfhood  or  to  the 
achievement  of  optimal  health  and 
well-being  for  women.  Nursing  was 
created  as  a  means  of  practicing  legal- 
ly what  had  always  been  a  very  real 
part  of  woman's  self-expression:  assist- 
ing others  in  ways  which  extend  the 
natural  healing  ability  of  the  mind- 
body-spirit  totality.  Laws  which  allow 
only  a  few,  by  virtue  of  their  sex  or 
position,  the  right  to  perform  these 
healing  acts  create  a  destructive  dichot- 
omy between  healing  (medicine  as  it  is 
practiced)  and  the  achievement  of 
health. 

As  recipients  of  health  care,  women 
are  diagnosed,  treated,  examined,  dis- 
cussed, drugged,  operated  upon  (often 
unnecessarily),  incarcerated  as  mad, 
denied  information  about  their  health 
status,  denied  legal  right  to  their  bodies 
(particularly  in  the  reproductive  area), 
and  experimented  upon,  often  without 
consent  or  knowledge.  These  sexist 
attitudes  reflect  the  general  societal 
attitudes  toward  women,  and  towards 
nursing  as  an  occupation  primarily  of 
women.  Nurses  are  generally  consider- 
ed incompetent  to  perform  healing 
acts  unless  supervised  by  the  "more 
competent"  physicians.  They  are  con- 
sidered incapable  of  independent  deci- 
sions, especially  those  which  carry  risk 
and  responsibility.  They  are  laughed  at, 
ridiculed,  scorned  and  rarely  consider- 
ed peers  of  physicians. 1 

How  do  we,  as  nurses,  achieve  a 
sense  of  self,  or  of  self-worth,  or  of 
feeling  good  about  nursing  under  these 


Women 
Healers 

vs. 

the 


by 

Rosemary  Rodewald 

graphics  by  Cynthia  Gair 

(c)  1974  Rosemary  Rodewald 


Women  Healers  vs.  the  AMA/21 


existing  conditions  and  within  these 
subservient  positions,  roles  and  atti- 
tudes? In  a  very  real  sense,  we  cannot. 
Women  lost  their  rightful  role  in  the 
art  of  medicine  because  of  the  relent- 
less discrimination  of  male  healers, 
whose  machinations  were  financed  by 
the  wealth  of  the  male  ruling  class. 
Women  lost  their  selfhood  when  they 
accepted  dependence  disguised  as  "re- 
spectability." To  find  this  selfhood 
within  nursing,  we  must  again  achieve 
the  status  of  independent  healers 
through  our  own  efforts  in  alliance 
with  other  women. 

The  subservient  role  of  nurses  in 
the  practice  of  medicine  arose  out  of 
class  and  sex  struggles  of  the  17th  and 
18th  centuries.  Details  of  these  strug- 
gles can  be  read  in  Witches,  Midwives 
and  Nurses:  A  History  of  Women 
Healers.^  Until  seventy  years  ago,  the 
art  of  healing  had  always  been  the 
realm  of  wise  women  healers  who  were 
often  accused  of  being  witches  because 
of  their  knowledge.  These  women  were 
experts  in  the  use  of  pharmacological 
remedies,  the  practice  of  obstetrical 
and  gynecological  medicine,  and  they 
cured  diseases  as  well  as  cared  for 
their  patients  throughout  their  illness- 
es. Between  the  15th  and  17th  cen- 
turies nine  million  women  were  burned 
as  witches  because  of  their  healing 
abilities.  Much  of  their  knowledge 
died  with  them,  knowledge  which  had 
previously  been  passed  on  from  moth- 
er to  daughter,  so  as  to  perpetuate  the 
art  of  healing  among  women. 3  There 
was  no  discrepancy  between  "curing" 
and     "caring"    until    the    practice    of 


22/Quest 


"modern  medicine"  in  America  in  the 
early  1900's.  The  model  for  present 
day  nursing  was  then  created  when 
other  areas  of  medicine  were  closed 
off  to  women  healers.  Caring  was  left 
to  nurses  whereas  curing  became  the 
sole  responsibility  of  male,  white, 
middle-class  physicians,  an  area  which 
became  one  of  power  and  control  with 
the  formation  of  the  American  Medical 
Association  (AMA). 

The  AMA  did  not  arise  out  of  a 
group  of  well-trained  medical  practi- 
tioners and  a  body  of  modern  science 
as  is  generally  claimed.  It  was  estab- 
lished through  the  patronage  of  the 
Carnegies  and  Rockefellers  who  rose  to 
the  ruling  class  from  fortunes  built  on 
oil,  coal,  industry  and  the  exploitation 
of  American  workers.  They  then  dis- 
pensed their  wealth  through  the  crea- 
tion of  tax-free  foundations  and  pour- 
ed millions  into  elitist  medical  schools. 
By  granting  funds  only  to  those  schools 
which  followed  an  education  pattern 
of  four  years  of  medical  school  follow- 
ing four  years  of  college,  they  effective- 
ly eliminated  women,  working  classes 
and  poor  people  from  the  possibility 
of  a  medical  education.  These  tactics 
and  the  patronage  of  the  wealthy 
established  male  healers  as  the  medical 
profession.  Women  reformers  conse- 
quently invented  nursing  when  all  legal 
forms  of  independent  medical  practice 
were  wrested  from  them  in  the  ensuing 
sexist  and  class  struggles. 4 

Professionalism 

A    profession    is    an    elitist    union 


which  sells  its  services  at  a  high  price, 
restricts  its  membership  to  a  few  of  the 
chosen  and  caters  to  the  demands  of 
the  upper  classes.  Becoming  a  member 
of  a  profession  is  an  effective  step  for 
those  desiring  upward  movement  from 
one  class  position  to  another.  The 
effectiveness  of  moving  upward  through 
the  acquisition  of  professional  status 
has  been  well  established  in  Hawaii, 
particularly  by  Japanese  and  Chinese 
immigrants  who  were  brought  into 
Hawaii  to  work  in  the  sugar  cane  and 
pineapple  fields.  They  were  able  to 
move  out  of  the  fields  by  becoming 
lawyers,  dentists,  doctors,  architects, 
and  today,  some  of  them  are  among 
the  richest  and  most  respected  men  in 
Hawaii. 

Nursing  is  attempting  to  seek  simi- 
lar status  by  equating  equality  with 
professionalism.  In  doing  so,  it  negates 
the  real  issue  which  is  keeping  nurses 
in  subservient  roles,  that  is,  sexism 
throughout  the  health  field.  This  sex- 
ism duplicates  the  traditional  male- 
female  roles  of  a  class  based  society. 
These  are  firmly  established  and  main- 
tained roles  which  keep  men  in  control 
of  power  forces  and  keep  women  sup- 
porting and  sustaining  them.  These 
controls  are  found  not  only  in  medical 
systems,  but  in  all  systems-legal/penal, 
religious,  educational,  economic,  gov- 
ernmental/political and  family.  Within 
these  systems  women  serve,  but  do  not 
make  the  decisions  by  which  their 
lives  are  controlled.  They  serve  as 
mothers,  wives,  secretaries,  aides,  nuns, 
teachers  and  nurses,  each  of  these  roles 
being  potentially  a  position  of  control 


Women  Healers  vs.  the  AMA/23 


if  the  women  who  fill  them  choose  to 
make  them  so.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
achieve  the  status  of  a  profession  to 
have  control  over  one's  life  and  one's 
health. 

The  attempt  to  achieve  professional 
status  within  nursing  has  led  us  to 
infighting,  to  the  establishment  of 
differences,  to  separateness  and  war- 
ring factions  among  ourselves.  These 
differences  can  be  felt  in  the  question 
that  is  often  asked  of  nurses,  "Are  you 
a  degree  nurse  or  'only'  an  RN?"  We 
use  this  question  against  each  other 
in  a  way  which  maintains  the  distance 
keeping  us  from  establishing  effective 
cohesiveness.  Its  use  has  generated 
categories  of  expertise-nurse  practi- 
tioner, clinical  practitioner,  achieve- 
ment lists  for  those  gaining  status 
through  special  examinations-labels 
which  all  change  yearly  as  we  claw  and 
scratch  our  way  up  the  professional 
ladder.  Some  of  us  may  recognize  that 
in  the  process  of  achieving  such  status, 
we  hurt  other  nurses.  Few  of  us  recog- 
nize how  in  the  process  we  reinforce 
sexism  and  hurt  other  women  who 
could  join  with  us  in  the  struggle  for 
establishment  of  women  as  independent 
practitioners  of  medicine. 

Professionalism  apes  sexism  because 
it  can  only  be  achieved  through  the 
strict  control  of  a  profession's  mem- 
bership and  by  the  elimination  of  "less 
worthy"  or  "inferior"  others.  In  the 
attempt  to  achieve  professional  status, 
some  women  are  relegated  to  a  posi- 
tion of  inferiority  by  job,  intellect, 
education,  ability  or  other  criteria. 
Infighting  further  perpetuates  sexism 


241  Quest 


by  creating  the  "Queen  Bee  Syndrome," 
which  says  that,  "I,  a  woman,  made  it 
alone  in  a  male  world;  you  can  too, 
without  help  from  me."  The  Queen 
Bee  not  only  denies  help  to  other  wo- 
men but  actively  works  against  them  to 
maintain  her  own  position  in  the  male- 
dominated  system. 

Nursing  is  a  healing  art  which  should 
not  require  the  blessing  of  the  medical 
profession  in  order  to  exist.  A  healing 
art,  by  its  very  definition,  is  also  the 
practice  of  medicine  because,  by  its 
use,  people  are  cured  of  their  diseases, 
relieved  of  their  pain  and  restored  to  a 
state  of  well-being  and  wholeness.  To 
deny  that  nurses  also  practice  medicine 
maintains  our  subservient  positions  and 
negates  our  abilities  as  healers.  We  can- 
not practice  nursing  effectively  as  inde- 
pendent practitioners  within  establish- 
ed health  facilities  or  in  private  prac- 
tice because  we  are  not  legitimized  by 
the  medical  profession  to  do  so.  The 
AMA  controls  powerful  lobbying  forces 
which  influence  laws  restricting  our 
opportunities  to  practice  independent- 
ly of  the  medical  hierarchy.  Through 
legal  controls,  doctors  continue  to 
supervise  us  directly  and  indirectly  and 
determine  which  functions  we  are 
allowed  to  perform.  As  more  of  these 
physician-functions  are  delegated  to  us, 
we  practice  nursing  less,  assist  doctors 
more  and  do  not  even  receive  the  high- 
er salaries  of  bonafide  Physician  Assist- 
ants. 

Nurses  could  secure  control  over 
their  wages  and  their  right  to  be  inde- 
pendent of  medical  controls  in  rela- 
tively simple  ways.  "Simple"  does  not 


necessarily  mean  easy.  It  will  take 
courage  for  nurses  to  overthrow  an 
identity  based  on  subservient  roles  and 
to  create  radical  change  in  a  practice 
steeped  in  a  tradition  of  giving  to 
others  while  denying  one's  own  needs. 
To  join  with  other  so-called  non-pro- 
fessional or  lay  women  to  achieve  the 
goal  of  independence  means  using  ag- 
gressive means  and  acquiring  assertive 
skills,  skills  which  are  the  antithesis  of 
nursing  philosophy.  In  addition,  real 
changes  are  almost  always  accompanied 
by  personal  pain  and  anxiety,  loss  of 
support  groups  and  economic  security. 
The  very  aspect  of  subserviency  gives 
nursing  its  job  security.  Nurses  are  not 
usually  required  to  take  responsibility 
for  making  decisions  which  can  mean 
the  difference  between  health  and  ill- 
ness, life  and  death.  In  contrast,  inde- 
pendent practice  will  necessitate  that 
nurses  must  make  many  of  the  decisions 
now  made  by  physicians  and  must  take 
the  responsibility  for  their  decisions. 

Nurses  need  to  adopt  the  philosophy 
of  the  Feminist  Movement— that  is,  the 
bonding  together  of  women  in  sister- 
hood for  strength  and  control  over 
our  lives.  This  means  not  only  the 
bonding  of  registered  nurses,  but  all 
women  who  work  in  the  health  fields- 
aides,  LPN's,  kitchen  workers,  janitors, 
dieticians,  social  workers,  secretaries. 
The  recent  strike  against  four  of  Hono- 
lulu's hospitals  by  registered  nurses  is  a 
specific  case  in  point.  Nurses  in  super- 
visor's roles,  LPN's  and  aides  who  con- 
tinued to  work  while  other  women 
walked  picket  lines  were  functioning 
counter    to    the    strike   efforts   of  the 


Women  Healers  vs.  the  AMA/25 


nurses  when  they  could  have  been 
acting  in  support  of  their  sisters'  ef- 
forts. Their  lack  of  support  was  defeat- 
ing to  themselves  as  practitioners,  and 
ultimately  to  the  concept  of  responsi- 
ble patient  care  as  well.  If  all  of  the 
women  in  these  four  hospitals  had 
bonded  together  for  improvement  of 
working  conditions,  their  demands 
would  have  had  to  be  met.  Medicine, 
in  its  present  form,  cannot  exist  with- 
out women  in  serving  roles.  Health 
facilities  require  womanpower,  and 
the  health  system  would  be  paralyzed 
without  it.  However,  womanpower 
used  only  in  subservient  roles  has  re- 
sulted in  and  will  continue  to  result  in 
the  grossest  of  discriminatory  prac- 
tices: the  best  medical  care  for  the 
upper  classes  and  denial  of  the  same 
kind  of  health  care  to  women,  to  those 
with  low  incomes,  and  minority  or 
Third  World  groups.  This  condition  is 
likely  to  continue  because  there  are 
insufficient  physicians  to  provide  bet- 
ter care  and  little  motivation  to  change 
a  medical  system  which  keeps  physi- 
cians' fees  high  and  salaries  of  other 
health  workers  low. 

Nurses  could  also  change  existing 
controls  over  their  job  situations  by 
becoming  politically  active  in  joint 
efforts  with  other  women  health  work- 
ers. There  is  presently  a  bill  in  the 
Hawaii  State  Legislature  which  will 
require  reexamination  of  all  of  Hawaii's 
health  practitioners  for  relicensure. 
Relicensure  should  and  could  give 
health  personnel  the  right  to  practice 
independently  in  their  area  of  exper- 
tise    through     the    identification    and 


26/Quest 


acceptance  of  areas  of  responsibility 
determined  by  the  licensing  process. 
Nurses  do  not  have  the  money  or 
cohesiveness  for  the  necessary  lobby- 
ing power  to  compete  with  establish- 
ed medical  controls  which  affect  our 
right  to  work.  A  joint  effort  by  all 
women  health  workers  could,  how- 
ever, be  a  highly  persuasive  force  for 
change. 

To  make  these  changes,  we  as  nurses 
must  give  up  our  struggle  to  achieve 
professional  status  within  the  medical 
profession  and  recognize  that  all  wom- 
en in  the  health  fields  are  necessary 
for  optimal  patient  care.  We  must  also 
recognize,  accept  and  move  forward 
on  the  basic  premise  that  no  one  wom- 
an's job  is  more  important  or  less  im- 
portant than  anothers',  and  that  each 
woman    possesses    wisdom    about    her 


own  body  and  health  experiences.  By 
sharing  the  differing  knowledges  each 
of  us  possesses,  we  increase  the  wis- 
dom and  health  of  all  people. 

Those  of  us  who  work  in  the  Femi- 
nist Movement  for  change  of  existing 
health  care  practices  are  presently  a 
minority.  Our  efforts  will  not  be  real- 
ized until  all  women,  patients  or  prac- 
titioners, work  together  for  change.  It 
is  my  belief  that  the  Feminist  Move- 
ment will  be  the  single  most  effective 
mechanism  for  achieving  the  changes 
nurses  have  long  talked  about  and  de- 
sired but  have  been  powerless  to  effect. 


Rosemary  Rodewald  is  a  Registered 
Nurse  studying  women's  health  con- 
cerns and  helping  to  establish  a  Wom- 
en's Health  Center  in  Hawaii. 


FOOTNOTES 

iRead  "The  Nursing  Profession-Condi- 
tion Critical"  by  Trucia  D.  Kushner,  Ms., 
August  1973,  for  an  accurate  view  of  nurses 
through  the  eyes  of  some  typical  physicians. 

^Barbara  Ehrenreich  and  Deirdre  English, 
Witches,  Midwives  and  Nurses:  A  History  of 
Woman  Healers,  Glass  Mountain  Pamphlet 
No.  1,  The  Feminist  Press,  Box  334,  Old 
Westbury,  N.Y.  11568,  1973. 

^Andrea  Dworkin,  "What  were  those 
witches  really  brewing?"  Ms.,  April  1974, 
pp.  52-55,  89-90. 

4  Although  by  1830,  thirteen  states  had 
outlawed  "irregular"  medical  practices  and 
established  "formally  trained  regulars"  as 
the  legal  healers,  there  was  no  popular  sup- 
port then  for  a  medical  monopoly  or  for 
the  group  of  middle-class,  white  males  who 
made  up  this  group  of  healers.  "Formal" 
training  varied  from  a  few  months  to  two 


years  and  did  not  require  a  high  school 
education.  The  attempt  to  legislate  out  the 
trusted  healers  of  the  common  people  re- 
sulted in  a  radical  uprising  in  1830's  and 
40's  called  the  Popular  Health  Movement, 
primarily  backed  by  women.  By  1840,  most 
of  the  medical  practice  laws  had  been  re- 
pealed through  women's  efforts.  The  Popular 
Health  Movement  lost  out,  however,  when 
feminists  opted  for  respectability  and  align- 
ed themselves  with  middle-class  male  healers. 
Male  healers  formed  the  first  national  organ- 
ization in  1848  calling  themselves  the  Amer- 
ican Medical  Association.  During  the  later 
part  of  the  19th  century,  sectarian  prac- 
titioners and  women  healers  were  attacked 
by  the  AMA  in  openly  sexist  assaults.  It 
took  the  patronage  of  the  ruling  class  in 
the  early  1900's,  however,  to  secure  the 
authority  of  the  laws  which  were  necessary 
for  the  AMA  to  become  the  only  legal  prac- 
titioners of  medicine. 


Women  Healers  vs.  the  AMA/27 


CLASS 
REALITIES: 


CREATE  a  NE 


This  article  is  dedicated  to  Jo 
Butler,  Beulah  Sanders,  Edith  Van 
Horn,  and  Janet  Kollias,  my  mother- 
four  of  the  strongest  women  I  know. 

The  Women's  Movement  has  been 
defined  as  an  educated,  white  middle- 
class  one,  and  for  most  of  its  parti- 
cipants, this  definition  holds  true. 
The  most  obvious  reason  for  this  is 
that  its  middle-class  originators  or- 
ganized around  needs  and  experiences 
which  reflected  their  background.  How- 
ever, there  are  feminist  organizers 
from  lower-  and  working-class  back- 
grounds, and  some  of  us  have  tried  to 
integrate  class  consciousness  and  class- 
oriented  issues  into  the  Women's  Move- 
ment-but  not  with  much  success. 

If    a    truly   representative    feminist 

*Edited  by  Sidney  Oliver,  et  al 
(thanks  go  to  Sidney's  patience);  and 
special  thanks  to  Shirl  Smith  for  typing 
and  class  support.  An  unending  thanks 
to  all  the  women  I've  been  lucky 
enough  to  meet,  who  confirm  the  ideas 
in  this  article-you  all  know  who  I 
mean. 


organization  is  to  be  created,  then 
we  must  find  concrete  ways  to  incor- 
porate class  and  race  issues  in  a  clear 
ideology.  But  so  far,  these  topics  have 
been  misunderstood,  forgotten,  ignored 
or  misused.  As  a  result,  action  around 
these  issues  has  been  minimal  and  in 
many  cases,  has  caused  further  splits 
within  the  Movement. 

To  be  an  effective  tool  for  social, 
political  and  economic  change,  the 
Women's  Movement  must  know  how 
to  utilize  money,  power  and  organiza- 
tion. While  these  skills  often  are  lack- 
ing among  middle-  and  upper-class 
women,  they  are  part  of  the  lives  of 
lower-  and  working-class  women.  Eco~ 
nomic  conditions  have  forced  many 
of  us  to  develop  strong  self-concepts, 
roots  for  group  identity,  and  the  re- 
sponsibility of  accountable  leadership. 

The  Movement  has  a  lot  to  learn 
from  lower-  and  working-class  women, 
whether  or  not  they  are  feminists.  But 
until  the  Movement  can  project  an 
analysis  of  feminism  which  exposes  the 
ways  capitalism  and  racism  further 
divide  and  oppress  women,  it  cannot 
expect  our  further  participation. 


28/Quesf,  vol.  I  no.  3,  winter,  1975 


)WER  BASE 

by  Karen  Kollias 

graphics  by  Peg  Averill 

I  work  from  three  assumptions: 
both  white  and  non-white  lower-  and 
working-class  women  need  the  Wom- 
en's Movement  to  further  our  struggles 
for  change;  the  Movement  has  to  act 
upon  class  and  race  issues  to  create  a 
powerful  base  for  change  for  all  wom- 
en; and  these  struggles  must  create  a 
society  which  doesn't  depend  upon 
anyone's    oppression. 

This  article  will  define  three  com- 
monly lumped-together  groups-the 
lower  class,  the  working  class  and  the 
working  poor;  show  how  strong  self 
concepts,  a  group  identity  and  leader- 
ship qualities  develop  from  class  exper- 
iences and  create  a  certain  perception 
of  the  power  structure;  point  out  how 
the  Movement  has  been  classist  and 
racist  in  its  theories  and  strategies; 
and  finally,  provide  some  suggestions 
for  ways  feminists  can  deal  with  class 
and  race  in  developing  an  effective 
political  organization. 

What  We  Need  To  Understand 

Theoreticians  from  the  old  Left  to 
present   day  liberals,  as  well  as  many 


"class-conscious"  people,  see  all  who 
are  neither  upper  nor  middle  class  as 
the  "masses"  or  the  "working  class." 
My  purpose  is  to  distinguish  among 
these  classes  in  order  to  show  the  nec- 
essary and  consistently  overlooked 
positive  qualities  which  such  women 
often  possess.  I  can  not  account  for 
all  lower-  and  working-class  women,  or 
provide  "the  definition"  of  these  three 
groups.  Nor  do  I  examine  the  weak- 
nesses supposedly  inherent  in  these 
class  experiences— too  much  has  been 
said  about  them  already.  Instead,  I 
congratulate   our   strengths. 

One  critical  distinction  among  the 
working  class,  the  working  poor,  and 
the  primarily  urban  lower  class  is  that 
for  the  working  class,  upward  mobility 
is  possible,  but  for  the  working  poor 
and  the  lower  class,  the  chances  for 
it  are  slim.  Family  and  economic 
experiences  are  most  important  in 
shaping  women's  lives.  I  will,  there- 
fore, focus  on  them  while  examining 
class  differences  among  women,  show- 
ing how  varying  experiences  mold  their 
perceptions  of  society. 

The  Working  Class  Family 

Most  working  class  families  are 
supported  primarily  by  men.  The  jobs 
available  to  these  men  are  fairly  se- 
cure, often  unionized,  and  require 
some  level  of  marketable  skill.  But 
at  the  same  time,  they  offer  little  or 
no  room  for  intellectual  challenge  or 
advancement-and  hardly  ever,  for  pow- 
er. The  family  income  can  vary  widely, 
depending  on  unions  and  skills,  but 
often   it  is  sufficient  to  meet  immed- 


Class  Realities/29 


iate  necessities  as  well  as  modest 
desires. 

Higher  education  is  usually  reserved 
for  the  men.  Community  colleges  and 
state  universities  may  be  possible,  but 
the  reality  for  women  is  most  often  a 
high  school  degree  and  possibly  a 
secretarial  or  vocational  school.  Most 
working  class  women  are  married,  and 
mothers,  long  before  a  middle-class 
woman  receives  her  B.A. 

A  reasonable  economic  level  often 
leads  to  the  means  for  upward  mobil- 
ity. Parents  consciously  push  their 
children  to  "be  more"  and  will  put  out 
more  than  they  can  afford  for  higher 
education  if  the  opportunity  arises. 
They  identify  with  middle-class  fam- 
ilies in  consumption  patterns  and  by 
living  outside  industrial  areas.  In  their 
struggle  for  social  acceptance  they 
are  likely  to  emphasize  the  differences 
between  themselves  and  the  lower 
classes. 

For  the  women,  running  the  home 
is  the  clearly  defined  role  regardless  of 
other  activities.  Economically,  she  may 
not  have  to  work,  but  she  often  does 
so  to  help  in  the  struggle  for  upward 
mobility.  Her  attentions  and  efforts 
are  spent  primarily  in  the  home  as  wife 
and  mother.  From  a  limited  study  of 
southwest  Chicago's  workingclass  wom- 
en, Kathleen  McCourt  notes  that  they 
were  quick  to  state  not  only  that  their 
husbands  and  children  weren't  over- 
looked in  favor  of  community  activi- 
ties, but  in  fact,  that  she: 

still  has  dinner  on  the  table  every 
night  at  the  right  time.  She  still 
keeps  her  house  neat  and  clean.  She 


still  supervises  her  children.  No  matter 
how  important  the  women  may  per- 
ceive their  working  in  the  community 
to  be,  it  is  defined  within  the  house- 
hold as  secondary.  It  is  not  sufficiently 
important  that  the  traditional  distribu- 
tion of  household  chores  be  re-aligned 
to  make  more  room  for  it.  1 

The  mother  is  the  controlling  force 
within  the  family.  She  mediates  be- 
tween the  institutions  (church,  school, 
city  government)  and  her  family;  she 
provides  moral  support  to  a  husband 
who  feels  powerless,  alienated  and  un- 
important in  his  job;  she  assesses  the 
larger  society  and  provides  both  some 
of  the  money  (if  she  works)  and  most 
of  the  direction  in  the  family's  move 
to  identify  with  the  middle  classes; 
she  keeps  the  family  out  of  the  danger 
of  economic  hardship  by  close  manage- 
ment and  distribution  of  its  income; 
plus  she  coordinates  all  the  domestic 
chores. 

The  Working  Poor  Family 

Working  poor  families  are  usually 
supported  by  unskilled,  male  or  fe- 
male jobs,  which  are  relatively  inse- 
cure because  they  are  not  unionized. 
Since  fewer  males  are  heads  of  house- 
holds, many  women  must  support  their 
families  alone,  on  low  wages  from 
exhausting  service  jobs,  such  as  wait- 
resses, sales  clerks,  or  domestic  work- 
ers. Many  hold  down  two  jobs,  one  of 
which  (like  sewing  or  ironing)  can 
be  done  at  home.  All  the  income  is 
needed  for  day-to-day  necessities,  so 
there  is  little  left  over  for  upward 
mobility. 


30/Quest 


A  high  school  education  is  common, 
but  working  poor  children  may  be 
forced  to  drop  out  of  school  to  get  a 
job  to  help  support  the  family.  It  is 
usually  the  women  who  are  expected 
to  quit  school.  Sometimes  drop-outs 
finish  high  school  at  night,  but  be- 
cause of  economic  need  or  marriage  or 
both,  night  school  often  is  not  possible 
or  considered  vital.  Higher  education 
is  seldom  available  and  given  less  stress 
than  in  the  working  class. 

Working  poor  families  lack  the 
money  to  relocate  and  often  stay  in 
the  same,  urban  communities  for  gen- 
erations unless  forced  out.  Even  though 
their  housing  is  usually  poor,  the  com- 
mon conditions  of  the  neighborhood 
as  well  as  family  roots  have  the  poten- 
tial to  create  strong  bonds. 

The  options  for  women  are  few, 
virtually  insuring  an  early  marriage  in 
the  effort  to  start  over,  or  more  simply, 
because  there  are  no  other  choices. 
Since  finances  require  her  to  work,  the 
working  poor  mother  has  little  time 
or  energy  to  devote  to  her  children's 
"proper"  socialization.  Children  are 
raised  more  independently  than  those 
of  the  working  class  and  age  quickly, 
soon  finding  themselves  with  most  of 
the  responsibilities  of  running  the 
home,  particularly  if  they  are  female. 

Working  poor  women,  starting  at  an 
early  age,  are  used  to  making  decisions 
which  affect  others  and  have  had  to 
develop  confidence  in  their  ability  to 
confront  day-to-day  responsibilities. 
They  have  to  provide  needed  income, 
often  alone,  as  well  as  provide  family 
security    and    physical    welfare.    They 


tend  to  be  strong  because  they  have 
survived  hard  economic  realities,  par- 
ticularly those  who  can't  depend  on 
men  as  an  additional  means  of  security 
or  support. 
The  Lower  Class  Family 

Lower  class  family  existence  is  char- 
acterized by  a  continuous  daily  strug- 
gle; employment  is  usually  temporary, 
unstable  and  undesirable.  While  most 
lower-class  families  are  headed  by  wom- 
en, these  women  don't  have  real  con- 
trol over  their  situations.  They  are  re- 
sponsible for  raising  their  families  by 
themselves,  and  many  are  dependent 
on  welfare  for  their  income.  Johnnie 
Tillmon,  National  Welfare  Rights  Or- 
ganization spokeswoman,  describes  the 
welfare  system: 

A.F.D.C.  (Aid  to  Families  with  De- 
pendent Children)  is  like  a  super-sexist 
marriage.  You  trade  in  a  man  for  the 
man.  But  you  can't  divorce  him  if  he 
treats  you  bad.  He  can  divorce  you, 
of  course,  cut  you  off  anytime  he 
wants.  But  in  that  case,  he  keeps  the 
kids,  not  you. 2 

Lower  class  women  must  take  what- 
ever work  they  can  find  to  try  to  meet 
expenses-usually  the  unskilled,  unor- 
ganizable  jobs  which  lack  stability  or 
leverage  for  further  advancement.  Many 
such  jobs  mean  long  night  shifts.  Since 
capitalism,  racism  and  sexism  are  inter- 
related, an  extremely  large  percentage 
of  lower-class  families  are  non-white. 
While  female-headed  lower-class  famil- 
ies have  the  least  financial  resources  for 
handling  crises  (medical  disabilities, 
break-ins,  rapes,  drugs,  etc.),  they  are 
most  vulnerable  to  them. 


Class  Realities/31 


32/Quest 


The  very  young  are  left  alone  with 
other  children  or  with  older  relatives. 
Children  are  responsible  for  themselves 
and  for  others  very  early;  educational 
opportunities  are  inadequate  and  unin- 
spiring. Those  in  school  are  often 
forced  to  drop  out  to  find  work,  or 
feel  the  uselessness  in  any  education 
which  can't  provide  immediate  cash 
security.  There  is  little  emphasis  on 
dating  and  romance,  but  many  younger 
women  see  pregnancy  or  marriage  as  a 
way  out.  Daily  struggle  is  their  educa- 
tion more  often  than  not. 

So  noticeably  absent  are  male  heads 
that  lower-class  urban  areas  often  look 
like  female  communities.  Female  chil- 
dren see  their  mothers  as  the  root  of 
the  family-a  model  of  strength,  unlike 
their  middle-class  counterparts. 

In  addition  to  economic  hardships, 
lower-class  women  face  constant  bour- 
geois criticism:  "unfit  mothers"  for 
leaving  the  children  unattended  if  they 
find  a  job,  or  "lazy  bitches  sucking 
off  the  system"  when  they  stay  home 
to  care  for  the  children.  Struggle  means 
fighting  to  survive,  standing  up  against 
these  "moral"  attacks,  and  not  taking 
anything  for  granted.  The  lower-class 
woman  has  to  surface  all  her  strengths 
just  to  survive,  and  in  the  process, 
develop  other  positive  qualities  as  well. 

The  further  the  family  is  from  gene- 
ral social  benefits-a  good  income,  a 
secure  and  meaningful  job-the  more 
dominant  are  the  women.  These  condi- 
tions create  the  experience  necessary 
for  confronting  and  potentially  chang- 
ing the  system.  This  also  illustrates  a 
relationship    between    class,    sex    and 


race  in  relation  to  the  power  structure. 

What  We  Need  To  Learn 

The  objective  economic  conditions 
in  all  three  of  these  classes  are  neither 
pleasant  nor  desirable.  However,  they 
have  generated  some  strengths  and  atti- 
tudes that  are  essential  for  understand- 
ing and  confronting  the  power  struc- 
ture: a  strong  self-concept,  group  iden- 
tity and  accountable  leadership,  all  of 
which  are  closely  related  and  therefore 
provide  continuous,  cyclical  support 
to  each  other.  Strong  self-concepts  help 
build  a  trusted  group  identity,  which, 
in  turn,  provides  accountable  leaders. 
Similarly,  strong  leadership  can  project 
strong  self-concepts  and  instill  the 
roots  for  group  identity-and  so  on. 
Self-Concept 

A  political  movement  will  ptoject 
the  strength  and  confidence  of  its 
representatives  through  their  self-con- 
cepts. And  clearly,  self-concept  is  de- 
termined by  one's  life  experiences  and 
how  one  handles  objective  life  condi- 
tions. But  while  the  Movement  states 
that  women  must  be  strong,  many 
feminists  fear  strong  women  and  label 
those  with  assertive,  confident  person- 
alities, too  aggressive. 

Lower-  and  working-class  women 
have  been  forced  to  surface  their 
strengths  in  order  to  survive,  and  often 
have  had  to  assume  responsibility  for 
others,  as  well.  While  most  women  have 
some  elements  of  strength  within 
them,  many  simply  haven't  had  to 
develop  it,  because  of  their  comfort 
and  economic  security. 

One    of   the    major   issues    of  the 


Class  Realities/33 


Women's  Movement  has  been  to  elimi- 
nate women's  weakness  and  replace 
it  with  confident  independence.  This 
is  partly  because  middle-class  women 
who  have  some  kind  of  protector  (a 
successful  husband  or  father)  feel  a 
lack  of  control  over  their  own  lives 
and  have  felt  the  need  to  organize 
around  that.  This  is  valid  within  its 
own  class  context. 

Middle-class  models  of  strength 
have  primarily  been  men,  and  strength 
is  usually  equated  with  power.  Lower- 
and  working-class  women,  especially 
non-white  women,  on  the  other  hand, 
have  seldom  been  able  to  depend  on 
someone  else  for  their  decisions  or 
maintenance.  The  process  of  taking 
active  control  over  their  lives,  and  of 
influencing  those  close  to  them,  has 
given  them  a  lifetime  of  experience 
with  decision-making  of  the  most  basic 
nature-survival.  This  decision-making 
becomes  part  of  what  makes  for  a 
strong  self-concept. 

In  a  system  run  by  men,  for  men, 
decisive  power  is  naturally  equated 
with  men.  This,  perhaps,  explains  some 
middle  class  women's  fear  of  a  decisive, 
strong  female.  But  in  a  system  or  sub- 
system in  which  women  make  deci- 
sions, decisive  power  doesn't  assume 
undesirable  connotations.  For  the  only 
"masculine"  attribute  of  power  comes 
from  the  perception  that  now  certain 
men  control  how  things  are  run;  power, 
per  se,  isn't  inherently  negative.  This 
can  be  translated  into  a  political  goal: 
women  want  not  only  to  achieve  cer- 
tain rights  within  a  system,  but  also 
to  get  a  part  of  the  decision-making 


power  governing  that  system. 

It  follows,  then,  that  women  with 
strong  self-concepts  should  be  models 
for  women  seeking  that  confidence. 
This  doesn't  mean  that  poor  women 
should  be  idolized.  It  does  mean  that 
a  woman  might  find  both  a  motive 
and  a  model  for  expanding  her  self- 
concept  through  the  influence  of  these 
women.  However,  this  strength  should 
not  be  mistaken  for  economic  control, 
which  is  much  harder  to  achieve,  while 
capitalism  still  exists. 

Group  Identity 

Group  identity  allows  for  commit- 
ment, risk-taking,  accountability,  and 
the  establishment  of  mutual  trust. 
These  attributes  are  vital  for  groups 
seeking  to  be  a  unified  political  force. 
Group  identity  doesn't  just  happen; 
there  are  certain  objective  economic 
and  social  conditions  which  are  instru- 
mental in  helping  diverse  individuals 
to  unite  in  tight  bonds.  Sex,  class  and 
race  differences  are  such  conditions 
which  can  be  consciously  utilized  to 
create  a  powerful  political  base. 

The  concept,  "sisterhood  is  power- 
ful," was  an  attempt  to  ground  femi- 
nism in  a  strong  group  identity.  It 
didn't  catch  on  as  widely  as  was  hoped, 
primarily  for  the  reason  offered  by  the 
San  Diego  Women's  Studies  Program: 

It  (sisterhood)  came  from  women  in 
the  movement  who  were  mainly  white, 
middle  class  women.  They  believed 
that  all  women  were  our  sisters.  Seeing 
the  commonality  of  their  oppression 
for  the  first  time,  they  realized  that 
what  they  had  gone  through  was  not 


34/Quest 


unique  or  crazy  but  had  a  common 
social  base.  This  made  them  gloss  over 
differences,  that  were  real  differences 
in  women's  social  realities  (class,  race, 
sexual  preference).  Given  the  fact  that 
this  idea  came  from  white,  middle 
class  women,  it  is  reflective  of  their 
attempt  to  gloss  over  differences  rather 
than  to  deal  with  them.* 

It  was  just  too  simple. 

Consciousness-raising  and  feminist 
therapy  groups  were  two  tools  that 
might  have  provided  roots  for  group 
identity  in  the  Movement,  but  they 
were  successful  with  only  a  small  num- 
ber of  women.  They,  too,  overlooked 
some  important  considerations:  not 
only  should  they  be  planned  political- 
ly, they  should  provide  and  encourage 
space  to  act  out  of  one's  group  identi- 
ty, and  their  reasons  for  existing  need- 
ed to  be  more  apparent. 

Some  groups  of  women  have  a  group 
identity,  and  more  important,  have 
succeeded  in  utilizing  it.  Out-of-the- 
closet  lesbians  have  created  strong 
bonds  of  group  identity  based  on  their 
sexuality.  Their  solidarity  comes  from 
the  need  to  depend  upon  each  other 
for  survival,  because  coming  out  is  a 
political  risk.  This  provides  them  with 
a  closer  understanding  of  woman's 
class  identification  in  general.  Genuine 
love  and  passion  for  women  helps  to 
strengthen  the  lesbian's  self-concept 
and  to  give  her  a  deepened  respect  for 
and  trust  of  women. 

Black,  lower-  and  working-class 
women,  due  to  pressing  economic 
problems,  are  likely  to  establish  roots 
for  identity  with  one  another  out  of 


common  necessity.  This  form  of  group 
identity  is  potentially  quite  powerful: 
the  necessities  they're  after  are  non- 
negotiable.  Survival  demands  watching 
out  and  caring  for  their  families,  neigh- 
bors and  friends;  these  shared  responsi- 
bilities strengthen  group  identity. 

These  two  groups  illustrate  that  if 
feminism  is  to  strengthen  a  sense  of 
group  identity  in  women,  it  must  allow 
for  flexibility  and  work  with  the 
differences  of  women  rather  than  ig- 
noring them  to  get  to  the  similarities. 
Women  who  work  on  race  and/or  class 
demands  should  not  be  criticized  as 
"not  feminist  enough,"  but  supported 
for  being  strong  women  at  work  on 
change.  If  the  Women's  Movement 
doesn't  recognize  these  differences, 
it  will  never  acquire  a  larger  basis 
for  group  identity.  If  it  does,  it  has 
the  potential  to  be  a  revolutionary 
coalition  of  organized,  strong  groups. 

Accountable  Leadership 

Leaders  are  visible  representatives 
of  ideologies  to  the  public.  They  are 
also  images  of  strength,  direction,  and 
enthusiasm  for  those  working  around 
that  ideology.  However,  the  public 
view  of  the  Women's  Movement  has 
been  greatly  affected  by  its  lack  of 
acknowledged  leaders.  Since  the  Move- 
ment has  stifled  the  development  of 
leaders,  denied  their  importance  and 
condemned  some  visible  personalities, 
the  media  has  created  feminist  leaders 
to  satisfy  its  audiences.  The  majority 
of  these  are  researchers,  authors  and 
other  professionals  whose  primary  re- 
lation to  the  Movement  is  their  vocal 


Class  Realities/35 


or  written  observation.  Others  are 
women  working  on  single-issue  reforms 
or  government  programs  designed  to 
improve  life  within  the  capitalist  sys- 
tem. Most  media-created  leaders  rein- 
force the  white,  middle-class  stereotype 
of  the  movement. 

Real  leaders  of  an  effective  feminist 
organization  must  be  able  to  combine 
diverse  issues  and  make  them  relevant 
to  many  different  women.  In  addition, 
they  must  deal  accountably  with  issues 
that  affect  some  women,  but  not  neces- 
sarily all,  such  as  the  needs  of  lower- 
and  working-class  women,  lesbians, 
and  non-whites,  as  well  as  those  of  the 
straight,  white,  middle  class.  Leaders 
are  needed  who  begin  with  the  assump- 
tion that  everything  must  change,  in- 


cluding governing  social  institutions, 
if  everyone  is  to  be  free. 

Accountability  to  and  identity  with 
a  broad  spectrum  of  women,  and 
practical  experience  in  utilizing  and 
gaining  power,  are  essential  for  leaders. 
In  certain  respects,  non-white  and  poor 
women  have  a  head-start  in  these  areas. 
For  example,  they  understand  the  rela- 
tion between  money  and  power-a  vital 
quality  for  good  leadership.  Contrary 
to  the  bourgeois  myth  that  welfare 
mothers  mismanage  money, 

...an  AFDC  mother's  probably  got 
a  better  head  for  money  than  Rocke- 
feller. She  has  to.  She  has  so  little  to 
begin  with  that  she's  got  to  make  every 
penny  count  if  she  and  her  kids  are 
even  going   to   survive  A   This  kind  of 


36IQuest 


confrontation  with  the  system  forces 
poor  women  to  see  how  society  oper- 
ates. Once  they  are  politicized  these 
women  offer  new  perspectives  on  how 
things  should  be  redistributed,  pro- 
viding visions  for  future  alternatives. 

Since  understanding  one  form  of 
oppression  usually  makes  it  easier  to 
analyze  others,  the  Movement  should 
support  leaders  who  are  accountable 
to  class  and  race  issues  as  well  as  femi- 
nism. As  Margaret  Sloan,  a  founder  of 
the  National  Black  Feminist  Organiza- 
tion, puts  it: 

It  would  be  very  easy  for  me  if  the 
oppressor  would  split  up  the  week  and 
say  from  Monday  to  Wednesday  we  are 
going  to  mess  over  her  because  she's 
female,  and  the  rest  of  the  week  we 
are  going  to  put  her  down  because 
she's  black... but  it  doesn't  happen 
that  way. 5  The  issues  of  feminism  are 
too  closely  bound  with  class  and  race 
issues  for  some  strong  women  to  set 
one  aside  in  favor  of  the  other. 

Consequently,  a  comprehensive  po- 
litical analysis  will  most  likely  come 
from  non-white,  lower-class  women. 
As  Geraldine  Rickman  puts  it,  the 
black  (poor)  woman 

...has  the  necessary  adaptability, 
sense  of  self,  and  reality  orientation. 
The  high  risk  involved  for  the  black 
woman  as  a  functioning  change  agent 
is  equal  only  to  the  high  stakes  to  be 
gained  by  her.  Economically,  she  is  at 
the  bottom  of  the  barrel,  and  as  a 
group,  there's  only  one  way  to  go— up.  * 
It's  no  wonder  that  those  of  us  from 
lower-  or  working-class  backgrounds, 
or  who  are  black,  once  involved  with 


the  Women's  Movement,  have  taken 
responsibility  for  bringing  to  feminists 
the  issues  of  class  and  race. 

What  We  Need  To  Correct 

Rather  than  list  all  the  shortcomings 
of  the  Movement,  I  will  point  out  a 
few  attitudes  which  have  resulted  in 
the  exclusion  of  black  and  poor  wom- 
en: the  "women-as-one-class"  analysis; 
concentration  on  middle-class-bound 
demands  within  the  existing  system; 
and  socialist-feminists  and  reformist- 
feminists  acting  out  of  a  bourgeois 
position. 

Much  of  the  Movement's  political 
analysis  has  been  developed  around  a 
false  sense  of  women's  equality:  all 
women  are  equally  oppressed,  have  an 
equal  number  of  problems,  and  can 
change  existing  conditions  by  equal 
amounts  of  effort  and  participation. 
Rather  than  attacking  the  power  struc- 
ture, the  Women's  Movement  has  dealt 
primarily  with  sex  role  oppression, 
consciousness-raising,  and  supportive 
services.  When  exposed  to  the  public, 
these  often  get  lost  between  the  femi- 
nists who  express  them  and  the  women 
who  hear  them: 

With  one  exception,  nobody  I  talk- 
ed with  has  articulated  an  understand- 
ing of  the  socialization  process  and 
sex  role  stereotyping  that  the  wom- 
en's movement  is  fighting  against.  Be- 
yond the  job  sphere,  the  movement  is 
perceived  as  'kookie'  or  'man-hating' 
or  'women  who  wish  they  were  men' 
or  'bra-burners.'  7 

The    Movement    has    been    bogged 


Class  Realities/37 


down  in  abstractions  and  personal 
confrontations.  There  is  a  lack  of 
organizing  around  solid  economic  de- 
mands applicable  to  lower-,  working-, 
and  even  middle-class  women. 

For  example,  Ellen  Willis  points  out 
that  the  Movement's  biggest  employ- 
ment concern  has  been  the  lack  of 
career  opportunities  for  educated  wom- 
en.^ Economic  demands  are  coming 
from  the  already  privileged,  requesting 
the  legal  authorities  to  grant  them 
more  privileges.  Educational  reforms 
have  been  geared  to  the  college  and 
university  level:  higher  admission  rates, 
especially  to  medical  and  law  schools; 
more  programs  for  women;  the  estab- 
lishment of  women's  studies  programs, 
etc.  But  the  majority  of  non-white, 
lower-  and  working-class  women  don't 
have  the  power  to  utilize  these  benefits 
because  their  primary,  objective  eco- 
nomic conditions  haven't  changed. 

Socialist-feminists  are  developing  a 
class  analysis  within  feminism.  (For 
analysis  and  criticism  of  Women's 
Movement,  see  the  NAM  Bulletin.^) 
Many  still  relate  to  mixed  socialist 
groups  which  instruct  them  to  create 
feminist  caucuses.  Even  those  who 
organize  independent  socialist-feminist 
groups  maintain  Marxist  analyses,  view- 
ing women  as  "laborers"  in  the  prole- 
tarian sense  only.  Little  consideration 
is  given  to  lower-class  women-parti- 
cularly  welfare  recipients,  the  demands 
of  black  women,  or  the  working-class 
wives  who  are  hard  to  organize.  Many 
socialist-feminists  romanticize,  but 
don't  understand  the  daily  life  exper- 
iences, perceptions  of  society,  cultural 


determinants  and  levels  of  struggle 
which  shape  lower-  and  working-class 
women.  These  aren't  found  in  Marxist 
books  of  the  Left  nor  are  they  under- 
stood in  terms  of  20th  Century,  highly 
technological  American  society. 

This  oversight  stems  from  the  pri- 
marily white,  educated,  middle-class 
experiences  of  many  socialist-feminists. 
The  gap  between  their  daily  lives  and 
the  lives  of  women  of  the  other  classes 
makes  it  difficult  for  them  to  act  out 
their  theories.  Nevertheless,  some  dis- 
cussion groups  have  politicized  social- 
ist women  around  feminism,  and  vice- 
versa.  For  example,  women  in  San 
Diego  wrote  a  good  piece  on  how  to 
identify  and  combat  their  own  classist 
and  racist  attitudes.  They  stated  that 
though  many  feminists  have  "political- 
ly correct"  ideas  and  motivations,  in 
daily  life  they  are  capable  of  attitudes 
oppressive  to  black,  poor  and  working- 
class  women.  10 

Reformist  women  have  organized 
projects  around  economic  demands 
but  lack  an  overall  analysis  that  in- 
cludes class  issues.  These  feminists,  also 
primarily  middle-class,  educated  and 
white,  work  with  the  objective  of 
winning  minimal  concessions  from  the 
power  structure.  Because  they  have 
benefited  from  the  system,  they  mere- 
ly try  to  extend  its  benefits  to  some 
of  the  needy,  instead  of  questioning 
the  validity  of  capitalism  itself,  a 
condescending  attitude  at  the  least. 
Most  of  their  programs  concern  single- 
issue  demands-ones  which  the  govern- 
ment can  meet,  without  flinching. 

The   majority   of  reformist  women 


38/Qwesr 


Class  Realities/39 


(such  as  those  in  NOW's  Task  Force 
on  Poverty  or  on  various  "Status  of 
Women"  commissions)  aren't  concern- 
ed with  eliminating  classism  and  rac- 
ism; they  simply  help  gloss  over  some 
"differences"  (inequalities).  These 
women  haven't  felt  the  necessity  for 
an  ideology  which  settles  for  nothing 
less  than  revolution.  In  fact,  reformist, 
middle-class  women  may  feel  threaten- 
ed by  the  concrete  economic  demands 
of  black  and  poor  women  because  they 
have  some  privileges  to  lose. 

What  We  Need  To  Do 

The  Feminist  Movement  must  com- 
mit itself  to  the  absolute  necessity  of 
an  economic  and  social  revolution  if 
it  is  serious  about  adequately  meeting 
the  needs  of  non-white,  lower-  and 
working-class  women.  This,  of  course, 
would  affect  everyone.  A  majority  of 
feminists  still  fail  to  understand  the 
importance  of  continuous  struggle  a- 
round  broadly-based  issues  within  a 
revolutionary  context. 

Most  of  the  work  to  determine  and 
activate  programs  and  theories  appli- 
cable to  black  and  poor  women  lies  a- 
head.  I  will  mention  a  few  general  con- 
cepts and  specific  questions  I  feel  are 
important  in  the  effort  to  link  class 
and  race  issues  with  the  Women's 
Movement. 

Many  women  organizers  directly  af- 
fect the  lives  of  women  by  organizing 
primarily  around  economic  issues.  Bev- 
erly Fisher,  in  a  series  of  radio  pro- 
grams, stated  that  community  wom- 
en who  wouldn't  define  themselves  a.« 


feminists,  actually  have  a  "feminist 
approach  to  their  organizing."!  1  They 
recognize  the  strengths  of  women  and 
the  issues  which  will  be  of  greatest 
concern  to  the  community.  Yet  many 
won't  affiliate  with  the  Women's  Move- 
ment, primarily  because  of  the  media's 
emphasis  on  the  male-female  confron- 
tation and  because  there  is  no  organiz- 
ed structure  through  which  women  can 
state  what  they  need  and  want  from 
the  Movement.  We  need  to  develop 
those  structures. 

Many  of  the  political  divisions  a- 
mong  women's  groups  are  simple  dif- 
ferences in  style  and  not  necessarily 
ideology.  Studying  the  styles  of  var- 
ious organizations  should  strengthen 
each  group  and  open  communication 
channels;  differences  in  strategies  can 
serve  as  a  basis  for  sharing  and  learning 
more  skills.  Feminists  should  assess 
what  groups  are  organized  around 
which  issues  and  work  with  those 
which  get  things  done.  Parts  of  the  new 
feminist  ideology  we  seek  may  already 
exist  in  various  forms  in  other  organi- 
zations. 

Re-Evaluate  Our  Demands 

We  must  become  conscious  of  those 
demands  which  are  either  harmful  or 
irrelevant  to  black  and  poor  women. 
A  push  tor  women's  studies  in  higher 
education,  for  example,  isn't  going  to 
reach  those  it  should  unless  it  opens 
its  doors  to  women  in  the  community 
and  gives  them  free  access  (or  offers 
a  sliding  scale)  to  skills-building  and 
continuing  education.  This  would  help 
working-class,  black  and  poor  women 


AOlQuest 


to  raise  their  standard  of  living  and 
carry  out  more  effective  organizing. 
As  the  San  Diego  women  noted: 

...we  know  of  women's  issues  that 
are  not  anti-capitalist,  which  in  fact 
hurt  rather  than  help  women.  Such 
demands  might  be  increasing  the  num- 
ber of  women  in  the  military,  the 
police  force  or  in  managerial  positions. 
Oppressive  institutions  are  oppressive 
no  matter  who  staffs  them.  It  is  not 
in  the  interest  of  women  to  participate 
in  the  injustice  of  arresting  other  wom- 
en for  shoplifting,  prostitution  or  for- 
gery when  capitalism  has  forced  wom- 
en to  these  things  in  order  to  survive.*  2 

This  puts  another  challenge  to  the 
Women's  Movement-how  to  secure 
decent-paying  jobs  for  those  who  need 
them,  without  being  forced  to  oppres- 
sive institutions  for  employment.  Some 
middle-class  women  can  afford  to 
choose  their  jobs  according  to  morals 
(and  also  to  be  downwardly-mobile), 
but  this  isn't  true  for  poor  women. 

Professional  women  in  jobs  oppres- 
sive to  lower-  and  working-class  wom- 
en must  begin  to  take  risks.  Social 
workers,  probation  officers  and  admin- 
istrators in  health,  psychiatric  and 
penal  institutions  must  make  demands 
and  use  their  leverage  if  they  believe 
they  are  there  in  the  interests  of  wom- 
en. They  must  expose  oppression  in 
these  institutions,  make  demands  for 
change,  use  their  skills  and  position 
for  women,  and  urge  others  to  do  the 
same.  Unless  there's  struggle  and  agita- 
tion within,  the  professions—prison 
guards  of  the  class  system-will  not 
voluntarily  change. 


For  those  women  who  cannot  take 
many  political  risks,  there's  the  option 
of  sharing  financial  resources.  If  wom- 
en don't  have  the  time  or  energy  to 
actively  participate  in  feminist  organi- 
zations, their  financial  contributions, 
preferably  on  a  regular  basis,  should  be 
pooled  into  a  community  women's 
bank,  supervised  by  representatives  of 
women's  groups  which  organize  a- 
round  class  and  race  related  issues.  It 
is  criminal  that  now  (thanks  to  progres- 
sive capitalism)  a  single  woman  may 
make  up  to  $25,000  (not  to  mention 
what  a  man  can  make)  while  an 
A.F.D.C.  mother  is  allowed  to  struggle 
with  her  family  on  less  than  $4,000 
yearly.  If  women  are  serious  about 
eliminating  class  inequities,  then  they 
had  better  start  acting  out  their  honest 
intentions  now,  not  after  the  revo- 
tion. 

Select   Tactical  Specifics 

There  are  lots  of  issues  which  are 
actually  "women's  issues"  (e.g.,  wel- 
fare) that  the  Women's  Movement 
hasn't  acted  on.  One  such  issue  is  pub- 
lic housing.  The  majority  of  people 
forced  to  live  in  housing  projects  are 
welfare  recipients,  most  often  women 
and  children.  The  government  is  just 
as  bad  as  private  slumlords.  Public 
housing  usually  doesn't  meet  govern- 
ment housing  standards:  it  is  the  most 
susceptible  to  break-ins;  its  women 
and  children  are  vulnerable  to  attacks 
and  rapes;  and  if  they  protest,  evic- 
tions are  easy  to  process.  Since  find- 
ing other  housing  is  nearly  impossible, 
many  women  tolerate  unliveable  con- 


Class  Realities/41 


ditions  rather  than  live  on  the  streets. 
Yet  middle-  and  upper-middle  class 
women  haven't  paid  much  attention 
to  housing  issues.  They  are  in  a  position 
to  make  demands,  contribute  resources 
and  work  around  community  programs 
in  coalitions  with  other  projects  (ten- 
ants' unions  and  welfare  rights,  etc.), 
and  therefore  have  a  great  deal  of  po- 
tential for  producing  change. 

Public  transportation  is  another 
important  issue  to  lower-  and  working- 
class  women  who  usually  cannot  af- 
ford cars.  Most  cities  have  inadequate 
mass  transportation:  no  subways,  ir- 
regular and  expensive  buses,  unsafe 
stops,  and  so  on.  Many  working  poor 
women  are  subjected  to  these  unsatis- 
factory   conditions.    Again,    feminists 


\JSk 


NEWS 


Feminist  Alliance  Against  Rape 
Bi-monthly  Newsletter 

Over  200  groups  worldwide  are  or- 
ganized against  rape.  Their  political 
and  tactical  struggles  are  of  interest 
to  all  feminists.  Read  F.A.A.R.  News 
for: 

•  news  of  innovative  anti-rape  pro- 
jects   being    developed    by    women. 

•  analysis  of  issues  and  problems 
which  face  women  committed  to  stop- 
ping rape  .  .  .  prisons,  reformism,  pro- 
fessionalism, funding,  rape  preven- 
tion, etc. 

Annual  subscription  rates: 
$5/individuals,  rape  groups 
$10/institutions 

P.O.  Box  21033 
V^         Washington,  D.C.  20009  J 


haven't  acted  around  this  issue,  be- 
cause they  don't  have  to  contend  with 
public  transportation  as  part  of  their 
survival.  Organized  women's  groups 
could  demand  improvements,  such  as 
more  bus  stops  and  frequently-running 
buses  in  areas  where  public  housing 
projects  are  located.  Women  in  these 
projects  are  especially  dependent  on 
public  transportation  to  get  to  govern- 
ment agencies,  health  clinics,  etc.  Wom- 
en in  isolated  workplaces  should  de- 
mand that  their  employers  provide 
transportation  to  and  from  their  jobs 
-especially  when  night  shifts  are  in- 
volved. Strong  coalitions  of  various 
women's  groups  could  gain  influence 
in  decisions  made  about  public  trans- 
portation, and  set  a  precedent  for 
organization  around  other  citizens' 
issues. 

A  final  problem  for  women  from 
the  lower  classes,  black  and  white,  is 
the  division  between  those  of  us  who 
are  feminists,  and  those  who  aren't. 
Many  of  us  got  involved  in  the  move- 
ment through  situations  not  always 
open  to  our  sisters:  decent  jobs,  up- 
wardly-mobile marriages,  political  par- 
ticipation in  overtly  sexist  groups,  or 
higher  education.  Our  "non-feminist" 
sisters  feel  the  difference.  Roots  must 
not  be  forgotten,  no  matter  how  pain- 
ful the  memories,  or  how  critical  of 
us  other  feminists  may  be.  It  is  our 
responsibility  to  share  any  resources 
(skills,  money,  property)  we  may  have 
gained  from  newly-acquired  privileges- 
particularly  since  it  will  be  a  while 
before  most  middle  and  upper-middle- 
class  women  share  their  resources  with- 


42/Quest 


out  feeling  they  are  being  used. 

These  constitute  only  a  few  sugges- 
tions. There  are  many  others  forming 
in  women's  heads,  and  their  ideas, 
courses  of  action  and  programs  must 
be  discussed  and  expanded.  This  is 
only  the  beginning  in  re-evaluating  the 
directions  of  the  Women's  Movement, 
its  class  composition,  and  its  inherent 
relationship  to  self-concept,  forms  of 
power,  and  new  structures  of  organiza- 
tion. 

Footnotes 

^Kathleen  McCourt,  Politics  and  the 
Working-Class  Woman:  The  Case  on  Chi- 
cago's Southwest  Side  (Chicago:  National 
Opinion  Research  Center,  July,  1972),  p.  11. 

^Johnnie  Tillmon,  "Welfare  Is  a  Woman's 
Issue,"  Ms.,  (preview  issue),  Spring,  1972, 
p.  111. 

^San  Diego  Women's  Studies  Program, 
"Working  Draft-Socialist-Feminist  Paper," 
in  Three  Years  of  Struggle:  A  History  of  the 
San  Diego  Women's  Studies  Program  (San 
Diego:  SDSC,  May,  1973),  p.  14. 

^Tillmon,  p.  112. 

^Quote  by  Margaret  Sloan  appeared  in 
"Words  on  Women,"  Civil  Rights  Digest, 
p.   55. 

^Geraldine  Rickman,  "A  Natural  Al- 
liance; the  New  Role  for  Black  Women," 
in  Civil  Rights  Digest,  a  quarterly  of  the 
U.S.  Commission  on  Civil  Rights,  Spring, 
1974,  p.  58.  This  issue  is  titled  "Sexism  and 
Racism:  Feminist  Perspectives,"  which  con- 


tains valuable  material.  Copies-in  bulk  or 
singly-are  available  without  charge  by  writ- 
ing to:  Office  of  Information  and  Publica- 
tions, U.S.  Civil  Rights  Commission,  Wash- 
ington, D.C.  20425. 

7Kathleen  McCourt,  p.  13. 

^Ellen  Willis,  "Economic  Reality  and 
the  Limits  of  Feminism,"  Ms.,  June,  1973, 
p.  91. 

'Women's  Caucus,  New  American  Move- 
ment, "Notes  From  a  Workshop  on  Socialist 
Feminism,"  NAM  Bulletin,  March-April, 
1974,    p.    48. 

l^San  Diego  Women's  Studies  Program, 
"Racism  in  the  Women's  Movement,"  pp.32- 
33  and  "Ways  Petit  Bourgeois  Women  Can 
Struggle  with  Biases,"  pp.  33-36,  Three  Years 
of  Struggle. 

11  Radio  Free  Women,  WGTB-FM, 
Georgetown  University.  Series  on  class  and 
the  Women's  Movement,  leadership,  cultural 
differences,  and  future  visions.  Included 
Beverly  Fisher,  Karen  Kollias  and  Dolores 
Bargowski.  Rita  Mae  Brown  on  the  leader- 
ship tape.  Series  taped  in  Spring,  1973. 
Tapes  available  through  The  Feminist  Radio 
Network,  P.O.  Box  5537,  Washington,  D.C. 
20016. 

l^San  Diego  Women's  Studies  Program, 
p.  13. 


Karen  Kollias,  Promotion  Editor  of 
Quest,  and  employed  by  the  National 
Center  for  Urban  Ethnic  Affairs,  is 
working  on  economic  issues  as  they 
affect  women. 


Class  Realities/43 


It's  All 

D 

K 

I 

c 

p 
s 


Americans  have  the  Dixie-cup  men- 
tality-if  you  don't  like  someone,  then 
crumple  them  up  and  throw  them  a- 
way.  Auto  graveyards,  prisons  and 
mental  institutions  share  one  thing  in 
common:  all  contain  society's  cast- 
offs.  The  truly  remarkable  aspect  of 
the  Dixie-cup  mentality  is  not  that 
Americans  throw  people  and  things 
away  but  that  we  assume  we  can  al- 
ways get  another.  Cars  are  replaceable. 
People  are  replaceable.  All  you  have 
to  do  is  look  the  market  over  and  se- 
lect the  one  best  suited  to  your  needs. 

To  complete  the  cycle  of  conspic- 
uous abundance  and  waste  we  thought 
we  could  replace  ourselves.  And  what 
could  be  more  American?  Everyone  is 
out  for  the  best  self  they  can  get. 
Mother  called  it,  "Turning  over  a  new 
leaf."  Religious  folk  call  it,  "Rebirth." 
Madison  Avenue  sells  it  as  a  "New 
You."  Psychology  gravely  refers  to  it 
as  an  "Identity  Crisis."  It's  all  Dixie- 
cups  to  me. 

Bad  as  our  used  car  lot  attitude 
toward  other  people  may  be,  our  atti- 
tude toward  ourselves  is  even  more 
treacherous.  We  throw  away  parts  of 
ourselves  we  consider  unpleasant.  Con- 
sequently, we  suffer  head-on  collisions 
with  the  ghosts  of  our  former  selves 
driving  down  a  twisting  road  that  turns 
in  on  itself  before  we  can  hit  the 
brakes.  Identity  becomes  a  construct- 
ed item.  The  need  for  conscious  iden- 


to  M©      by  Rita  Mae  Brown 


graphics  by  Jacqui  Linard 


AA I  Quest,  vol.  I  no.  3,  winter,  1975 


tity  is  a  manufactured  item.  The  fact 
that  so  many  people  are  dismantling 
and  refurbishing  themselves  turns  this 
phenomena  into  a  bizarre  assembly 
line. 

The  moment  a  person  dissociates 
herself  from  her  self,  she  becomes  a 
spectator  to  her  own  life.  She  becomes 
schizophrenic.  Reality  retreats  under 
screening  room  scrutiny.  The  self  is 
then  once  removed  from  experience. 
If  you  aren't  your  self  then,  for  you, 
no  one  else  can  be  a  self  either.  You'll 
be  too  busy  looking  for  your  self  to 
see  other  human  beings.  You'll  catch 
narcissistic  paralysis. 

There  is  another  self  beneath  the 
social  self.  Social  self  is  self  conscious- 
ness through  comparison.  What  makes 
the  bedrock  self,  the  root  self,  so  diffi- 
cult to  define  is  that  we  owned  our 
self  before  the  moment  of  comparison. 

Can  you  remember  your  first  mo- 
ment of  self  consciousness?  More  than 
likely,  that  moment  involved  some 
kind  of  comparison.  Perhaps  you  dis- 
covered you  were  black.  (Whites  didn't 
discover  they  were  white  until  1964.) 
Or  perhaps  you  found  out  you  were  a 
woman.  Maybe  someone  told  you 
your  coat  was  raggedy  and  suddenly 
you  knew  you  were  one  of  the  poor. 
For  precious  few  folk  the  first  moment 
of  self  consciousness  was  not  negative. 
The  people  who  fell  into  that  group 
discovered  they  were  "better."  They 
discovered  they  were  men,  or  rich,  or 
both.  Adam  knew  he  was  different 
from  the  beasts  of  the  land  but  that 
self  consciousness  was  not  negative. 
He  got  to  name  the  beasts,  which  is 


power  through  language.  Naming  is  an 
expression  of  status.  For  those  of  us 
who  fall  into  the  many  oppressed 
groups  we  were  named  according  to 
our  distinguishing  feature :  nigger,  dyke, 
kike,  trash  etc.  Our  early  consciousness 
involved  the  knowledge  that  we  were 
"less"  or  second  class. 

Through  self  consciousness  we  be- 
gan to  look  at  our  selves.  By  becoming 
a  spectator  to  our  own  lives,  by  com- 
paring, by  narrowing  our  selves,  we 
become  removed  from  our  experiences. 
So  removed,  we  are  more  in  need  of 
external  cues  to  tell  us  who  we  are 
supposed  to  be.  We  become  vacant 
and  vulnerable,  easy  targets  for  manip- 
ulation. This  vacancy  or  uncertainty 
as  to  place  in  the  social  order  is  one 
reason  advertising  is  so  successful.  Con- 
sumerism bulldozes  a  short-cut  to  iden- 
tity. It's  an  echo  of  school  days.  You 
have  answers,  only  now  you  buy  them. 
The  more  you  buy,  the  more  "right" 
you  are.  Objects  replace  emotions. 
When  the  object  becomes  dated  or 
wears  out,  you  get  another  one  or  you 
lose  status.  Under  these  conditions  it 
becomes  hard  to  tell  the  difference 
between  other  humans  and  objects. 
Worse,  we  objectify  ourselves.  We  too 
become  dated  as  we  get  older.  We 
aren't  as  valuable  if  we  aren't  lovely, 
etc. 

Self-Service  Factories  such  as  Esalen 
arose  in  reaction  to  consumerism.  Here 
one  buys  the  tools  to  forge  a  new  self. 
It's  psychological  consumerism.  Phrases 
from  the  Self-Service  Factories,  such 
as,  "get  in  touch  with  your  feelings," 
"gut    reaction,"    "I    hear    you,"    and 


It's  All  Dixie  Cups  to  Me/45 


v^^v 


46/Quest 


others  too  numerous  to  mention  per- 
meate middle  class  America.  Thanks 
to  television  (vicarious  identity),  those 
concepts  are  available  to  anyone  with 
the  stamina  to  watch  "Marcus  Welby, 
M.D."  and  other  media  wonders.  There 
is  something  uniquely  American  and 
contradictory  in  self  factories:  thou- 
sands search  uniformly  for  individuali- 
ty, for  identity.  And  whose  interests 
does  it  serve  to  have  vast  numbers  of 
the  population  bellowing  the  primor- 
dial scream  in  unison? 

Such  fashionable  psychological  con- 
cepts seeped  into  the  Women's  Move- 
ment. Consciousness-raising  utilized 
pop  psychology  in  attacking  a  female 
identity  created  in  oppressive  condi- 
tions. But  consciousness-raising,  the 
double  edged  sword  of  feminism,  also 
perpetuated  the  idea  that  one  can  build 
an  identity. 

Identity  Within  The  Movement 

The  Movement  was  and  is  correct 
in  stating  that  women's  collective  past 
bled  a  river  of  pain.  The  Movement 
tried  to  call  out  what  is  strong  in  wom- 
en. We  tried  to  find  examples  from 
the  past.  It's  still  hard  for  many  wom- 
en to  grant  that  strength  to  a  living 
woman  in  their  midst.  Woman-hatred 
again,  dead  women  are  more  lovable 
than  living  women.  Identifying  with 
other  women  proved  rocky  at  first  but 
over  time  it  became  easier. 

Recognizing  that  our  collective  past 
was  as  painful  as  our  individual  pasts, 
the  Movement  sought  a  solution  to  all 
that  pain  and  desolation.  Toss  away 


your  hateful  past  and  as  for  a  collec- 
tive past,  dip  into  the  mists  of  matri- 
archy, at  least  life  was  better  then. 
With  the  help  of  your  sisters  you  too 
can  build  a  new  and  stronger  self. 
When  in  doubt  pray  to  the  Great 
Mother  in  the  Skies  or  Isis  or  Sappho. 

And  here  is  where  we  hurt  ourselves, 
intellectually  and  organizationally. 
How  are  we  to  reach  others  if  we  deny 
our  past,  personal  or  collective?  We 
must  remember  our  old,  oppressed 
selves.  We  must  resolve  the  pain  of  our 
mothers.  We  can't  blot  out  that  past  by 
ignoring  the  thousands  of  years  of  male 
supremacy  and  nodding  out  in  the  haze 
of  pre-recorded  history-matriarchy. 
We  need  to  unearth  that  matriarchal 
past  but  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
that  we  don't  forget  for  one  minute 
what  came  between  us  today  and  ma- 
triarchy. We  need  to  understand  our 
past  and  use  it  for  the  future.  One  of 
the  earmarks  of  humanness  is  a  con- 
ception of  the  past  and  a  possibility  of 
the  future. 

Identity,  selfhood,  cannot  be  bought, 
sought  or  given.  A  lover,  a  therapist, 
the  Women's  Movement  will  not  make 
a  "new"  you.  A  certain  degree  of  re- 
evaluation  will  provide  insights  into 
why  you  did  what  you  did,  possibly 
even  helping  you  see  patterns  in  your 
behavior.  But  even  that  won't  tell  you 
who  you  are.  The  chilling  point  is: 
Why  ask?  You  are  you  when  you  "for- 
get" you.  Not  reject  you,  not  throw 
your  self  away  like  a  living  Dixie-cup 
or  a  worn  out  Studebaker.  Stop  look- 
ing for  a  car  when  you're  driving  one. 

Earlier,  I  noted  that  we  suffer  head- 


It's  All  Dixie  Cups  to  Me/47 


48/Quest 


on  collisions  with  the  ghosts  of  our 
former  selves.  There's  a  difference 
between  inspecting  your  self/past  and 
discarding  your  self/past.  Another  way 
to  look  at  it  is  to  think  of  your  past 
and  the  collective  past  as  a  boomerang. 
Throw  it  away,  turn  your  head  and 
watch  out,  the  boomerang  will  come 
back  at  you.  For  instance:  suppose 
before  you  became  a  feminist  you  were 
a  dogmatic  Lutheran.  Now  after  femi- 
nism you  are  a  dogmatic  Lesbian.  You 
won't  see  this  repeating  pattern  be- 
cause you  think  you  threw  the  Dixie- 
cup  away.  Your  friends  may  see  the 
pattern.  Any  mention  on  their  part 
will  probably  be  resented  because  you 
thought  you'd  cut  the  thread  to  your 
oppressed  past  and  your  former  be- 
havior. 

Only  by  telling  who  we  were  and 
where  we  came  from  can  another 
woman  know  the  truth  of  our  journey. 
Only  then  can  she  trust  us  for  we've 
given  her  a  roadmap. 

Feminism,  the  root  self,  isn't  one 
magic  moment  of  understanding  then 
life  becomes  easy.  Feminism  begins  a 
process  that  brings  us  closer  and  closer 
to  you/our  goal.  You'll  come  home. 
Home  to  your  root  self.  Home  to  the 
self  before  social  consciousness  of  self. 

The  root  self,  for  me,  develops 
from  two  bases:  Emotion  and  Work. 
Emotion  is  the  toughest  to  pin  down 
especially  when  writing  in  English. 
We're  told  that  there  is  a  whole  or- 
chestra of  emotions.  True  enough,  but 
I  think  all  emotions  spring  from  two 
sources:  Love  and  Fear.  Fear  in  its 
purest  stage  is  a  response  to  physical  or 


mental  danger.  Fear  is  reactive.  Love  is 
active.  Love  is  the  root  emotion. 

To  return  to  root  self  we  must 
return  to  love,  a  difficult  journey  in  a 
country  that  hates  women.  That  is 
why  women-identification,  women  lov- 
ing other  women,  putting  women  first, 
putting  themselves  first  is  so  crucial  to 
our  finding  our  root  selves  and  to  us 
finding  the  power  of  our  movement. 

Love's  reality  is  that  it  eats  away  at 
social  structure,  at  control,  so  it  must 
be  suppressed.  Think  of  the  furor  over 
black-white  couples.  Love  threatened 
a  necessary  part  of  racism,  that  the 
races  remain  separate.  Or  what  about 
cross-class  friendships.  These  are  frown- 
ed upon,  "Stay  with  your  own  kind," 
because  in  essence,  the  emotion  dis- 
rupts oppression. 

Love  is  the  enemy  of  unequal  social 
structure.  When  people  really  love 
they  become  disobedient.  And  by  love 
I  don't  just  mean  sex  because  that's  a 
tiny  fraction  of  the  love  we  are  capable 
of.  Sex  has  been  used  to  confine  love 
because  it  serves  male  supremacy  to 
limit  love  to  a  biological  function 
which  keeps  us  in  our  place. 

After  woman-identification,  people 
usually  return  to  some  activity  they 
discarded  because  it  was  discouraged, 
Dixie-cupped  by  parents,  teachers,  the 
old  gang  of  psychological  thugs.  Rein- 
forced by  other  women  and  by  increas- 
ing feelings  of  strength  a  woman  re- 
turns to  earlier,  lost  interests.  Re-dis- 
covering a  happy  part  of  childhood  is 
one  more  step  toward  the  self  before 
social  consciousness  of  self. 

Through   my    observation,    this  re- 


It's  All  Dixie  Cups  to  Me/49 


discovery  is  linked  to  some  form  of 
work.  Just  as  a  knowledge  of  past  and 
future  mark  us  off  as  human  so  does 
the  need  for  fulfilling  work,  for  pur- 
pose. A  squirrel  buries  her  nuts  by 
instinct.  She  is  born  knowing  what  to 
do  and  how  to  do  it.  We  have  to  learn. 
What  we  learn  depends  on  sex,  class 
and  race.  Before  we  suffered  con- 
sciousness of  categorization  most  of  us 
expressed  some  preferences  about  what 
we  liked  doing.  We  liked  music  or  we 
took  clocks  apart  or  whatever.  Those 
pre-school  desires,  I  believe,  are  close 
to  the  root  self.  An  adult  going  back 
to  that  early  desire  may  or  may  not 
be  able  to  make  a  career  of  it  but 
she'll  be  getting  closer  to  her  self.  That 
renewed  strength  helps  her  face  a  hos- 
tile world.  It  also  means  she  is  not  go- 
ing to  be  content  with  oppression. 
She  will  no  longer  settle  for  less.  If  a 
woman  can  make  a  living  from  her  ear- 
ly work  drive  she  is  in  an  enviable  posi- 
tion. She  will  be  especially  able  to  help 
her  sisters  since  her  time  won't  be 
divided  into  earning  a  wage  vs.  doing 
what  she.  wants. 

The  amazing  thing  about  work  is 
that  the  more  you  enjoy  your  work 
the  harder  you  work  and  the  less  self- 
conscious  you  are.  You  get  very  close 
to  that  root  self. 

Returning  to  the  root  self  under 
male  supremacy  is  a  tremendous  battle 
for  we  must  fight  the  entire  Western 
world  as  we  know  it.  Under  male- su- 
premacy love  for  other  humans  is 
labeled  irrational,  frivolous  and  so  on 
unless  love  is  within  the  context  of 
marriage    and    family    where    love    is 


one-sided.  Once  a  woman  makes  the 
great  breakthrough  to  woman-identifi- 
cation, to  discovery  of  worth,  the 
road  becomes  smoother  although  it 
isn't  always  safe.  We  still  don't  know 
exactly  how  a  woman  becomes  woman- 
identified  although  we  do  know  the 
more  contact  she  has  with  strong, 
positive  women  the  more  likely  this 
will  happen. 

The  Women's  Movement,  for  all 
our  mistakes,  is  right  to  hold  a  mirror 
up  to  our  faces.  By  clearly  seeing  our- 
selves we  can  use  the  jolt  of  self 
awareness  as  an  oppressed  person  to 
lead  us  back  to  our  past  and  simultan- 
eously to  our  future.  By  identifying 
with  other  women,  with  ourselves,  we 
gain  a  definite  goal:  Freedom.  Our 
self  is  linked  with  other  selves.  The 
ultimate  act  of  humanness,  identifying 
with  others,  guides  us.  Slowly,  heighten- 
ed self-consciousness  fades  as  we  con- 
nect, understand,  love  and  breathe 
the  lives  of  our  sisters.  By  identifying 
with  other  women  some  of  them  begin 
to  identify  with  us,  giving  us  the  love 
and  faith  to  pursue  our  work.  Within 
the  goal  of  women's  freedom  we  find 
our  more  personal  goals. 

And  one  day,  in  good  time,  you'll 
glance  in  your  mirror  and  discover  it's 
a  window.  Welcome,  Sister,  you've 
come    home    at    last. 


Rita  Mae  Brown  is  an  author,  poet, 
and  political  theorist. 


50/Quest 


suzy  &  jane  &  srefior 

&  me 


"you're  just  like  suzy"  they  tell  me  when  i  don't 

agree. 

(suzy  is  a  dead  friend  who  cut  her  wrists  because 

no  one  agreed  with  her.)  (except  me) 

"why  can't  you  be  like  jane"  they  tell  me  when  i  don't 
do  what  they  want. 

(Jane  is  a  dull  friend  who  went  to  college  because 
everyone  told  her  to.)  (except  me) 

"i  want  to  be  like  gregor"  i  tell  them  when  i  don't 
know  what  else  to  say. 

(gregor  is  a  man  who  turned  into  a  cockroach  because 
kafka  wrote  it  that  way.) 

no  one  understands.  (except  me) 


by  Naomi  Rachel 


Suzy  &  Jane  &  Gregor  &  Me/51 


What  I  have  to  say  about  women 
and  childraising  is  harsh.  I  know  of  no 
other  way  to  get  the  message  across, 
so  mucked  up  are  we  in  fear,  myth, 
romance  and  historical  ignorance  of 
the  world's  oldest  and  most  significant 
female  vocation-motherhood.  The 
harshness  comes  from  a  sense  of  urgen- 
cy.  Unless  we  untangle   the  real  fea- 


numbers,  rage  and  immobility.  When 
they  strike  we  will  come  up  with  them 
or  they  will  take  us  down.  That  is  how 
I  felt.  Two  years  later  in  an  impatient 
surge  toward  individual  liberation  I 
gave  up  custody  of  my  three  children. 
As  a  result,  I  am  a  mother  and  then 
again  I  am  not.  Non-mothers  or  the 
childfree   measure   their  words  in  my 


If  All  Else 
Fails* 

Vm  Still  a 

Mother 


by   Lucia  Valeska 

tures  of  childraising,  the  feminist 
movement  will  fail  to  jump  its  most 
difficult  hurdle. 

Three  years  ago  in  the  midst  of  the 
contemporary  lesbian  rebellion,  as  a 
mother  I  turned  to  my  lesbian  sisters 
and  said:  "Mothers  will  be  next  and 
lesbians  will  look  like  silly  putty  in 
comparison."  Mothers  outweigh  us  in 


graphic  by  Mary  Smith 

presence,  and  since  I've  left  the  fold, 
most  mothers  find  me  fundamentally 
suspect.  But  the  view  from  renegade 
bridge  is  enlightening. 

I  see  three  distinct  but  occasionally 
overlapping  political  camps:  1)  The 
childraisers,  2)  The  children,  and  3) 
The  childless  or  childfree.  These  camps 
share  a  common  oppression  but  they 


52/Quest,  vol.  I  no.  3,  winter,  1975 


are  also  in  direct  conflict  with  one 
another.  Each  situation  carries  a  series 
of  contradictions  and  concomitant  am- 
bivalencies,  complicated  by  the  separ- 
ate realities  of  sex,  race,  and  traditional 
class  divisions.  The  job  of  untangling 
the  conflicts,  of  forging  a  common 
struggle  is  nearly  beyond  comprehen- 
sion, but  we  must  start  digging  some- 
where. 

The  Childraisers 

Mothers  are  not  the  only  child- 
raisers.  Included  in  this  group  are 
lovers,  housekeepers,  babysitters,  nur- 
sery, elementary  and  secondary  school 
teachers,  communal  mothers,  relatives, 
friends,  feminist  aids,  and  an  occasion- 
al father.  There  are  what  can  be  broad- 
ly defined  as  primary  and  secondary 
childraisers  with  much  variety  and 
several  degrees  in  between.  A  primary 
childraiser  is  the  primary  source  of 
emotional  and  economic  support  for 
her  children.  The  secondary  childraiser 
is  only  one  of  a  group  of  people  who 
is  economically  and  emotionally  re- 
sponsible  for   the   children. 

Whether  you  are  a  primary  or  secon- 
dary childraiser  and  what  else  you  do 
with  your  time  makes  a  big  difference. 
The  myth  tells  us  simply  that  you  are 
a  mother  or  you  are  not.  But  the  facts 
cast  the  deciding  vote,  especially  re- 
garding the  strength  or  poverty  of  the 
self  image  you  derive  from  child- 
raising.  Ethel  Kennedy  affords  a  ready 
illustration.  Tennis,  horseback  riding, 
golf,  a  huge  houseful  of  surrogates  and 
the    Washington    cocktail    circuit    can 


uniquely  influence  the  self  concept  of 
your  basic  mother  of  eleven.  The  single 
mother  who  works  a  nine  hour  shift  in 
order  to  support  her  four  children  will 
have  a  different  self  image.  What  we  do 
well  tends  to  create  a  solid  self  con- 
cept. What  we  do  poorly  results  in 
the  opposite.  How  well  we  do  anything 
directly  depends  on  the  economic  and 
social  environment  in  which  we  do  it. 
The  crunch  in  childraising  comes  when 
you  realize  that  poor  mothering  and 
faulty  childcare  are  currently  built-in 
givens  in  the  North  American  social 
and   economic   system. 

Specific  signs  of  decay  are  readily 
apparent.  To  begin  with,  we  are  all 
familiar  with  the  dreaded  question: 
"And  what  do  you  do?"  (a)  "I'm  a 
mother"  (b)  "I'm  a  lawyer"  or  (c) 
"I'm  a  pig  farmer."  As  a  mother  I  was 
always  tempted  to  answer  with  'c' 
because  there  are  some  interesting 
historical  parallels.  The  primary  differ- 
ence boils  down  to  the  fact  that  pig 
farming  went  out  a  little  earlier  than 
motherhood  and  so  you  pick  up  an 
extra  point  or  two  on  its  antique 
value.  Not  even  the  middle  class  Amer- 
ican supermom  with  the  greatest  re- 
sources at  her  private  command  can 
beat  the  inevitable  failure.  As  the  femi- 
nist movement  legitimizes  rebellion, 
supermom  after  supermom  throws  in 
the  towel  of  her  discontent  and  as 
often  as  not  returns  to  school. 

If  being  with  children  is  a  joy  why 
aren't  we  fighting  harder  for  the  privi- 
lege? Why  is  it  when  you  ask  for  child- 
care  volunteers  everybody  in  the  room 
contemplates  their  boot  laces?  Why  is 


If  All  Else  Fails,  I'm  Still  a  Mother/53 


it  the  mothers  and  a  handful  of  politi- 
cal stalwarts  are  inevitably  left  with 
the  job  of  consciousness  raising  (chil- 
dren are  human  beings  too)  and  or- 
ganizing childcare  for  meetings,  jobs, 
community,  wherever. 

The  signs  are  real.  The  message  is 
clear.  If  you're  looking  for  a  solid 
self,  don't  be  a  mother,  or  an  elemen- 
tary school  teacher,  or  a  childcare 
center  aid  at  all.  Since  failure  is  built 
into  childraising  in  our  society,  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  a  good  mother  and 
no  such  thing  as  a  good  self  concept 
emerging  from  this  work.  The  situation 
goes  beyond  the  sole  dictates  of  male 
supremacy.  It  has  nothing  whatever  to 
do  with  any  individual  childraiser's 
advanced  skill  at  maneuvering.  There 
are  a  number  of  ingenious,  if  partial, 
escape  routes  that  the  more  privileged 
work  out  for  themselves.  But  there  you 
go;  it  is  an  escape-something  to  get 
away  from.  That  something  transcends 
good  or  bad  mothering.  What  is  it? 

The  Changing  Economy  Of 
Motherhood 

Early  one  morning  everybody  in  the 
world  woke  up  and  decided  in  unison 
to  hate  children.  Hence  the  cure:  we  all 
wake  up  tomorrow  morning  and  decide 
to  love  children.  Stripped  of  its  ration- 
al facade  this  is  the  kind  of  solution 
which  too  often  prevails.  Many  contem- 
porary writers  (Jill  Johnston,  Shula- 
mith  Firestone,  Germaine  Greer,  Jane 
Alpert)  talk  of  returning  to  the  good 
old  days  when  children  were  "inte- 
grated" into  adult  society,  when  they 


were  treated  as  "small  adults"  and 
were  a  constant  presence  in  the  daily 
life  of  the  community.  It's  not  a  bad 
idea.  We  could  gather  up  all  the  chil- 
dren and  go  marching  through  the 
factories,  business  offices,  medical 
schools,  cocktail  lounges,  libraries,  col- 
lege administrations,  board  meetings, 
nuclear  laboratories,  saying:  "Here's 
three  for  you  and  three  for  you  and 
three  for  you;  keep  them  safe,  happy 
and  intelligent;  we'll  be  back  for  them 
in  25  years." 

The  description  of  an  integrated 
society  these  writers  present  resembles 
an  historical  truth,  which  in  many 
parts  of  the  world  still  prevails.  But 
it  is  the  entire  social,  technological 
and  economic  fabric  of  these  periods 
and  places  that  makes  the  integration 
of  children  a  viable  reality.  Many  of 
these  integrated  children  vitally  con- 
tribute to  the  economic  life  of  the 
community:  they  work  from  sun-up 
to  sun-down.  But  most  significantly, 
their  relationship  to  their  mothers  is 
relatively  casual. 

In  any  economic  setting  with  an 
extended  family,  the  mother's  rela- 
tionship to  her  children  is  automatical- 
ly secondary.  That  is,  the  children  will 
be  raised  and  economically  supported 
by  a  group  of  people  of  which  the  bio- 
logical mother  is  simply  one  member. 
This  is  generally  true  for  all  classes, 
races,  and  cultures. 

The  economic  settings  which  main- 
tain a  secondary  relationship  between 
mothers  and  children  cover  an  enor- 
mous range  and  variety  in  life  style. 
They  include  nomadic  communal  gath- 


54/Quest 


ering  and  hunting  peoples,  agrarian 
societies,  feudal  societies  and  early 
industrial  societies.  Since  these  eco- 
nomic forms  have  prevailed  for  most  of 
human  history,  many  of  the  contem- 
porary expressions  of  motherhood  are 
outgrowths  of  an  economic  existence 
which  is  now  obsolete  in  most  parts  of 
the  U.S.A.  and  generally  in  any  ad- 
vanced industrial  setting. 

Here's  the  deal:  the  nuclear  family 
is  the  result  of  an  economic  system 
which  has  come  to  depend  upon  small, 
tight,  economically  autonomous,  mo- 
bile units.  It  is  essential  to  capitalism 
because  it  not  only  meets  the  peculiar 
production    needs     of    our    economy 


but  also  fits  the  requirements  of  capi- 
talistic consumption.  Thus  the  ideal 
nuclear  family  boasts  one  producer 
and  several  (but  not  too  many  lest 
the  labor  force  explode)  consumers. 
It  is  a  middle  class  ideal  and  the  norm 
held  out  for  all  classes.  Even  though 
the  working  class  family  rarely  achieves 
the  ideal,  it  too  believes  this  is  the  way 
life  is  supposed  to  be.  In  the  "good" 
family,  the  man  "works,"  the  woman 
is  wife,  mother  and  homemaker. 

The  nuclear  family  provided  stable 
family  units  for  the  advanced  indus- 
trial state  for  a  number  of  years.  Now, 
the  very  mobility  it  arose  to  feed  is 
turning    around    and    killing    it.    The 


If  All  Else  Fails,  I'm  Still  a  Mother/55 


means  of  stabilizing  and  sustaining  the 
old  family  have  progressively  disinte- 
grated: neighborhoods,  churches,  mini- 
sters, relatives,  etc.  New  institutional 
buffers  have  taken  their  place:  T.V., 
psychiatrists,  psychologists,  social  work- 
ers, family  counselors,  school  counse- 
lors, and  a  huge  educational  system. 

By  keeping  the  nuclear  family  limp- 
ing along,  these  adjustments  have  eased 
the  new  primary  relationship  between 
mothers  and  children.  But  short  of  to- 
tal fascistic  control  (no  divorce,  no 
abortion,  no  childcare)  the  attempt  is 
economically  doomed.  The  US.  gov- 
ernment has  failed  to  salvage  an  insti- 
tution which  served  it  well.  The  stop- 
gap adjustments  have  not  been  suffi- 
cient. Psychiatrists  no  longer  even 
attempt  to  "save"  marriages:  they 
help  people  through  "transitions."  The 
divorce  rate  soars,  giving  the  nation  a 
new  choice  and  women  and  children  a 
new  deal.  Either  the  old  nuclear  pro- 
vider supports  two,  three,  or  four 
families,  which  most  men  can't  or 
won't  afford,  or  middle  class  women 
join  the  labor  force  with  unmatched 
vengeance.  All  this  at  a  time  when  the 
number  of  jobs  is  rapidly  shrinking. 

Meanwhile,  back  at  the  homestead, 
the  children  are  waiting  to  go  to  school 
to  make  this  new  deal  possible.  For  a 
mother  of  three  that's  a  minimal  wait 
of  nine  years  on  diaper  duty  before  she 
is  free  to  look  for  "work."  Upon  find- 
ing that  job,  she  also  finds  she  must 
be  away  from  home  for  at  least  eight 
hours  a  day  not  including  travel  time. 
Most  children's  school  days  run  two 
to  four  hours  short  of  this  requirement. 


Talk  about  credibility  gaps,  here  we 
have  a  possibility  gap.  Welcome,  ladies, 
to  the  working  class. 

But  long  ago,  they  moved  middle 
class  women  out  of  the  extended  fam- 
ily, Mexican,  Irish,  Italian,  Jewish 
neighborhood.  Mother  still  lives  in 
Pocatello,  Aunt  Jean  is  in  an  institu- 
tion up  in  Rhode  Island;  so  who  now 
will  watch  the  kids?  Arise  the  new 
child  care  center:  haphazard,  unfund- 
ed, disorganized,  and  expensive.  A  col- 
lege educated  woman  earns  less  than  a 
male  with  two  years  of  high  school 
training.  If  you  even  find  a  job,  do  you 
grasp  the  size  of  the  pay  check  coming 
in,  minus  babysitting,  childcare,  gro- 
ceries, moving,  housing  and  medical 
costs?  This  is  a  framework  for  built-in 
failure. 

Take  a  good  look  at  the  rhetoric 
surrounding  the  issue  of  motherhood. 
The  term  "childless"  represents  our 
society's  traditional  perception  of  the 
situation.  Since  motherhood  was  the 
primary  and  often  only  route  to  social 
and  economic  well-being  for  women, 
having  children  was  a  material  asset, 
and  to  be  "childless"  was  historically 
negative.  Indeed  the  term  was  often 
directly  equated  with  "barrenness". 
Few  women  were  autonomous;  survi- 
val depended  on  marrying  and  bearing 
children.  No  man  wanted  a  barren 
woman.  So  under  these  circumstances 
no  "sane"  woman  chose  not  to  have 
children.  To  be  childless  still  carries 
a  negative  stigma  even  though  the  so- 
cial and  economic  reality  has  drastical- 
ly changed.  Consequently  the  question, 
must  we  be  childless,  is  loaded. 


56/Quest 


The  term  "childfree"  represents  a 
new  perception  of  reality  in  the  U.S.A. 
Not  only  is  motherhood  no  longer  the 
only  route  to  social  and  economic  well 
being,  it  has  become  a  real  detriment— 
a  detriment  which  is  clearly  visible 
when  a  mother  looks  for  a  job,  a  place 
to  live,  babysitters  or  childcare,  when- 
ever she  tries  to  take  her  children 
any  place  she  goes. 

Women  must  for  the  first  time  in 
herstory  leave  the  nest  in  order  to  gain 
an  identity  and  a  living  wage.  Yet  a 
mother  cannot  leave  the  nest  because 
she  is  the  children's  sole  remaining  legal, 
economic,  and  emotional  representa- 
tive. When  children  are  barred  from 
any  productive  role  until  they  are  25 
years  old,  it  makes  the  job  of  represen- 
tative ten  fold  what  it  was  in  the  past. 
To  be  a  good  representative  you  must 
be  economically  solvent,  have  a  solid 
self  concept  (gained  elsewhere),  and 
have  a  great  deal  of  time  on  your 
hands. 

On  another  level,  the  debate  be- 
tween "childless"  and  "childfree"  is 
purely  rhetorical.  Clearly,  with  or  with- 
out children,  women  are  not  free  in 
our  society.  Even  more  important,  as 
long  as  children  exist  it  is  a  delusion 
to  speak  of  being  free  of  them.  They 
are  still  all  out  there,  impatiently 
clamoring  for  recognition  and  support. 

Meanwhile  the  government  takes  its 
own  stand.  It  has  already  paid  farmers 
not  to  grow  food  and  workers  not  to 
work  past  a  certain  magical  age.  It 
pays  students  not  to  join  the  labor 
force  and  fathers  to  stay  away  from 
home.  Now  the  government  is  implicit- 


ly paying  women  not  to  have  children. 
Ford  will  follow  Nixon  in  refusing  the 
necessary  funds  for  childcare.  Like 
Nixon  he  will  call  it  "economizing 
and  preserving  the  American  family." 
The  new  deal  for  children  and  mothers 
amounts  to  no  deal  at  all.  They  are 
being  forced  into  an  economic  and 
social  transition  which  is  doomed  to 
failure  irom  the  start. 

Consequences  And  Strategies 

The  situation  portrayed  presents 
distinct  consequences  and  strategical 
possibilities  for  the  three  political 
camps:  mothers,  children,  and  the  child- 
free.  We  must  recognize  the  contem- 
porary condition  of  women  and  child- 
ren as  a  complex  product  of  economic 
history.  The  problem  is  far  more  com- 
plicated than  just  the  result  of  bad 
men  in  places  of  power.  The  grim  fact 
that  women  in  feminist  collectives  re- 
fuse to  deal  with  the  dilemma  unless 
mothers  literally  put  them  up  against 
the    wall,    is    one   indication   that  our 


% 


*  -P0.  BOX  163 

cA  puTNey,vT. 


*% 


05iH<o 


G03P 


If  All  Else  Fails,  I'm  Still  a  Mother/57 


situation  is  not  a  simple  by-product  of 
the  ideology  of  male  supremacy. 

Think.  In  general  the  feminist  move- 
ment has  benefited  its  members.  It  has 
given  them  .a  collective  identity  which 
in  turn  has  made  them  stronger  as  in- 
dividuals. Women  have  given  of  them- 
selves freely  and  deeply,  in  order  to 
develop  this  new  strength.  Of  course 
we've  had  our  casualties,  but  in  general 
the  prize  has  been  worth  the  cost.  In 
the  case  of  childraising  the  prize  does 
not  yet  equal  the  cost.  We  reflect 
society's  perception  that  mothers,  chil- 
dren, and  childcare  are  expendable. 
The  "expendability"  is  often  expressed 
in  statements  such  as:  "Childcare  is  a 


reformist  issue."  But  this  expendabil- 
ity of  mothers  and  children  is  built 
into  the  economic  system  which  con- 
trols all  of  us. 

Mothers 

Mothers  must  make  it  militantly 
clear  that  they  are  not  expendable. 
The  economic  changes  which  have 
made  motherhood  a  national  disaster 
area  can  be  changed.  National  and  lo- 
cal budget  priorities  and  consciousness 
can  be  rearranged  to  suit  job,  educa- 
tional, and  childcare  needs.  Of  course 
the  privileged,  be  they  men  in  power 
or  your  so  called  childfree  sisters,  will 


5SIQuest 


never  give  up  their  advantages  out  of 
the  goodness  of  their  hearts.  They 
need  to  know  that  the  price  of  not 
dealing  with  your  situation  is  greater 
than  the  cost  of  dealing  with  it-that 
whatever  endeavor  they  are  involved 
in  simply  cannot  proceed  without 
meeting  your  needs.  You  are  raising 
their  children;  they  must  provide  the 
resources  to  do  the  job  adequately. 
Mothers  everywhere  must  caucus,  or- 
ganize unions,  and  put  an  end  to  their 
isolation  through  collective  action. 
There  is  a  lesbian  mothers  union, 
based  in  California,  and  mothers  should 
use  this  as  a  beginning  model  for  col- 
lective effort. 

In  the  meantime,  if  an  individual 
mother's  situation  is  unbearable,  and 
if  the  option  of  custody  transfer  is 
remotely  feasible,  she  should  give  this 
option  serious  consideration.  It  is  the 
surest,  quickest,  most  effective  strategy 
available  for  personal  survival.  It  is  also 
a  political  statement.  It  says  in  no  un- 
certain terms:  "If  my  community  will 
not  provide  me  with  the  freedom  I 
need  to  rebuild  my  life,  then  I  will 
take  it  for  myself."  For  a  growing 
number  of  women,  custody  transfer 
is  more  than  an  option.  It  is  a  necessity. 

The  potential  tragedy  is  not  that 
children  and  mothers  are  lost  to  each 
other,  but  that  the  decision  is  made 
in  a  social  vacuum.  There  is  virtually 
no  community  support.  The  so  called 
experts-psychologists,  counselors- 
paint  an  invariably  gloomy  future  for 
you.  Even  the  most  liberal,  non-judg- 
mental shrink  tends  to  lose  her  cool  at 
the  mention  of  custody  transfer.  The 


one  I  consulted  rose  up  out  of  his 
chair  and  shouted:  "You  can't  do 
that."  Fortunately,  I  disregarded  this 
"advice"  and  proceeded.  What  women 
need  is  some  one  or  group  to  share 
positively  both  the  decision  and  the 
transition  with  them. 

No  mother  makes  this  choice  easily. 
Both  the  social  taboo  and  the  mother's 
entire  conditioning  conspire  to  keep  it 
out  of  the  realm  of  serious  possibility. 
Another  obstacle  is  the  false  assump- 
tion that  the  decision  will  be  complete 
and  irrevocable-a  "here  today,  gone 
tomorrow"  finality.  Such  is  not  usually 
the  case.  The  details,  including  psycho- 
logical consequences  for  both  mothers 
and  children,  will  vary  with  the  individ- 
ual situation. 

Whether  a  child  is  raised  by  her 
uncle,  her  grandmother,  two  people  or 
a  group  of  people,  and  what  kind  of 
people  they  are  makes  all  the  difference 
in  the  world.  My  own  three  children 
have  two  sets  of  parents  (one  lesbian, 
one  heterosexual),  and  four  function- 
ing grandmothers.  They  spend  summers 
with  my  lover  and  me,  and  the  school 
year  with  their  father  and  another 
mother.  The  transition  was  gradual. 
My  oldest  child  moved  in  with  his 
father  three  years  ago.  A  year  later  the 
two  younger  ones  joined  him. 

In  our  case  the  change  was  a  neces- 
sity, economically  and  emotionally. 
Perhaps  we  could  have  scraped  by  eco- 
nomically, although  I  had  no  vocation- 
al skills  and  was  still  working  on  a 
college  degree.  But  emotionally  the 
situation  for  me  as  a  single  mother 
was   disastrous.   My   two  year  stint  in 


If  All  Else  Fails,  I'm  Still  a  Mother/59 


the  women's  movement  had  allowed  a 
vast  reservoir  of  rage  to  surface.  The 
open  resentment  at  being  trapped  be- 
gan to  far  outstrip  the  pleasures  of 
mothering,  and  the  daily  burden  was 
too  great  for  me  or  my  kids  to  bear. 
That  a  healthier  situation  was  available 
was  a  stroke  of  luck  and  privilege  for 
which  I  shall  be  forever  grateful. 

Children 

A  key  feature  of  industrialization 
is  that  the  "work  place"  is  far  removed 
from  the  home,  which  gradually  leads 
to  the  segregation  of  children  from 
the  "business"  of  the  world.  As  indus- 
trialization and  technological  develop- 
ment proceed,  the  discrepancy  between 
adult  and  child  spheres  grows.  Children 
must  be  set  aside  for  longer  and  longer 
periods  of  their  lives  before  they  can 
play  any  integral,  responsible  role  in 
the  life  of  the  community.  At  the  same 
time,  increased  mobility  combines  with 
super  media  to  expose  children  to  a 
constant  flow  of  new  situations  and  a 
complex  environment  which  demands 
that  they  grow  up  more  quickly  than 
ever. 

In  essence,  we  have  mass  produced  a 
nation  of  young  people  who  are  ex- 
tremely sophisticated,  while  we  have 
simultaneously  denied  that  sophistica- 
tion any  serious  expression.  Because 
children  are  segregated  and  constantly 
held  down,  they  have  developed  their 
own  culture,  with  values,  codes  of 
honor  and  means  of  social  control  that 
clash  with  the  adult  ones.  Even  though 
children    are    packed    neatly    away    in 


their  ghetto-the  American  Public 
School  System-we  cannot  avoid  bump- 
ing into  them,  because  there  is  trouble 
brewing  in  the  ghetto. 

Like  other  oppressed  peoples,  chil- 
dren have  begun  to  organize,  to  de- 
mand basic  rights  and  responsibilities 
commensurate  with  their  abilities.  As 
with  other  oppressed  groups  who  begin 
to  rebel,  society  has  reacted  negatively 
to  these  initial  efforts.  Just  as  rape 
has  become  a  national  sport,  razor 
blades  and  arsenic  in  halloween  treats 
and  armed  guards  in  the  corridors  of 
our  best  middle  class  Junior  Highs 
have  become  standard.  These  rein- 
force the  children's  own  conclusion 
that  they  live  in  a  state  of  siege. 

Segregation  of  children  has  had  one 
potentially  liberating  consequence:  it 
significantly  dilutes  the  impact  of 
where  they  lay  their  heads  at  night. 
It  is  no  longer  possible  for  adults  to 
stamp  out  pint-sized  replicas  of  them- 
selves through  the  nuclear  or  tradition- 
al family.  The  individual  child's  destiny 
is  increasingly  determined  by  her  own 
community.  In  this  respect,  children 
are  in  part  seeing  to  their  own  libera- 
tion. But  their  situation  is  still  unique 
for  two  reasons.  First,  their  condition 
is  temporary  by  definition.  Secondly, 
they  are  by  nature  to  some  extent  de- 
pendent on  the  adult  community. 
That's  where  we  come  in. 

A  well-developed  industrial  system 
changes  children  from  an  advantage  to 
a  deficit.  Under  other  economic  sys- 
tems, children  materially  contribute 
to  a  family's  wealth  and  well  being  and 
eventually  the  young  take  care  of  the 


60/Quest 


old.  Not  so  today.  This  change  has 
tremendously  influenced  both  our  per- 
ception and  treatment  of  children.  No 
amount  of  sweetness  and  light,  inno- 
cence or  charm  can  outweigh  the  fact 
that  they  are  a  pain  in  the  ass  and  cost 
a  lot  of  money.  Since  our  perception 
of  children  comes  from  a  specific  social 
and  economic  environment,  it  can  only 
be  changed  by  altering  that  environ- 
ment. The  cost  of  childraising  can  no 
longer  be  shouldered  by  private  indi- 
viduals. Childraising  must  move  from 
the  private  to  the  public  sphere,  from 
the  individual  to  the  local  and  national 
community.  My  children  must  become 
our  children. 


We  have  begun  this  transition-wit- 
ness the  education  industry.  But  we 
are  dragging  our  heels  all  the  way.  If 
we  compare  need  with  designated  re- 
sources, the  educational  establishment 
today  is  a  mere  welfare  program.  By 
and  large  the  treatment  of  children  in 
it  is  comparable  to  the  treatment  of 
welfare  recipients.  Imagine  how  dif- 
ferent funding  for  education  and  child- 
care  would  be,  if  the  grandchildren  of 
our  national  Congress  people  were  in 
public  childcare  from  three  months  of 
age  up! 

In  making  the  transition  from  my 
children  to  our  children,  we  can  and 
must  change  the  consciousness  of  our 


If  All  Else  Fails,  I'm  Still  a  Mother/61 


sisters  first.  And  then,  we  change  the 
nation.  But  society's  perception  of 
children  will  not  change  until  we 
create  a  viable  role  for  children  and 
give  them  the  resources  to  fulfill  that 
new  role. 

In  the  meantime,  childhating  must 
go.  It  should  not  be  replaced  with  old 
platitudes  on  the  natural  virtues  of 
children  or  life  with  them.  Rather,  it 
should  be  replaced  with  a  firm  under- 
standing of  why  children  are  "unaccept- 
able" in  our  society,  and  a  concrete 
strategy  to  include  children  in  our 
thoughts  and  actions. 

Any  organization  or  gathering  is 
practicing  childhating  if  it  does  not 
arrange  for  quality,  feminist  childcare 
by  the  "childfree."  Furthermore,  any 
person  who  says:  "But  I  don't  particu- 
larly like  children,"  is  practicing  child- 
hating. She  is  letting  society's  negative 
stereotype  of  children  take  over  her 
mind.  There  is  as  much  variety  among 
children  as  there  is  among  individual 
women.  How  can  you  dislike  all  of 
them?  The  statement  comes  from  one 
who  perceives  children  as  an  inferior 
group  that  is  not  worthy  of  her  per- 
sonal recognition  or  time.  Struggles 
against  racism  and  sexism  have  set  our 
minds  bolt  upright  on  these  issues. 
The  casualness  with  which  childhating 
statements  are  made  and  received  is  a 
measure  of  our  lack  of  consciousness 
of  this  issue. 

The  Childfree 

All  women  who  are  able  to  plot 
their  destinies  with  the  relative  mobil- 


ity of  the  childfree  should  be  encour- 
aged to  take  on  at  least  one  existing 
child,  part  time  or  full  time.  Love  that 
child,  teach  her  something  she  might 
otherwise  never  learn,  show  her  resepct 
she  might  not  find  elsewhere.  Oh  yes, 
and  be  consistent.  Let  one  child  in 
your  community  grow  to  expect  and 
rely  on  your  coming  just  as  she  relies 
on  the  air  she  breathes.  You  should 
not  do  so  because  the  experience  will 
be  joyful  but  because  it  is  politically 
necessary  for  the  growth  of  all  women 
and  children.  Then  if  joy  comes, 
halleluja! 

To  have  our  own  biological  children 
today  is  personally  and  politically  ir- 
responsible. If  you  have  health,  strength, 
energy  and  financial  assets  to  give  to 
children,  then  do  so.  Who  then  will 
have  children?  If  the  childfree  raise 
existing  children,  more  people  than 
ever  will  "have"  children.  The  line 
between  biological  and  non-biological 
mothers  will  begin  to  disappear.  Are 
we  in  danger  of  depleting  the  popula- 
tion? Are  you  kidding? 

Right  now  in  your  community  there 
are  hundreds  of  thousands  of  children 
and  mothers  who  desperately  need 
individual  and  community  support.  It 
is  not  enough  for  feminists  to  add  to 
this  population  and  then  help  out  in 
their  spare  time.  A  growing  number  of 
young  women  are  indeed  beginning  to 
resist  having  their  own  biological  chil- 
dren—mostly from  a  sense  of  self-preser- 
vation. But  the  new  childfree  must  not 
only  take  conscious  control  of  their 
reproductive  organs,  they  must  also 
see  that  true  self-preservation  depends 


62/Quest 


upon  the  survival  of  their  entire  com- 
munity-one which  includes  living  chil- 
dren. 

We  must  develop  feminist  vision 
and  practice  that  includes  children. 
We  must  allow  mothers  and  children  a 
way  out  of  the  required  primary  rela- 
tionships of  the  nuclear  family.  This 
can  only  be  done  by  forging  new  rela- 
tionships, with  economic  and  emotion- 
al underpinnings,  between  children  and 
the  childfree.  At  this  historical  moment 
the  goal  is  a  moral  imperative  only. 
Moral  imperatives  have  a  habit  of 
hanging  out  there  in  thin  air  until  hell 
freezes.  It  is  the  responsibility  of 
non-mothers  to  end  the  twin  tyrannies 
of  motherhood  and  childhood  as  they 
are  lived  today,  but  the  childfree  will 
not  do  so  until  mothers  and  children 
light  a  big  fire  of  their  own. 


Lucia  Valeska  is  a  lesbian  mother  in 
Albuquerque,  working  on  a  disserta- 
tion on  female  separatism. 


12  W.  25th  Street 
Baltimore,  Maryland 

disss 
press 

Diana  Press  wishes  to  thank  the 
subscribers  of  Quest  for  their  gener- 
ous response  to  our  fire  and  belated 
calendar  and  datebook.  If  you  have 
not  ordered  the  calendar  and/or 
datebook,  we  still  have  copies  avail- 
able. All  the  repair  work  on  our 
building  has  been  completed  and 
we  have  almost  caught  up  with  our 
backlog  of  work.  We  appreciate  your 
continued  support. 

Datebook 

The  Day  Before 

Calendar 

Garland:  1975 

Poetry  Books 

Songs  to  a  Handsome  Woman       2.00 
Rita  Mae  Brown 

The  Hand  that  Cradles  the  Rock  3.00 
Rita  Mae  Brown 

These  Days  1.00 

Lee  Lally 

Forty  Acres  and  a  Mule  1.00 

E.  Sharon  Gomillion 

Essay  Anthologies 

Women  Remembered  2.25 

Class  &  Feminism  2.25 

Lesbianism  and  the  Women's 

Movement  2.25 

Postcards 

Set  of  12,  each  with  a  different  draw- 
ing from  The  Day  Before  1.25 

Include  15%  extra 
for  postage  &  handling. 


3.50 


2.50 


If  All  Else  Fails,  I'm  Still  a  Mother/63 


. . .  some  ideas  on  where 
we  go  from  here 


THE  ONLY  MAGAZINE 
IN  AMERICA... 

that  focuses  on  positive  approaches  to  social  change.  What's 
being  done  and  what  might  be  done.  New  political  strategies. 
Policy  alternatives  and  ideas  for  action.  Speculation  on  Amer- 
ica's future  —  and  on  the  future  of  "the  good  society."  Nearly 
100  pages  of  reports,  proposals,  and  reviews  in  each  issue. 

By  writers  like:  Richard  Barnet,  Richard  Flacks,  Barbara  Gar- 
son,  Christopher  Jencks,  Andrew  Kopkind,  Elinor  Langer, 
Christopher  Lasch,  Staughton  Lynd,  Lee  Rainwater,  Emma 
Rothschild. 

WorkingPapers 

**     For  a  J.  New  Society 

Working  Paper*.  Dept.  3S,  123  Mt.  Auburn  St  Cambridge,  MA 02138 

Name . 

Street 

City ,__  State Zip 

Please  enter  my  subscription  for: 

D  1  year  (4  issues.  $8)       □  Check  enclosed        {pleflge  fldd  ^  &  y(jar 

D  2  years  (8  issues.  $15)    D  Bill  me  outside  North  America) 


dAIQuest 


mmu 


WRITTEN 
WORD 


ANGEIA  DAVIS 

by  San  dra  Flo  we rs    graPhic  by  cheryi  waiker 

There  is  so  much  to  say  about  this  book  that  it  is  difficult  to  isolate  the 
factors  which  make  it  such  important  reading.  The  key,  however,  comes 
about  halfway  through  the  book  when,  in  discussing  how  her  affiliation 
with  the  Communist  Party  led  to  her  firing  from  the  UCLA  faculty,  Davis 
says,  "...I  realized  that  the  personal  goals  I  had  set  for  myself  were  about  to 
collide  head-on  with  the  political  requirements  of  my  life."  The  recount  of 
this  particular  woman's  collision  and  its  aftermath  is  what  makes  this  book 
so  important.  For,  whether  or  not  we  articulate  it  so  well-if  at  all-meshing 
our  own  personal  goals  with  the  political  requirements  of  our  lives  is  the 
confrontation  we  all  must  survive  before  our  purpose  and  commitment  can 
be  defined. 

While  Davis  never  proclaims  herself  a  feminist,  many  who  read  this  book 
will  assign  that  designation  to  her.  Predictably,  as  a  woman  activist,  her 
political  life  has  been  one  long  sexist  experience.  Some  things  were  so  com- 
mon, so  condescending,  that  we  can  now,  with  a  raised  consciousness  and 
recognition  of  institutional  stupidity,  laugh  at  them.  In  prison,  for  instance, 
Davis  found,  "All  prisoners-whether  they  were  sixteen  or  sixty-were  re- 
ferred to  as  'girls.'  "  Too, 

One  other  jail  "outlet"  was  overwhelmingly  sexist.  It  was  the  stubborn  pres- 
ence of  the  washing  machine,  clothes  dryer  and  ironing  paraphernalia... The 
"reasoning"  behind  this  was  presumably  that  women. ..lack  an  essential  part 
of  their  existence  if  they  are  separated  from  their  domestic  chores.  The 
men's  linens  and  jail  clothes  were  sent  elsewhere... the  women  were  expected 
to  tend  to  their  own. 


Written  Word:  Angela  Davis/65 


There  was  more  vigorous  sexism,  however,  during  Davis'  pre-prison 
activism  in  Los  Angeles: 

It  was  a  period  in  which  one  of  the  unfortunate  hallmarks  of  some  nationalist 
groups  was  their  determination  to  push  women  into  the  background.  The 
brothers  opposing  us  leaned  heavily  on  the  male  supremacist  trends  which 
were  winding  their  way  through  the  movement..." 

Sadly,  these  trends,  though  somewhat  more  subtle,  still  exist  within  the 
black  community  and  often  undermine  the  political  activism  of  black  women. 

One  of  the  most  important  insights  to  be  gained  from  Angela  Davis' 
autobiography  (beyond  the  close  scrutiny  of  a  remarkably  strong  woman)  is 
the  way  in  which  the  book  suggests  directions  for  political  activism.  These 
insights  should  be  useful  for  political  activists  of  either  sex,  any  race  or  any 
political  persuasion.  One  especially  noteworthy  comment  is,  "When  white 
people  are  indiscriminately  viewed  as  the  enemy,  it  is  virtually  impossible  to 
develop  a  political  solution."  This  is  not  to  suggest  that  all  whites  will 
immediately  be  embraced  by  Third  World  peoples.  However,  the  word 
"indiscriminately"  is  crucial,  because  through  it,  that  statement  may  open 
closed  minds  and  doors  which  have  previously  precluded  effective  and/or 
lasting  alliances. 

Just  as  the  above  statement  suggests  thinking  which  can  promote  within 
black  feminists  a  heightened  responsiveness  to  white  feminists,  there  are 
counterpoints  in  the  book  to  which  white  and/or  "middle-class"  feminists 
should  pay  close  attention:  1)  the  racism  described  throughout  the  book 
(most  easily  perceived  in  the  discussion  of  Davis'  early  schooling);  2)  the 
strong  group-identity  and  refutation  of  class  divisions  which  are  apparent  in 
the  sections  on  Davis'  prison  experiences. 

First,  in  relating  her  elementary  school  experiences,  Davis  exposes  the 
core  of  racism— the  manner  in  which  Third  World  children  are  victimized  by 
it  and  programmed  to  accept  a  lesser  lot  in  adult  life.  The  academic  achieve- 
ments which  Davis  herself  attained  can  be  more  fully  appreciated  when  con- 
trasted to  the  inauspicious  conditions  of  her  early  education.  In  spite  of  a 
racist  school  system  which  relegated  (and  relegates)  black  children  to  condi- 
tions least  conducive  to  learning,  Davis'  curiosity  and  encouraging  parents 
prompted  her  to  be  a  sincere  scholar.  The  "school"  she  attended  was  actually 
a  community  of  dilapidated  houses  with  mud  yards,  leaky  roofs,  and  pot- 
bellied stoves.  Textbooks  were  few  and  incomplete.  There  were  no  black 
people  on  the  Board  of  Education.  Until  their  own  'black  library'  was  built, 
blacks  could  only  gain  access  to  library  books  through  a  daring  black  librarian 
who  smuggled  them  out. 


66/ Quest, vol.  I  no.  3,  winter  1975 


As  oppressive  as  these  conditions  were,  and  even  as  they  facilitated  racist 
programming  of  genetic  and  social  inferiority,  Davis  cites  the  disadvantage 
turned  to  advantage-the  opportunity  to  fill  the  void  created  by  disregard 
for  what  black  children  learned  with  a  thorough  and  constant  exposure  to 
black  history.  It  was  in  this  way  that  black  southerners  came  to  have  such  a 
strong  sense  of  community  and  self. 

Obviously,  this  is  a  strategy  which  the  women's  movement  does  not  have 
an  opportunity  to  utilize  against  sexism  in  early  education.  It  does,  however, 
present  an  explanation  of  why  Third  World  and  poor  women  have  not  come 
to  the  movement  in  greater  numbers:  Because  of  the  movement's  general 
lack  of  commitment  to  the  specific  concerns  of  racially  and  economically 
oppressed  people,  the  divide  and  conquer  technique  continues  to  be  success- 
fully utilized  to  keep  women  from  uniting. 

Second,  it  has  often  been  said  that  the  women's  movement  is  patterned 
on  the  black  movement  in  terms  of  the  concepts  of  consciousness  and  group 
identity.  Angela  Davis'  pre-prison  activism  in  Los  Angeles  provides  an  analogy 
to  substantiate  that  supposition.  Through  the  same  techniques  of  self- 
knowledge,  organizing  and  autonomy,  both  movements  enhanced  the  oppor- 
tunities for  their  groups  to  move  more  freely  in  society.  Perhaps  the  commit- 
ment necessary  to  endure  in  the  face  of  such  opposition  as  Davis  encountered 
in  Los  Angeles  is  an  extreme  example  when  speaking  of  commitment  to  the 
goals  of  the  women's  movement.  Nevertheless,  as  Davis  told  an  audience  after 
her  acquittal  on  the  charges  of  murder  and  kidnapping,  her  presence 
"signified  nothing  more  and  nothing  less  than  the  tremendous  power  of 
united,  organized  people  to  transform  their  will  into  reality." 

This  "power"  did  not  come  about  because  1,000  strong  people  were 
engaged  in  disjointed  efforts  to  free  Angela  Davis.  Rather,  it  was  because 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  shared  a  group  identity-that  of  people  who 
were  oppressed  and  repressed  and  who  recognized  that  Angela  Davis' 
imprisonment  typified  the  battle  that  was  being  fragmented  by  inability  to 
act  cohesively.  This  strong  group  identity  was  further  illustrated  in  the 
reception  Davis  invariably  received  from  co-inmates-the  prisoners  joining  in 
her  hunger  strike  in  protest  of  being  kept  in  solitary  confinement;  the  mes- 
sages smuggled  to  her  by  sympathetic  matrons;  the  inmates  chanting 
"Free  Angela"  slogans  along  with  the  demonstrators  in  the  street;  and  num- 
erous other  instances  in  which  solidarity  grew  out  of  a  recognized  priority. 

This  is  where  the  women's  movement  needs  to  be-and  certainly  hopes  to 
become-more  effective.  Certain  passages  in  Davis'  book  make  the  value  she 
places  on  group  identity  apparent.  In  one  of  her  much  publicized  letters  to 


Written  Word:  Angela  Davis/67 


George  Jackson,  she  talks  about  collective  action  and  insists  that  "...individual 
escape  is  an  evasion  of  the  real  problem."  Further,  "Women's  liberation  in 
the  revolution  (black)  is  inseparable  from  the  liberation  of  the  male."  It  is 
critical  for  the  women's  movement  to  reach  this  understanding,  because 
Third  World  women  have  long  since  realized  that  they  cannot  be  free  unless 
Third  World  men  attain  freedom  as  well.  Is  this  a  commitment  the  women's 
movement  is  able  to  concede. ..and  then  act  upon? 


The  beginning  of  this  review  talks  about  the  collision  course  Davis  found 
herself  on  when  her  personal  goals  were  confronted  by  the  political  respon- 
sibilities of  her  life.  This  collision  course  was  actually  set  in  motion  some 
years  before  her  political  emergence  when,  at  15,  her  academic  goals,  lifestyle 
and  politics  were  all  realigned  by  her  move  from  Birmingham  to  a  white 
family's  home  in  New  York.  During  the  several  years  following  that  move, 
the  civil  rights  movement  was  approaching  its  zenith  while  Davis,  by  that 
time  in  Europe,  pursued  her  studies  in  philosophy  and  "felt  cheated"  by  her 
geographical  separation  from  the  movement.  It  was  the  contradiction  of 
securing  the  most  liberal  education  attainable  while  becoming  increasingly 
agitated  to  be  involved  in  the  civil  rights  movement  which  first  mandated  for 
Davis  the  meshing  of  her  personal  goals  and  political  responsibilities. 


6S/Quest 


Black  political  activism  was  at  its  peak  in  the  summer  of  1967-Martin 
Luther  King  and  the  Southern  Christian  Leadership  Conference;  Huey  New- 
ton and  the  Black  Panther  Party  for  Self  Defense;  Stokely  Carmichael  and  the 
Student  No n- Violent  Coordinating  Committee;  black  power.  Plunging  into 
this  male-dominated  movement,  Davis  made  arrangements  to  continue  her 
doctoral  studies  at  the  University  of  California  in  San  Diego  and  soon  found  a 
political  base  which  combined  campus  activities  in  San  Diego  and  community 
organizing  in  Los  Angeles. 

As  Davis  points  out  in  her  Preface,  "...with  a  little  twist  of  history,  another 
sister  or  brother  could  have  easily  become  the  political  prisoner  whom 
millions  of  people  from  throughout  the  world  rescued  from  persecution  and 
death."  That  "little  twist",  however,  stems  in  large  part  from  the  fact  that 
Davis  was  an  activist  in  the  most  turbulent  days  of  black  activism  in  Los 
Angeles.  The  author  gives  a  vivid  account  of  the  repression  and  persecution 
which  black  activists  were  subjected  to.  The  black  communities  of  Los  An- 
geles were  in  effect  militarized  war  zones  with  police  utilization  of  Vietnam 
veterans  to  subdue  and  harrass  the  community  organizing  which  was  being 
attempted.  Comrades  were  killed  or  wounded,  and  later,  when  her  Communist 
Party  affiliation  became  known,  Davis  was  assigned  a  body-guard  in  reaction 
to  the  many  threats  against  her  life.  With  the  killing  of  Jonathan  Jackson  in 
August  of  1970,  Angela  Davis'  personal  goals  began  an  inalterable  subjugation 
to  her  political  responsibilities. 

It  is  at  this  point  that  Davis  actually  begins  her  story.  The  book  opens 
with  an  account  of  Davis'  underground  experiences  while  she  was  on  the 
FBI's  "ten  most  wanted  criminals"  list.  If  one  has  any  sense  of  empathy,  it  is 
not  at  all  difficult  to  feel  the  fear  and  despondency  she  describes  during 
those  months.  Even  though  we  know  how  the  book  will  end-with  her  acquit- 
tal-it is  almost  a  relief  when  the  capture  finally  takes  place;  at  least  she  is 
safe  and  the  fear  of  pursuit  can  be  shaken  off. 

There  is  no  relief  to  be  found,  however,  in  the  months  of  imprisonment. 
There  is  the  sisterhood  which  exists  within  the  prisons  and  the  compassion  of 
some  of  the  matrons.  But  there  is  also  the  degradation,  the  racism,  and  the 
cruel  severities  of  prison  life. 

There  is  Davis'  persistent  faith  and  dignity-after  a  particularly  annoying 
encounter  with  one  matron,  Davis  firmly  tells  her,  "You  may  leave  now." 
But  there  is  also  the  empty  sadness  as  Davis  relates  her  feelings  when  George 
Jackson  was  murdered  in  San  Quentin.  This  was  the  occasion  in  which 
Angela  Davis'  personal  goals  and  political  responsibilities  finally  collided  and 
painfully  but  surely  reconciled  themselves  in  her  life:  "George's  death  would 


Written  Word:  Angela  Davis/69 


be  like  a  lodestone,  a  disc  of  steel  deep  inside  me,  magnetically  drawing 
toward  it  the  elements  I  needed  to  stay  strong  and  fight  all  the  harder.. .He 
was  gone,  but  I  was  here.  His  dreams  were  mine  now." 

Certainly  this  book  meets  the  first  of  Davis'  objectives  in  writing  it— to 
make  clear  the  rationale  and  intensity  of  her  commitment.  We  should  hope 
that  it  will  meet  the  second-to  inspire  others  to  join  the  growing  community 
of  struggle.  After  the  National  United  Committee  to  Free  Angela  Davis  had 
raised  the  cash  to  set  her  free  on  bail  just  before  her  trial,  Davis  reflected  on 
what  had  been  accomplished: 

Back  in  my  cell,  I  lay  down  feeling  a  profound  sadness.  Why  me  and  not  the 
others?  I  could  not  get  rid  of  a  sense  of  guilt.  But  I  knew  that  my  freedom 
would  be  significant  only  if  I  used  it  to  push  on  for  the  freedom  of  those 
whose  condition  I  had  shared. 

Hopefully  Angela  Davis'  book  will  help  us  see  the  urgency  of  maximizing 
our  strength  by  realigning  our  own  personal  goals  with  the  political  respon- 
sibilities of  our  lives.  Perhaps  in  that  way  the  women's  movement  can  broaden 
its  horizons  and  develop  new  perspectives  and  priorities. 


Sandra  Flowers,  of  the  Southern 
Regional  Council  in  Atlanta,  is  a  con- 
sultant and  free  lance  writer  on  prob- 
lems that  black  women  encounter  with- 
in the  women's  movement. 


the  second  wave 

A  MAGAZINE  OF  THE  NEW  FEMINISM 
Box  344,  Cambridge  A 
Cambridge,  MA    02139 

vol 3  no3        prison 

santa  cruz  bust 
corporate  child  care 


w     name 

4.    address, 
city 


state. 


.zip. 


$3*  for  a  year  sub  (4  issues).  Start  my  sub 


..ith  issue  no 

S.75+S.25  postage  for  1  copy  of  issue  no 

'add    $1-  outside  of  USA,  $7.50  airmail  overseas 


70/Quest 


Respect 


To  me 

my  mother  said 

I  respect  you. 

And  I  amazei" 

asked  of  hi  A 

i 
But  why? 

She  spok 


you  are  a  liberated  woman 
ou  do  as  you  wish  with  your  life. 

Baby  girl  my  sweet  daughter 
^lon't  you  know  that  is  all 
've  ever  wanted  forg^Mlf. 

immer,  1974 


LOOKING  BACKWARD... 

briew 


♦  ♦♦ 


by    Gerri  Traina 


Once  upon  a  time,  about  ten  years 
ago,  there  wasn't  a  women's  move- 
ment; the  media  hadn't  coined  the 
sneer  phrase,  "women's  lib."  Women 
got  unequal  pay  for  equal  work  and 
didn't  protest;  corporate  annual  re- 
ports did  not  brag  that  their  companies 
had  affirmative  action  programs  for 
minorities  and  women;  Jack  Parr  could 
comment  about  the  size  of  a  woman's 
breasts  without  a  peep  from  his  aud- 
ience; housewives  who  ran  for  public 
office  were  an  oddity;  and  even  in 
burgeoning  radical  nooks  across  the 
country,  "the  girls  can  do  the  typing" 
was  heard. 

Women  have  come  from  different 
places  and  taken  different  routes  to 
get  to  feminism.  But  it  is  important 
to  understand  why  and  how  we  got 
from  there  to  here;  it  is  particularly 
important  to  see  how  our  individual 
political  history  relates  to  gaining  the 
self-confidence  necessary  to  carry  out 
the  things  we  need  to  do. 

During  the  60's,  a  few  of  us  became 


photographs  by  Victoria  Eves 

a  part  of  the  anti-imperialist  radiclib 
counter-culture-now  called  the  "male 
left."  Then,  our  heroes  were  all  who 
defied  the  establishment-from  Abbie 
Hoffman  to  Dr.  Spock,  from  the  Wea- 
thermen to  the  Black  Panthers  and  the 
Young  Lords,  from  Julian  Bond  to 
Mark  Rudd.  We  sailed  with  the  Ven- 
ceremos  Brigade,  defied  police  in  Chi- 
cago, extolled  Ho  Chi  Minh,  carried 
the  red  flag  of  revolution.  We  wore  our 
jeans  and  army  shirts  defiantly  and 
marched  and  chanted  down  barricaded 
streets.  And,  funny  thing,  within  this 
subculture,  we  still  typed,  and  cooked, 
and  wiped  the  noses  of  our  children. 

I  lived  a  very  schizophrenic  life 
back  then,  sophisticated  New  York 
professional  by  day,  aspiring  revolu- 
tionary by  night;  the  contradictions 
were  overwhelming.  During  involve- 
ment in  a  CR  group  for  more  than  a 
year,  these  contradictions  became 
more  and  more  apparent,  and  more 
and  more  unlivable.  While  other  wom- 
en had  already  joined  and  confronted 


72/Quest,  vol.  I  no.  3,  winter  1975 


each  other  within  N.O.W.  or  engaged 
in  more  militant  actions,  I  stayed  with- 
in the  security  of  my  male-left  spawn- 
ed CR  group.  I  was  not  ready,  able,  or 
willing  to  give  up  certain  of  the  privi- 
leges that  I  had  fought  so  hard  for, 
since  I  came  from  a  working-class, 
ethnic   minority   background. 

Certain  realities,  however,  could 
not  be  ignored.  I  had  no  more  status 
as  a  woman  within  the  male  left  sub- 
culture than  I  had  within  my  family, 
my  traditional  job,  or  my  relationships 
with  men.  I  sat  on  my  hands  during 
interminable  political  meetings  just  as 
I  sat  on  my  hands  at  professional 
meetings.  If  I  ever  got  the  nerve  to 
speak,  I  wasn't  listened  to  within  our 
political  group  in  the  same  way  that  I 
wasn't  listened  to  by  any  man  with 
whom  I  had  a  relationship. 

My  CR  group  provided  the  climate 


that  made  possible  my  dawning  aware- 
ness of  those  political  realities  that  I, 
as  had  so  many  women,  previously 
ignored,  avoided,  or  felt  helpless  to 
deal  with.  CR  enabled  me  to  confront 
myself  and  challenge  the  way  I  lived 
my  life.  It  did  for  me  what  some 
months  of  shrinking,  many  months 
of  introspection,  much  glorious  avoid- 
ance, and  sporadic  mattress  time  with 
men  never  did... the  women  in  that  CR 
group  helped  me  confront  my  sexual- 
ity and  state  publicly,  "I  am  a  lesbian." 
Stating  publicly  that  I  was  a  lesbian 
enabled  me  to  state  privately  what  I 
was  as  a  woman.. .a  first  and  major 
step  towards  freeing  me  to  struggle 
politically  as  a  feminist.  It  took  ano- 
ther year  to  cross  over  from  the  male- 
dominated  Miami  Convention  Coali- 
tion to  the  Miami  Women's  Coalition 
during  the  summer  of  1972.  Why  did 
it  take  so  long?  Conceptual  change  is  a 
painful  process-you  question  what  you 
have  been,  what  you  have  done  with 
your  life  until  then.  You  want  to  keep 
holding  on  to  a  piece  of  it  because 
you're  fearful  that  you  may  get  cast 
adrift.  Leaving  the  security  of  family, 
leaving  the  security  of  a  professional 
job,  leaving  the  security  of  being  a 
male-identified  woman  was-and  is— 
not  an  easy  thing  to  do.  Gut  and  brain 
had  to  come  together.  It  was  not  easy 
to  accept  that  I  would  no  longer  be  on 
the  inside.  Even  though  I  was  a  politi- 
cal radical,  I  was  still  embraceable  by 
some  parts  of  society.  Once,  however, 
I  refused  to  function  as  a  heterosexual, 
once  I  focused  my  political  energies  on 
the    white,    ruling-class    male,    on    the 


Looking  Backward.. .Briefly/73 


patriarchal  establishment  that  rules 
my  life  and  the  life  of  the  world,  then 
I  would  be  an  outsider.  And  that  is 
sometimes  a  very  lonely  place  to  be. 

A  Community  of  Women 

We  "outsiders"  who  were  trying  to 
define  our  politics  needed  to  commune 
with  others  like  ourselves.  So,  by  de- 
grees, we  split,  separated  ourselves 
from  the  male's  world  and  became  a 
living,  working  part  of  an  all-women's 
world;  we  joined  women's  communes, 
worked  in  women's  trade  collectives, 
socialized  only  with  women,  slept  only 
with  women,  joined  women's  political 
caucuses,  started  women's  centers  and 
women's  health  collectives  and  wom- 
en's newspapers. 

We  were  separatists  and  semi-separa- 
tists who  needed  time— time  todevelop 
a  sense  of  self  that  was  positive  and 
strong,  to  develop  a  feminist  politics 
that  was  viable,  to  overcome  the  years 
of  conditioning  that  had  prevented 
us  from  achieving  our  full  potential. 

We  experimented  with  new  ways  to 
get  things  done.  We  had  endless  poli- 
tical discussions  where  we  encouraged/ 
forced  every  woman  to  participate; 
we  argued,  we  challenged,  we  remained 
silent,  we  were  divisive,  we  made  ene- 
mies among  ourselves,  we  trashed  our 
leaders,  we  were  trashed  by  others,  we 
were  heavies,  we  were  stars,  we  dropped 
out  of  the  movement,  we  fought  or 
gave  up  the  fight. ..and  some  of  us 
survived... and  grew  stronger. 

For  many  women,  one  contributory 
aspect  of  a  strong  self-concept  is  being 


part  of  a  community  of  women  that 
shares  our  commitment,  that  supports 
us,  that  works  together  politically  in 
situations,  where  we  get  into  women's 
music,  when  we  get  into  our  bodies 
on  varied  playing  fields,  when  we  move 
en  masse  to  a  women's  happening. 
Within  the  community  that  is  Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  even  though  we  do  differ- 
ent things  and  think  different  ways, 
we  know  we  are  not  alone,  that  there 
is  a  tremendous  supportive  network 
that  keeps  providing  the  momentum 
to  propel  us  forward. 

Of  course,  our  community  is  also 
very  insular  and  can  have  within  it 
components  of  destructiveness  that 
not  only  can  damage  self  but  also 
forestall,  tarnish  or  even  destroy  our 
political  efforts.  I  have  been  used  and 
abused  by  some  in  the  women's  move- 
ment. I  have  felt  that  I  was  a  flunky, 
a  patsy,  a  warm  body  that  was  needed 
to  accomplish  a  particular  task.  I  have 
been  angry  and  hurt  by  such  treatment, 
and  I  have  known  others  who  were 
angry  and  hurt  and  got  lost  for  awhile 
trying  to  sort  things  out.  I  suppose, 
then,  that  even  when  such  abuse  comes 
down  on  us,  being  sure  of  ourselves 
and  what  we  are  working  towards  is 
crucial.  That  sureness  of  commitment 
to  a  future  which  is  beyond  self  is  a 
quality  of  strong  self  concept  since  it 
allows  us  to  keep  doing  and  not  be 
inordinately  affected  by  personal  slings 
and  arrows.  I  contemplate  my  navel 
rarely;  I  would  rather  offer  up  my 
body  daily  to  the  not-so-genteel  tug  of 
war  that  is  the  women's  movement  in 
Washington  than  spend  time  with  my 


lAIQuest 


chin  leaning  on  my  clenched  fist  dream- 
ing about  Amazon  takeovers. 

Sometimes  it  becomes  necessary  to 
retreat  to  a  private  place  to  think  and 
not  just  cry.  But  if  we're  strong  enough, 
we  don't  stay  in  that  private  place  for 
too  long,  because  we  may  begin  to  like 
it  too  well;  it  becomes  so  comfortable, 
such  a  nice  refuge  from  harsh  reality. 
How  many  women  do  you  know  who 
have  retreated  into  the  snugness  of  a 
marriage,  of  an  isolated  woodland,  of 
a  university,  or  a  relationship  (with 
woman  or  man),  who  will  never  come 
out  again? 

A  Metamorphosis 

How  have  some  of  us  survived,  and 


grown?  How  did  we  overcome  all  those 
negatives  that  had  been  bred  in  us 
daily,  those  ever-building  walls  which 
threatened  to  entomb  us  and  throw 
off  shadows  that  crept  increasingly 
between  us  and  the  one  ray  of  light 
that  kept  us  struggling?  That  ray  of 
light  was  our  selfhood,  the  whole 
woman  that  was  in  each  of  us,  fighting 
to  stay  alive  and  not  give  in  to  the 
shadows. 

What  did  we  do?  One  thing  some  of 
us  did  was  to  build  a  kind  of  invisible 
cocoon  around  ourselves,  a  cocoon  that 
allowed  in  the  light  rays  but  kept  out 
the  shadows.  We  wore  clothes  that  hid 
our  bodies  so  we  would  be  less  objecti- 
fied as  sex  symbols,  clothes  which  also 
gave   us   a    freedom   of  movement  to 


Looking  Backward.. .Briefly/7 5 


climb  those  mountains  which  our  high 
heels  had  forbade,  freedom  to  hurl  ob- 
jects and  to  propel  our  bodies  forward 
without  the  restriction  of  "foundation 
garments,"  freedom  to  look,  act  and 
be  tough  while  we  built  up  the  strength 
to  match  the  image  we  were  putting 
forth. 

We  stayed  young.  "Youngness"  is 
a  quality  of  self-concept.  No  matter 
what  a  feminist's  chronological  age, 
be  it  18,  38,  or  58,  the  "youngness" 
of  women  whose  energies  and  lives  are 
future-directed  is  markedly  different 
from  the  youth  fetishism  of  our  socie- 
ty, whose  victims  are  mini-skirted 
grandmothers  and  women  who  haunt 
cosmetic  counters.  As  Rita  Mae  Brown 
intimated   in   her  article,    "The   Good 


Fairy"  (Quest,  Vol.  I,  No.  1),  feminists, 
and  particularly  lesbian  feminists,  move 
unselfconsciously,  are  comfortable  with 
their  bodies,  care  for  their  bodies-are 
"young"  in  very  different  ways  than 
are  their  male-identified  peers  who 
wear  the  clothes  and  the  accessories 
that  they  think  will  keep  them  looking 
"young"  and  therefore  attractive  to 
men. 

We  surrounded  ourselves  with  wom- 
en to  give  us  space  to  let  our  ideas 
grow  and  take  form  without  getting 
shot  down  before  they  were  fully  for- 
mulated. There  was  space  to  read,  to 
challenge,  to  reject,  to  expand-space 
to  put  all  the  broken,  shattered  frag- 
ments back  together  again,  fragments 
of  self  that   the   male  world  tried  to 


IdlQuest 


keep  us  from  piecing  into  a  unifying 
whole. 

We  created  women's  centers  and 
women's  health  clinics  and  women's 
presses  where  we  had  free  rein  for  the 
first  time  in  our  lives  to  accomplish 
something  without  some  male  looking 
over  our  shoulder  telling  us  that  we 
were  doing  it  all  wrong,  that  they  knew 
easier,  more  effective  ways  to  do  it, 
that  our  emotions  got  in  the  way  of 
production,  that  there  was  no  real 
profit  that  would  surface  from  our 
energies. 

We  were  able  to  put  more  than  two 
sentences  together,  then  more  than 
five,  then  more  than  ten,  until  we 
could  stand  up  in  a  room  full  of  people 
and  insist  that  we  be  heard.  We  didn't 


get  flustered  on  the  phone  by  male 
imperiousness,  we  didn't  fall  apart 
when  "officials"  in  school  systems  or 
unions  or  law  enforcement  or  business 
slapped  us  on  the  wrist,  implying  that 
we  should  go  home  and  be  the  wives 
and  mothers  that  we  were  "supposed 
to  be." 

We  are  not  dependent  on  men  for  a 
definition  of  what  we  are.  A  male 
doesn't  tell  us  what  the  limits  of  our 
abilities  are.  No  longer  do  we  need  to 
play  the  "office/coquette/  social  rou- 
lette" games  that  are  so  ego  destructive. 
In  fact,  we  are  prepared  to  deal  with 
men  only  on  our  terms,  not  on  theirs. 
This  means  not  wasting  our  energies 
confronting  male  sexism  in  speech, 
action  or  the  written  word  every  time 
we  see  it.  This  means  not  having  to 
put  in  "she"  for  "he"  on  all  office 
memos  or  argue  when  some  male's 
conditioning  has  him  open  a  door  for 
us.  What  a  strong  self-concept  does  in- 
sure is  a  quality  of  ease  that  lets  us 
feel  the  assurance  of  our  abilities,  lets 
us  create  our  own  space  to  learn,  to 
initiate,  without  constantly  deferring 
to  "him"  to  "know"  if  we  have  been 
successful.  A  strong  self-concept  is  a 
sense  of  freedom  to  deal  honestly  with 
both  men  and  women  and  to  give  free 
rein  to  ideas  with  the  confidence  that 
they  will  be  discussed  on  their  own 
merit. 

Different  women  have  taken  differ- 
ent routes— or  were  forced  by  class  cir- 
cumstance to  take  different  routes- 
than  I  have.  Many  could  not  afford  to 
split  from  the  man's  world;  they  had 
to  stay  there  and  earn  a  living  in  order 


Looking  Backward.. .Briefly/77 


to  survive.  Some  who  have  made  the 
split  intend  to  stay  there,  either  be- 
cause they  are  involved  in  women's 
businesses  and  are  beginning  to  carve 
out  the  women's  institutions  necessary 
towards  creating  a  new  society,  or  be- 
cause they  prefer  to  live  in  a  lesbian 
subculture  where  constant  reinforce- 
ment of  their  separatist  life-styles  is 
their  only  way  to  go. 

I  have  chosen  to  reenter  the  male's 
world  on  my  own  terms.  No  longer  will 
I  remain  silent.  I  will  insist  that  I  be 
listened  to  and  paid  for  my  efforts.  I 
can  write,  I  can  talk,  I  can  influence, 
I  can  accomplish,  I  can  produce,  I  can 
succeed-and  I  also  can  learn  those 
things  that  are  necessary  to  changing 
the  world. 

"Re-entry"  is  another  process  that 
can  be  destructive.  We  are  not  reenter- 
ing the   male's  world  to  get  our  own 


piece  of  the  pie  but  rather  to  keep  our 
goals  for  women  up  front  and  to  learn 
all  the  skills  we  can  from  that  world. 
Factories,  as  such,  may  not  exist  in  a 
future  society,  but  we  must  learn  what 
makes  them  work.  Financial  institu- 
tions may  not  exist  in  their  present 
form  x  years  from  now,  but  we  still 
must  learn  how  they  function.  Political 
parties  may  be  anachronistic,  but  we 
must  know  how  they  are  structured 
and  why  they  appear  to  survive. 

The  Looking  Glass  Darkens 

Where  have  we  come  to?  Now  that 
we  have  begun  to  hone  ourselves  to 
the  sharpest  edges  of  ourselves,  where 
do  we  go  from  here?  It  is  not  enough 
to  beat  our  fists  against  our  breasts 
and  proudly  proclaim,  "I  Am  Woman." 
Our    personal    accomplishment    is    as 


78/Quest 


nothing  when  compared  to  the  work 
that  has  yet  to  be  done.  Achieving  a 
more  positive  self-concept  is  just  the 
beginning,  the  first  stage  of  an  evolu- 
tion that  in  the  end  must  produce  a 
society  where  eveyone's  self-concept 
is  a  positive  one.  We  can't  sit  back  and 
congratulate  ourselves— or  be  isolated 
from-those  who  attack  us  or  denigrate 
us  or  point  at  us  with  shame. 

We  have  to  think  harder  and  push 
each  other  to  think  harder,  have  to 
work  harder  and  push  each  other  to 
work  harder,  have  to  get  up  off  our 
private  ass  while  we  shove  each  other 
to  get  off  our  collective  asses;  we  have 
to  put  our  private  money  where  our 
movement  is  before  we  can  tell  each 
other  what  to  do  with  our  collective 
money;  we  have  to  deal  in  the  real 
world  with  men  on  every  level  while 
we  plead  with  each  other  not  to  run 
away  and  hide  from  that  real  world; 
we  have  to  pull  our  heads  up  out  of 
the  sands  of  yoga,  hari  krishna,  jesus 
or  zen...or  men. 

A  strong  self-concept  is  not  for 
playing  games  or  filling  up  our  hours 
or  doing  busywork  to  get  us  by,  or 
being  the  ultimate  volunteer.  Or  for 
getting  us  a  fat  media  contract  as 
the  up-and-coming  feminist  star.  Get- 
ting power  is  our  goal  and  getting 
power  is  serious  business,  not  for 
powderpuff  derby  entrants.  Amazons? 
No.  Serious  women  able  to  take  respon- 
sibility? Yes.  A  strong  self-concept  is 
crucial  to  positive  leadership,  both  on 
the  individual  as  well  as  the  collective 
Movement  level.  Taking  on  the  mantle 
of  leadership   is  necessary   to  getting 


the  business  done.  Contemplating  our 
navel  is  not  going  to  move  us  any  closer 
towards  where  the  power  is. 

Gerri  Traina  is  a  women's  move- 
ment organizer  and  management  con- 
sultant to  community  groups. 


Errata: 

Quest  regrets  the  following  errors 
which  appeared  in  the  article  by  Vicki 
Gabriner,  "ERA:  The  Year  of  the 
Rabble''  (vol  I,  no.  2).  Unforgiveably, 
her  name  was  misspelled  twice;  also, 
ALFA  is  the  Atlanta  Lesbian  Feminist 
Alliance,  not  ALF -Liber  ation< 


Looking  Backward... Briefly \1 9 


To  begin  thinking  about  future  issues 


Future  Visions  and  Fantasies 


Theories  of  Revolution 


The  development  of  feminist  ideol- 
ogy requires  a  clear  sense  of  the  future; 
a  sense  of  where  we  are  going,  and 
what  we  want.  For  many  of  us  the 
initial  energy  for  involvement  in  the 
women's  movement  was  anger  aimed 
at  destroying  institutions  which  oppres- 
sed women:  capitalism,  patriarchy,  and 
white  supremacy.  Now  that  we  are  also 
trying  to  build  a  new  society,  we  need 
a  different  kind  of  energy— energy 
grounded  in  our  visions  of  the  future. 
The  relationship  between  vision  and 
struggle  is  at  the  core  of  the  Move- 
ment's development.  Our  visions  will 
provide  a  measure  of  our  successes 
and  a  source  of  energy  for  a  continu- 
ing commitment  to  struggle. 

We  need  all  kinds  of  visions  and 
fantasies  to  spark  our  energies.  Visions 
may  deal  with  alternative  forms  of 
power  relationships,  work,  social  inter- 
action among  people,  supply  and  dis- 
tribution systems  for  necessities  such 
as  food,  clothing,  health  care,  etc.  But 
beyond  that,  the  women's  movement 
needs  its  dreams  and  fantasies.  We 
must  liberate  our  minds  to  soar  into 
these  outer  limits,  to  create  our  own 
body  of  science  fiction,  myth,  and 
other  forms  of  the  fantasy  world.  Our 
dreams  may  lead  to  concrete  realitites, 
may  release  unknown  energy,  may 
reach  women  in  ways  that  our  concrete 
visions  cannot. 


Theories  of  Revolution  recognizes 
that  the  broad  range  of  feminist  politi- 
cal activity  across  the  country  has  gen- 
erated many  questions.  Is  there  a  need 
for  feminist  revolution?  Can  feminist 
ideology  unify  our  individual  and  col- 
lective, local  and  national,  personal  and 
political,  organized  and  unorganized 
approaches  towards  change?  What  is 
the  link  between  unity  and  pluralism? 
What  is  the  dynamic  between  feminist 
theories  of  revolution  and  our  survival? 

We  chose  the  word  theory  because 
it  presupposes  a  willingness  to  create 
action-oriented  critiques,  demands,  vi- 
sions and  strategies  for  feminism.  We 
see  theories  of  revolution  as  basic  to 
the  women's  movement  because  it 
deals  with  the  complex  questions  that 
face  us  in  our  struggle  for  social,  eco- 
nomic and  political  change. 

Women  are  recognizing  the  limita- 
tions of  existing  theories-socialist,  re- 
formist, anarchist,  lesbian-separatist, 
culturalist— and  are  seeking  to  create 
new  models,  directions,  and  definitions 
for  feminist  theory,  action  and  con- 
sciousness. 

Theories  of  Revolution  points  to  a 
new  possibility  of  building  feminist 
visions  for  change  grounded  in  the  real- 
ity of  the  present.  We  seek  your  par- 
ticipation in  that  re-definition  of  our 
struggle. 


SO/Quest 


Notes  for  prospective  contributors 

We  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling  material 
for  each  issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off  the 
presses,  a  small  development  committee  prepares  a  list  of  ques- 
tions and  ideas  which  we  hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  This 
list  is  available  to  anyone  who  is  considering  submitting  ideas  for 
the  issue,  outlines  for  potential  articles,  manuscripts,  poetry,  gra- 
phics, etc.  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out  writers  and 
artists  known  to  have  definitive  political  perspectives  on  issues 
related  to  the  theme. 

All  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members.  If  it  is  not 
appropriate  for  Quest  purposes  the  manuscript  or  graphic  will  be 
returned  to  the  author.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered,  it  is 
then  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible  for 
working  with  the  author  through  whatever  processes  of  rewriting 
and  editing  required.  This  process  includes  soliciting  comments  and 
suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and  Advisory  Committee 
members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review 
before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8!/2  by  11  paper,  using 
a  black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy). 
Where  appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  collected 
and  typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manus- 
cripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  are  requested.  For  information 
concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspon- 
dence to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


future  issues 

WOMEN  and  SPIRITUALITY 

vol.  I  no.  4 

The  spiritualism  of  women  has  to  do  with  a  commonality  of  spirit, 
the  affirmation  of  life,  joy,  a  new  world  vision,  and  a  new  self,  a  spiritu- 
ality that  increases  our  power  to  fundamentally  change  human  relation- 
ships and  society's  institutions.  Areas  for  articles  include:  feminist 
theology  and  philosophy;  feminist  visionaries  and  mystics;  religious 
forms  for  women  in  music,  art,  dance,  sports,  witchcraft,  and  astrology. 

Copy  Deadline:  December  1,  1974 

FUTURE  VISIONS  and  FANTASIES 

vol.  II  no.  1 

"What  do  we  want?"— what  are  women's  visions  of  a  new  society, 
what  are  our  projections  for  new  ways  of  living  and  working  that  meet 
our  needs  for  love,  friendship,  security,  growth,  freedom  and  fulfill- 
ment. Areas  for  articles  include:  what  kind  of  political  system  do  we 
want;  what  kind  of  economic  system;  what  cultural  and  spiritual  forms; 
how  should  society  be  reorganized?  Copy  Deadline:  March  1,  1975 

THEORIES  of  REVOLUTION 

vol.  II  no.  2 

How  do  we  get  what  we  want?— will  we  need  a  revolution  to  achieve 
new  political  and  economic  systems,  new  cultural  and  spiritual  forms, 
and  if  so,  what  kind  of  revolution.  Areas  for  articles  include:  defini- 
tions of  revolution;  what  ingredients  are  required  for  revolution  in 
different  societies;  what  is  the  role  of  leaders  and  political  parties  in 
change;  what  are  the  steps  necessary  and  obstacles  to  women  taking 
power  to  change  society.  Copy  Deadline:  June  1,  1975 

ORGANIZATIONS  and  STRATEGIES 

vol.  II  no.  3 

Feminists  have  experimented  with  various  organizations  and  strategies 
for  the  past  ten  years;  now  we  need  to  evaluate  these  closely  and  de- 
termine what  approaches  are  next.  Areas  for  articles  include:  examina- 
tion of  different  structures  in  terms  of  goals,  successes,  and  failures; 
tactical  strategy  charts  and  directions;  the  role  of  leadership,  of  national 
and  local  organizations,  parties,  coalitions,  and  communications  net- 
works; problems  of  community  control,  participatory  democracy, 
gaining  power,  and  goal  achievement.         Copy  Deadline:  September  1,  1975 


