$2.00 


quarterly 


THEORIES  of  REVOLUTION 


/^V  T   T  T^  O  rwi  vol.  II  no.  2 

V^Uiikjl  Faiii97s 

a  feminist  quarterly 

THEORIES  of 

REVOLUTION 

contents 

The  FUTURE  of  FEMALE  SEPARATISM 

Lucia  Valeska  2 

WAGES  for  HOUSEWORK: 

SUBSIDIZING  CAPITALISM? 

Joan  Landes  17 

CRITIQUE  and  COMMENTARY 

Emma  Price  31 

PATRIARCHY  and  CAPITALISM 

Linda  Phelps  34 

UNTITLED-A  Poem 

Margaret  Talbot  49 

NOT  FOR  LESBIANS  ONLY 

Charlotte  Bunoh  50 

The  NEXT  AMERICAN  REVOLUTION 

Linda  Teixeira  57 

FUNDAMENTAL  FEMINISM: 

PROCESS  and  PERSPECTIVE 
Nancy  Hartsock  67 

Copyright  (c)  1975  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All 
rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  pro- 
hibited. Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in 
January,  April,  July,  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly, 
Inc.,  1909  Que  St.,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C  20009,  U.S.A.  Applica- 
tion to  mail  at  second-class  postage  rates  is  pending  at  Washington 
D.C.  Quest  is  a  tax-exempt,  non-profit  organization. 

Printed  by  Diana  Press,  Baltimore,  Maryland,  U.S.A.  Subscrip- 
tion rates  are  $7.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals;  $8.00/year  in 
Canada  and  Mexico;  $9.00/year  overseas  surface,  $12.50/year  over- 
seas air;  $12.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.00  and  .35  postage  and 
handling/single  issues.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest.a 
feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003.  Bulk 
rates  available  upon  request.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available 
upon  request. 


staff 


Copy  Editor 

Charlotte  Bunch 
Managing  Editor 

Beverly  Fisher 
Design  Editor 

Alexa  Freeman 
Promotion  Editor 

Karen  Kollias 
Editors 

Jane  Dolkart 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Mary-Helen  Mautner 

Sidney  Oliver 

Gerri  Traina 

advisory 

Dolores  Bargowski 
Rita  Mae  Brown 
Jean  O'Leary 
Juanita  Weaver 

assistants 

Bertha  Harris 
Lee  Schwing 
Gale  Toko 


Cover  design  by 
Casey  Czarnik 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua22wash 


Z    *  i 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth 
feminist  political  analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is 
not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the 
women's  movement  possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as 
regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization  or  a  poli- 
tical party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the 
movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached  a  point  where  each 
answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been  through  various 
ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle 
brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power 
for  women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence 
against  women?  Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do 
not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across 
the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  ot  seeking. 


Special  Notice 


If  you  have  not  received  a  previous  issue  of  Quest,  it 
may  be  because  you've  moved  and  never  sent  us  a  change  of 
address.  The  post  office  does  not  forward  second  class 
mail  unless  you  specifically  request  it  and  also  indicate 
that  you  will  pay  for  it.  The  post  office  does  not  return 
the  undelivered  copies  to  Quest.  We,  therefore,  cannot  be 
responsible  for  these  lost  issues.  As  neither  of  us  can 
afford  the  loss,  please  notify  us  of  a  change  of  address 
immediately.  If  possible,  provide  us  with  the  number 
which  appears  above  your  name  on  your  address  label. 


/?J  ^^ 


c=>^^>> 


^ 


graphic  by  Karen  Russell 


the  future  of  female  sc 


by  Lucia  Valeska 

Every  woman  on  earth  can  draw 
strength  and  courage  from  the  separa- 
tist slogan  "Power  to  Women"  because 
every  woman  has  experienced  a  mea- 
sure of  futility  and  powerlessness  sole- 
ly due  to  the  fact  that  she  is  female. 
The  woman  who  calls  her  people, 
"Black"  will  feel  it.  So  too  with  the 
woman  who  is  working  class,  southern 
white  Baptist,  Betty  Ford,  or  Elizabeth 
the  Queen.  Thus  speaks  the  collective, 
biologically  based  history  of  mothers, 
sisters,  daughters,  aunts,  grandmothers, 
nieces,  misses,  mrs.,  mses,  queens  and 
ladies,  milkmaids,  whores,  and  dykes 
alike.  Wherever  you  are  or  have  been, 
the  power  of  "power  to  women"  gets 
to  you. 

Past  that,  we  have  some  difficulties. 
So  far,  biology  is  destiny,  but  so  are 
a  number  of  other  things.  Even  though 
sexism  pervades  society  across  class 
and  racial  boundaries,  still  it  affects  us 
differentially-especially  in  our  histori- 
cal, political  and  economic  develop- 
ment. If  the  fundamental  fabric  of 
society  is  paternalistic  (usually  associa- 
ted with  a  feudal  economy)  intimacy- 
emotional,  physical,  psychological-can 
be  sustained  between  rulers  and  ruled. 
With  industrialization,  the  rise  of  a 
competitive  political  economic  order 
gradually  numbed  the  previous  pater- 
nalistic relationship. 


graphics  by  Jackie  MacMiUan 

Take  black  and  white  America  as  an 
example.  One  of  the  primary  distin- 
guishing characteristics  of  race  relations 
in  a  paternalistic  system  is  that  it  simul- 
taneously places  great  social  distance 
between  the  races  in  combination  with 
a  high  degree  of  intimacy.  Black  "mam- 
mies" suckle,  toilet  train  and  tutor 
white  children,  and  black  "uncles" 
tell  stories,  teach  manual  skills,  pro- 
tect and  obey  the  master's  entire 
family.  The  children,  black  and  white, 
play  and  grow  together  from  infancy  to 
adulthood.  In  each  family's  daily  inter- 
course, in  the  quarrels  and  celebrations, 
the  other  maintains  a  close  watchful 
presence.  Sexual  contact  between  the 
races  is  never  entirely  condoned,  but  it 
is  relatively  frequent  and  practically 
unavoidable-especially  between  master 
and  female  slave. 

The  mass  migration  of  poor  blacks 
to  industrial  centers  changes  the  whole 
fabric  of  interdependent  and  intimate 
connections  between  whites  and  blacks. 
A  new  potential  for  mass  black  identi- 
ty and  organization  emerges  and  a 
different  form  of  racism  takes  hold.  1 

The  effect  of  industrialization,  how- 
ever, on  sex  roles  is  different  and  varies 
according  to  race  and  class.  Black  wom- 
en went  through  a  similar  economic 
transition  as  did  black  men  in  terms  of 
moving  out  of  a  paternalistic  frame- 


21  Quest,  vol.  II  no.  2,  fall,  1975 


aratism 


work.  The  fact  that  many  black  women 
remained,  or  became  domestic  workers 
in  white  households,  tempered  then- 
transition  somewhat,  but  not  enough 
to  keep  paternalistic  ties  with  whites 
intact.  The  black  domestic  worker  still 
calls  the  ghetto  home,  and  she  draws 


her  primary  political  consciousness 
from  that  segregated  community.  Con- 
sequently, black  women  rarely  have 
been  severely  paternalistically  beholden 
to  black  men  in  this  country-due  to 
the  history  of  racism  here. 

The  white  working  class  woman  also 


The  Future  of  Female  Separatism/3 


moved  from  a  thoroughly  paternalistic 
(often  rural  extended  family)  into  a 
competitive,  industrial  work  force.  The 
primary  difference  between  her  situa- 
tion and  that  of  the  black  woman  in 
terms  of  industrialization  is  that  the 
white  woman  temporarily  escaped  the 
new  competitive  order.  The  transition 
left  her  with  one  foot  in  the  new  order 
and  one  still  heavily  ensconced  in  the 
traditional  family.  The  traditional  fam- 
ily (extended  or  nuclear)  is  a  paternal- 
istic institution  by  definition. 

Stuck  in  this  particular  institution, 
white  middle  class  women  made  a  dif- 
ferent transition.  Until  recently  they 
have  remained  in  a  paternalistic  envir- 
onment with  respect  to  sex  role:  having 
their  class  identity,  economic  mobility, 
and  their  emotional  and  psychological 
existence  fundamentally  submerged  in 
their  father's  family  first  and  then 
their  husband's.  They  were  not  regard- 
ed as  primary  wage  earners.  Their 
families  did  not  require  their  (wage 
based)  economic  contribution  to  sur- 
vive. Only  recently,  with  the  demise  of 
the  middle  class  nuclear  family,  are 
middle  class  women  being  pushed 
wholesale  into  a  competitive,  indus- 
trial world.  Because  they  are  not  ghet- 
toized  in  the  traditional  sense,  and 
have  no  potential  for  mass  mobiliza- 
tion based  on  geographic  consolidation, 
they  therefore  have  come  to  view 
isolated,  paternalistic  existence  in  the 
family  and  one-to-one  ties  with  men 
as  uniquely  insidious. 

As  we  analyze  how  the  distinct 
realities  of  class,  race,  and  sexuality 
influence   our  lives  and   the  direction 


of  our  struggles,  it  is  crucial  to  note 
the  economic  roots  of  female  separa- 
tism. Our  individual  reactions  to  it  will 
vary  according  to  these  diverse  origins. 
However  our  collective  insight  must 
yield  a  concrete  understanding  of  why 
ultimately  lesbian  feminism  delivers  a 
unique  threat  to  the  complex  history 
of  human  oppression.  Furthermore, 
while  the  potential  blow  to  male  supre- 
macy is  as  real  today  as  it  was  six  years 
ago,  the  terrible  child  of  the  feminist 
revolution  is  still  emerging. 

The  first  wave  of  dyke-baiting  is 
over.  The  word  "lesbian"  can  be  utter- 
ed in  wider  circles  without  causing  as 
many  raised  eyebrows.  The  grand  con- 
vergence of  lesbianism  and  feminism  is 
seen  and  perceived  commonly  in  plain 
black  and  white  instead  of  acid  laven- 
der. 

Initial  militant  female  separatism, 
like  early  women's  liberation,  has  sober- 
ed in  most  quarters.  Sisterhood  is  still 
powerful  but  the  "army  of  lovers"  have 
set  aside  their  spears  to  make  music, 
poetry,  radio  networks,  bookstores, 
schools,  credit  unions,  presses,  maga- 
zines, farms,  cooperatives,  novels,  poli- 
tical theory,  health  care  centers,  and 
record  companies.  What's  more,  they 
are  brewing  up  these  projects  with  a 
very  mixed-some  say  odd-assortment 
of  women.  The  virulent  strain  of  strict 
separatism  and  even  once  vehement 
anti-leftism  appear  to  be  fading  into 
a  virtual  sea  of  project-oriented  activity. 

Consequently  some  maintain  that 
the  issue  of  separatism  is  used  up— it 
had  its  merry,  suicidal  fling,  and  died 
an  astonishingly  early,  if  not  remark- 


4/Quest 


able,  death.  From  the  west  coast  a 
friend  writes  that  the  very  word  elicits 
deadpan  hostility  or  an  active  curse. 
Yet,  she  adds,  "while  so  many  are  out- 
wardly against  separatism,  they  contin- 
ue to  live  it."  Recently,  three  women 
from  Seattle's  Radical  Women  sailed 
through  town  on  their  way  home  from 
the  Antioch  Socialist-Feminist  bash.  A 
query  on  separatism  gleaned  from  them 
a  resounding:  "It's  dead  in  Seattle. 
But,"  they  quickly  added,  "three- 
quarters  of  our  membership  is  lesbian 
and  we're  an  autonomous  female  or- 
ganization." 

Meanwhile,  on  the  east  coast,  a 
sporadic  rash  of  charges  and  counter 
charges  plagues  the  feminist  press.  A 
non-separatist  lesbian  is  ousted  from  a 
separatist  workshop.  2  Child  care  at  the 
west  coast  Lesbian  History  Conference 
is  mucked  up  in  the  planning  stages 
over  the  relative  ages  of  male  children. 
There  is  a  bit  of  a  row  at  Antioch  over 
whether  men  should  be  permitted  to 
watch  the  children.  And  a  feminist 
from  Canada  lashes  out  against  the 
lesbian  imperative,  shouting:  ".  .  .what 
I  do  with  my  cunt  is  my  own  busi- 
ness! "3  Omens  and  rumors  abound. 

Aside  from  the  fact  that  it's  some- 
what bizarre  to  be  pronounced  dead 
on  arrival  when  your  eyes  are  wide 
open  and  your  blood  is  running  hot, 
what  does  it  all  mean?  Where  do  the 
contradictions  leave  us?  Can  we  count 
up  the  booty  from  the  first  campaign 
to  see  what  we  have  got?  Undeniably 
a  certain  separatist  ideology  and  prac- 
tice has  taken  irrevocable,  organic  hold 
of  the  women's  movement  as  a  whole. 


One  doesn't  argue  the  merits  of  all- 
female  projects,  only  whether  or  not  an 
occasional  intruder  should  be  allowed 
and  under  what  conditions.  Lesbians 
are  no  longer  greeted  with  sisterly 
tolerance  but  with  a  sure  (if  hostile) 
respect.  Although  many  of  the  militant, 
lesbian-only  collectives  have  been  short- 
lived, the  cultural  revolution  they  start- 
ed and  sustain  thrives.  Every  spring  the 
latest  batch  of  new-feminist-gays  hits 
the  bars  on  schedule.  If  their  politics 
seem  a  bit  watered,  their  numbers 
alone  take  up  the  slack.  It  is  truly  a 
staggering  phenomenon.  But  what  has 
this  to  do  with  revolution? 

Revolutionary  Potential 

The  feminist  movement  spans  a 
nearly  infinite  range  of  political  orien- 
tations. Even  within  individual  organi- 
zations, large  and  small,  the  member- 
ship discloses  an  enormous  variety  of 
political  development.  The  reason  be- 
hind our  monstrous  diversity  is  simple: 
one  qualifies  for  the  feminist  move- 
ment if  one  is  female;  it  doesn't  par- 
ticularly matter  what  you  think  be- 
cause the  overriding  impulse  of  com- 
ing together  is  female  oppression  alone. 
But  while  our  strength  may  be  in  our 
diversity,  it  is  also  true  that  our 
greatest  revolutionary  weakness  can  be 
found  there  as  well. 

Revolutionary  growth  is  dependent 
upon  concrete  analysis,  well-articulated 
consciousness,  specific  short  and  long 
range  strategies,  and  organization  to 
implement  stated  collective  goals.  A 
concomitant  effect  of  well-developed 


The  Future  of  Female  Separatism/5 


revolutionary  growth  is  progressive 
polarization  which  naturally  and  logic- 
ally separates  us  from  them,  compels 
people  to  choose  up  sides  and  make 
ready  for  battle.  In  a  revolutionary 
situation,  one  is  not  given  the  option 
of  neutrality  or  even  diversity.  In  this 
sense  of  revolutionary,  the  feminist 
movement  clearly  falls  short.  The 
causes  for  our  shortcomings  are  com- 
plex and  numerous.  What  I  would  like 
to  focus  on  here  are  the  revolutionary 
shortcomings  with  respect  to  separa- 
tism. 

First,  what  does  separatism  mean? 
Speaking  academically,  separatism  is 
simply  another  word  for  segregation. 
The  chief  difference  between  the  two 
is  how  they  are  used,  by  whom,  and 
for  what  purposes.  Segregation  is  used 
by  the  economically  dominant  group 
as  a  means  of  social  control,  i.e.,  to 
maintain  and  perpetuate  a  given  eco- 
nomic, political,  and  social  stratifica- 
tion system.  Whereas  separatism  is 
used  by  the  economically  disadvan- 
taged in  order  to  radically  alter  exist- 
ing political,  social  and  economic  ar- 
rangements. 

Qualitatively,  both  separatism  and 
segregation  are  carried  out  in  degrees 
with  a  tremendous  variation  in  empha- 
sis depending  on  the  specific  situation. 
Furthermore,  the  politics  of  either  can 
be  used  by  individuals,  or  groups  who 
do  not  necessarily  define  themselves 
as  separatist  per  se. 

I  compare  separatism  with  segrega- 
tion because  their  academic  similari- 
ties tend  to  disguise  their  fundamental 
practical,    historical  and  political  dif- 


ferences. Separatism  arouses  liberal 
wrath  because,  in  the  liberal  mind,  it  is 
instantly  equated  with  segregation  and 
its  role.  An  example  of  this  confusion 
is  found  in  the  current  national  debate 
over  "quota  vs.  affirmative  action." 
Legally  (and  academically)  there  is  no 
difference  between  setting  aside  a  num- 
ber of  slots  for  white  males  (thus 
keeping  others  out)  and  setting  aside  a 
number  of  slots  for  ethnic  minorities 
and  women  (effectively  keeping  white 
men  out).  The  difference  is  in  our 
collective  political  histories.  How  the 
Supreme  Court  will  solve  the  dilemma 
remains  to  be  seen.  It  is  differential 
treatment  (legal  and  illegal)  that  creat- 
ed the  situation  and  it  will,  of  neces- 
sity, be  differential  treatment  that  gets 
us  out  of  it.  Differential  treatment  is 
illegal  but  it  is  the  same  everywhere.  If 
you  want  half  your  school  faculties  to 
be  female,  there  are  two  options: 
(1)  Double  the  faculty  (in  the  midst  of 
recession  and  long  after  the  baby 
boom);  or  (2)  fire  half  the  men.  This  is 
why  "affirmative  action"  is  a  sham 
reform  in  terms  of  its  potential  for 
social  change. 

There  is  more  than  just  an  academic 
similarity  between  segregation  and  sep- 
aratism. Both  are  powerful  political 
devices.  While  we  must  continually 
differentiate  between  them  in  terms  of 
who's  doing  what  (the  dividing  and  for 
what  purpose),  we  must  also  realize 
that  separation  is  a  weapon  we  instinc- 
tively gravitate  toward  out  of  necessity. 
Keeping  men  out  of  women's  con- 
sciousness raising  groups  (mild  separa- 
tism) can  be  defined  euphemistically; 


6IQuest 


(<l 


I     tB*- 


^ 


ft 


■ 


>>4. 


/ 


r- 


\ 


. ....  _. 


X 


1\ 


r 


c 


The  Future  of  Female  Separatism/7 


we  can  say:  "It  is  helpful  for  us  to  be 
together  without  men,  just  this  one 
place,"  or  "The  women  need  a  space 
of  their  own,"  etc.  But  the  fact  remains 
that  keeping  men  out  because  they  are 
men  is  discrimination  on  the  basis  of 
sex.  It  can  be  labeled  "sexism  in  re- 
verse" just  as  accurately  as  any  other 
form  of  female  separatism.  All  to  be- 
labor the  obvious  truth  that  feminism 
is  intrinsically  separatist.  True,  the 
type  and  degree  of  separatism  prac- 
ticed varies  tremendously  within  the 
movement. 

Lesbian  Feminism 

Lesbian  feminism  is  popularly  con- 
sidered the  most  militant  form  of 
separatism.  While  most  women  and 
organizations  which  label  themselves 
"separatist"  are  lesbian,  the  reverse  is 
no  longer  the  case.  This  is  a  notable 
development  of  the  last  five  years. 
Ever  since  the  convergence  of  lesbian- 
ism and  feminism,  lesbianism  alone  has 
progressively  taken  on  the  dimensions 
of  a  national  cure  for  what  ails  you. 
Gone  are  the  first  lesbian  feminists  who 
painstakingly  worked  their  way  out  of 
the  closet  through  a  step-by-step  politi- 
cal analysis  of  the  roots  and  main- 
stays of  male  supremacy.  In  their  place 
are  increasing  numbers  of  women  who 
simply  find  that  relationships  with 
women  are  better.  Many  of  these  wom- 
en are  also  feminists— in  fact  were  ini- 
tially exposed  to  the  "lesbian  alterna- 
tive" through  the  feminist  movement 
(or  through  their  friend  who  was 
active  in.  .  .).  But  their  politics  run  the 
same    infinite    gamut  as  those  in  the 


general  women's  movement.  There  are 
socialists,  reformists,  women's  studies 
dykes,  housekeepers,  sorority  sisters, 
and  divorced  sisters-in-laws.  These  days 
any  random  straight  woman  can  acci- 
dentally wander  into  a  lesbian  bar, 
party,  classroom,  picnic,  or  ball  game, 
and  remain  there  forever. 

On  the  one  hand,  the  proof  is  in 
the  pudding.  Apparently  it  wasn't  such 
a  bad  idea.  On  the  other  hand,  such 
riff  raff  you've  never  seen.  The  net 
effect  of  our  phenomenal  population 
explosion  as  a  people  is  yet  to  be 
tallied  and  I  shall  certainly  not  attempt 
it.  But  one  result  is  that  the  term 
lesbian  feminist  does  not  communicate 
what  it  once  did.  Some  militant  les- 
bian feminists  have  taken  refuge  under 
the  label  lesbian-separatist.  But  this 
too  has  its  difficulties  because  the 
lesbian  feminist  camp  itself  is  divided 
into  what  we  might  roughly  call  cultur- 
al nationalists  vs.  political  lesbian  fem- 
inists. Don't  faint  if  you  belong  to 
neither  group  or  both.  The  labels  only 
represent  approximate  emerging  con- 
stellations. No  single  individual  or  or- 
ganization exhibits  all  the  characteris- 
tics of  one,  but  rather  a  general 
orientation  toward  one  rather  than  the 
other. 

Both  advocate  separation  of  the 
sexes  organizationally,  politically  and 
personally-in  so  far  as  separation  is 
possible.  The  possibility  of  separating 
is  always  exaggerated  because,  let's 
face  it,  men  are  everywhere.  Similarly 
both  constellations  advocate  collective 
and  individual  economic  independence 
for  women  as  a  primary  strategy  for 


S/Quest 


achieving  the  desired  autonomy.  Often 
the  differences  between  the  two  are  in 
degree  rather  than  substance:  there  is 
much  exchange  between  them  and 
some  contention;  but  as  they  develop, 
the  distinctions  become  more  definite. 

Cultural  Nationalists 

When  cultural  nationalists  speak  of 
revolution  they  mean  matriarchal  revo- 
lution; that  is,  putting  women  in  charge 
of  everything  of  consequence— from 
child  rearing  on  down  to  president. 
Or  rather,  they  speak  of  returning  wom- 
en to  the  power  they  once  held  under 
the  grand  matriarchies  of  pre-historic 
civilization.  They  tend  to  see  separa- 
tism as  a  strategical  end-the  only  way 
to  reorganize  all  of  society  under  a 
truly  just,  fair,  loving  and  creative 
order.  It's  not  clear  how  we'll  get 
from  here  to  there,  just  faith  that  we 
will.  For  the  time  being  they  empha- 
size building  a  powerful  female  culture 
with  all  the  necessary  accouterments: 
music,  art,  poetry,  films,  religion,  sci- 
ence, medicine-all  female  based.  If 
you  press  them  for  a  narrow  descrip- 
tion of  their  politics,  they  call  them- 
selves anarchists  or  communalists.  They 
are  often  outspokenly  anti-authoritar- 
ian, anti-leadership  and  anti-structure. 

Their  general  strategy  is  one  of 
"drop  out"  rather  than  the  "stir-up" 
orientation  of  their  more  politically 
based  sisters.  In  fact,  cultural  nation- 
alists look  askance  at  the  very  word, 
"political"  (a  male  compartmentaliza- 
tion)  which  to  them  implies  rigidity, 
authoritarianism  and  oppressive  forms 
of  control.  What  is  deemed  correct  or 


incorrect  varies  according  to  individual 
inclination  rather  than  political  analy- 
sis or  organization. 

On  the  question  of  separatism,  they 
cover  a  wide  range  of  militancy.  Some 
are  virulently  anti-male,  others  may 
not  even  call  themselves  "separatist." 
They  are  somewhat  content  to  treat 
men  with  a  "live  &  let  live"  philosophy 
which  is  more  in  line  with  their  general 
political  attitude  of  non-coercive  tol- 
erance toward  all  living  things.  But, 
their  general  perception  of  males  is 
that  they  are  irresponsible  and  not  to 
be  trusted  with  any  degree  of  power. 

Political  Lesbian  Feminists 

This  constellation  is  urban  based. 
Those  who  gravitate  toward  it  are  often 
openly  hostile  to  men  and  see  separa- 
tism as  essential  to  the  revolutionary 
growth  of  women.  They  view  them- 
selves as  working  toward  revolutionary 
change;  but,  unlike  the  cultural  na- 
tionalists, they  see  the  return  of  ma- 
triarchy as  more  desirable  than  feas- 
ible. One  can  distinguish  the  two  con- 
stellations with  respect  to  separatism, 
but  not  in  terms  of  militancy.  The 
political  lesbian  feminists  tend  to  view 
separatism  as  one  primary  strategy. 
Other  strategies  include  building  class 
consciousness,  developing  collective  or- 
ganizational structures  (true  for  na- 
tionalists too),  fighting  capitalism,  urg- 
ing women  toward  a  socialistic  base 
and  analysis,  and  developing  institu- 
tional economic  independence. 

It  is  difficult  to  differentiate  clear- 
ly between  the  politicos  and  the  na- 
tionalists.  Both  hold  similar  views  of 


The  Future  of  Female  Separatism/9 


women,  men,  and  separatism  and  both 
also  suffer  from  a  lack  of  overall  theory 
and  organization.  Perhaps  the  funda- 
mental difference  is  that  political  les- 
bian feminists  are  not  so  put  off  by 
structures,  power,  leadership,  and  po- 
litical analysis.  In  fact,  their  emphasis 
is  on  how  to  get  from  here  to  there; 
their  intent  is  to  seize  power. 

Where  the  specific  evolution  of 
these  constellations  will  lead  is  un- 
known. It  is  significant  that  both 
evolved  from  an  initial  lesbian  feminist 
analysis  of  the  logical  direction  in 
which  feminism  must  move  in  order 
to  become  a  revolutionary  movement. 
In  the  following  discussion  of  that 
analysis,  I  do  not  differentiate  between 
them. 

Lesbian  Feminist  Analysis 

Knowing  that  oppression  alone  is  a 
faulty  foundation  for  revolutionary 
growth  and  realizing  that  sexism,  how- 
ever destructive,  comprises  a  way  of 
survival  for  all  women,  the  initial  les- 
bian feminist  movement  started  out  to 
build  an  analysis  and  platform  that 
would  provide  the  lacking  revolution- 
ary direction.  When  survival  itself  is 
dependent  on  oppression,  the  first  job 
must  be  to  create  an  alternative  means 
of  survival.  The  feminist  movement 
provided  the  initial  grist  when  it  po- 
litely articulated  our  right  to  a  separ- 
ate, viable  identity.  But  the  actual 
political  leap  from  the  public  arena  to 
the  private  sphere-where  women  have 
lived  out  an  overwhelming  percentage 
of   their   entire    political    history-was 


achieved  in  lesbian  feminist  analysis 
and  practice. 

It  was  a  natural  progression  of  analy- 
sis and  events.  Once  the  idea  of  private 
politics:  fathers,  brothers,  lovers,  hus- 
bands, family  home,  sexuality  and 
children,  fused  with  the  plain  old  femi- 
nist demand  for  a  separate  identity,  it 
was  only  a  matter  of  time.  The  bed- 
room just  isn't  that  far  from  the 
kitchen.  But  the  analysis  goes  much 
further. 

'  The  greatest  insight  that  lesbian 
feminism  provided  the  world  is  that 
the  institution  and  ideology  of  hetero- 
sexuality  (in  its  historical  develop- 
ment) is  a  cornerstone  of  male  suprem- 
acy. Further,  any  strategy  for  libera- 
tion which  ignores  this  insight  may 
achieve  miraculous  social  change  for 
millions  of  people,  but  it  will  fail  to 
end  male  supremacy.  By  logical  (prac- 
tical, personal,  and  political)  extension, 
lesbianism  comes  to  play  a  crucial  role 
in  the  feminist  revolution.  It  is  not  my 
intent  to  argue  the  legitimacy  of  the 
insight.  Such  has  been  done  and  will 
continue  to  be  done  in  greater  depth 
by  many  others.  5 

The  lesbian  feminist  analysis  may 
strike  the  standard  citizen  as  virtual 
madness.  But  this  reaction  is  not  uni- 
versal. For  instance,  in  1973  we  find 
one  sober,  male,  Marxist  sociologist 
concluding:  "As  long  as  the  vast  ma- 
jority of  adult  women.  .  .allow  them- 
selves to  be  linked  in  a  marital  or 
amorous  relationship  with  adult  males, 
it  will  be  difficult  for  them  to  join 
other  women  in  fighting.  .  .  .Until  such 
time  as  militant  feminists  will  propose 


10 1  Quest 


The  Future  of  Female  Separatism/ 11 


a  means  (satisfying  to  most  women)  of 
dispensing  with  men,  the  majority  of 
sisters  can  be  predicted  to  sell  out  to 
the  enemy.  .  .[and]  the  strategy  of 
female  liberation  [will  be]  distinguished 
from  the  revolutionary  model  of  class 
struggle.  "6 

The  phrase  "satisfying  to  most"  catches 
the  eye,  because,  if  nothing  else,  the 
lesbian  community  is  apparently  pro- 
viding a  healthy  number  of  women 
with  satisfaction.  However,  van  den 
Berghe  is  using  his  point  to  prove  that 
feminism  is  inevitably  and  hopelessly 
reformist  as  opposed  to  revolutionary. 
The  fact  that  he  readily  sees  hetero- 
sexuality  as  the  major  stumbling  block 
to  feminist  revolution  is  more  than 
interesting. 

As  a  grand  conductor  of  the  quality 
of  human  life,  and  the  largest  world- 
wide distributor  of  private,  public, 
psychic  and  economic  resources,  the 
institution  of  heterosexuality  and  the 
ideology  which  implements  it  are  never 
to  be  taken  lightly.  It  is  also  true  that 
the  only  institutional  and  ideological 
alternative  available  is  lesbian  femi- 
nism. Not  because  the  act  of  women 
loving  women  is  in  and  of  itself  revolu- 
tionary (potentially  yes,  actually  no) 
but  because  it  provides  the  soil  for 
revolutionary  growth.  Revolution  is 
never  automatic.  Initially,  lesbian  fem- 
inism confused  possibility  with  inevi- 
tability. When  you  work  hard  and 
long  to  come  up  with  an  astounding 
first  step,  you  sometimes  convince 
yourself  that  what  follows  must  surely 
be  easier.  This  was  not,  and  is  not,  the 
case. 


Refusing  to  be  men's  private  pro- 
perty is  essential  and  more  than  a 
"personal  solution."  Heterosexuality 
is  far  more  than  a  private  matter  be- 
tween a  woman  and  a  man;  it  is,  in 
fact,  a  mandate  that  all  women  be  for- 
ever divided  against  each  other  through 
a  compelling  allegiance  to  one  man  at 
home  and  all  men  outside  the  home. 
While  it  is  possible  to  refuse  to  be 
private  property,  refusing  the  public 
domination  of  men  is  virtually  impos- 
sible. The  man  is  everywhere,  at  every 
turn  in  our  existence,  holding  the  reins, 
creating  a  constant  reinforcement  of 
what  we  are— economically,  politically, 
and  sexually.  In  order  to  climb  out  of 
the  mire  of  female  oppression,  one  is 
invariably  forced  to  deal  with  male 
authority  in  a  manner  that  compro- 
mises lesbian  feminist  politics.  Con- 
sequently a  large  portion  of  the  les- 
bian feminist's  daily  existence-especial- 
ly  on  the  job— is  a  living  betrayal  of 
what  she  knows  and  believes. 

Recognizing  this  reality,  the  next 
logical  step  was  the  development  of 
strictly  lesbian  feminist  living  and 
working  collectives.  But  with  no  over- 
all theory  to  guide  their  development 
and  no  economic  base  to  sustain  them, 
many  early  efforts  in  this  direction  fell 
prey  to  instability  and  political  and 
economic  isolation.  To  remedy  the 
situation,  a  modified  course  seemed 
appropriate.  Clearly  there  has  been  a 
shifting  of  gears-a  moving  outward 
into  the  public  sphere.  The  issue  of 
working  with  straight  women  has  sub- 
sided and  has  been  replaced  by  the 
question:  With  whom  can  we  work  to 


111  Quest 


develop  economic  and  political  auton- 
omy outside  the  private  sphere? 

There  has  been  a  simultaneous  reali- 
zation that  it  isn't  heterosexuality 
per  se  that  must  be  conquered  but  the 
ideological  and  material  base  of  sup- 
port it  gives  to  male  supremacy.  Les- 
bian feminist  analysis  is  indispensable 
to  the  process  of  destroying  male 
supremacy,  but  not  the  end  of  it.  Out 
of  lesbian  feminist  analysis  comes  the 
base  opposition  to  heterosexual  hegem- 
ony and  its  role  in  maintaining  male 
supremacy;  but  this  analysis  does  not 
insist  that  all  women  become  lesbians. 

Choosing  a  modified  course  is  not 
to  admit  defeat.  In  its  purest  form 
separatism  doesn't  work  because  you 
cannot  cut  yourself  off  from  all  sources 
of  power  and  survive.  It  is  something 
that  must  be  handled  by  degrees:  the 
more  you  build  on  new  ground,  the 
further  from  the  old  you  get.  But  it  is 
also  dangerous  to  deny  the  strength  of 
the  initial  analysis  and  move  the  other 
way  altogether— into  an  anti-separatist 
position. 

The  contradictions  that  envelop 
separatism  come  from  a  complex  of 
sources  not  the  least  of  which  is  that 
it  threatens  male  supremacy  and  all 
those  who  survive  through  it.  But  we 
should  look  at  some  of  the  problems: 

The  flurry  of  exhilarating  expecta- 
tions aroused  by  lesbian  feminism 
sometimes  hits  reality  with  a  terrible 
thud.  I  don't  know  why  we  expect 
that  working  and  living  with  women- 
only  will  pan  out  so  perfectly,  but  we 
invariably  do.  We  are  an  emerging 
people,   in   every   sense.   Centuries  of 


oppression,  although  they  have  left 
their  mark,  should  at  .least  serve  to 
inform  the  direction  in  which  we 
move.  The  work  yet  to  be  done  is  vast 
enough  to  dispirit  the  most  stout- 
hearted-especially  for  the  motley  crew 
available  to  do  it. 

Come  Out!  is  an  eloquent  impera- 
tive and  a  grand  initial  strategy-one 
that  has  been  taken  very  seriously  by 
thousands  of  women.  Now  many  of 
them  are  all  out  there-without  child 
care,  jobs,  skills,  and  all  those  debili- 
tating ties  to  male  privilege.  Initial 
strategy  does  not  create  the  requisite 
alternative  means  of  sustenance. 

One  of  the  distressing  elements  of 
heavy  anti-separatism  is  that  it  leads 
many  of  us  to  gloss  over  the  extent  of 
our  psychological  and  emotional  addic- 
tion to  male  power  on  an  individual 
level,  as  well  as  our  survival  connec- 
tions to  male  power  on  an  individual 
and  mass  level.  Divisive  or  not,  we  must 
develop  and  articulate  a  practice  of 
systematically  criticising  our  psycho- 
logical as  well  as  our  material  depen- 
dence on  men  and  heterosexuality. 

One  of  the  hardest  lessons  for 
lesbian  feminists  to  accept  is  that  there 
are  some  straight  feminists  who  are 
making  a  more  vital  contribution  to 
women  than  some  lesbians.  But  the 
structural  difference  between  them  is 
still  real:  Straight  women  are  beholden 
to  male  supremacy  in  a  manner  that 
lesbians  are  not.  However,  although 
lesbians  have  greater  potential  by  vir- 
tue of  their  separation  from  men,  it 
does  not  matter  where  achievement 
comes  from;  it  is  actual  contribution 


The  Future  of  Female  Separatism/ 13 


that  counts  the  most. 

It  is  inappropriate  to  say  one- 
straight  or  lesbian— is  better  than  the 
other,  but  it  is  crucial  to  analyze  and 
understand  the  distinctions  in  revolu- 
tionary potential  and  to  submit  them 
to  systematic  criticism.  Ultimately  our 
ability  to  overcome  male  supremacy 
rests  upon  building  an  alternative  to 
it.  That  alternative  can  only  come 
from  developing  theory,  organizational 
structures,  and  economic  autonomy. 

Divided  loyalties  will  influence  the 
spirit  of  any  struggle,  but  they  can- 
not be  dealt  with  on  an  individual 
basis  alone.  Only  through  collective 
organizational  support  can  we  find 
the  courage  and  strength  to  accept 
the  changes  we  must  make. 

Coalition  in  the  Future 

Lesbian  feminist  separatism  as  it 
stands  today  advances  a  partial  analysis 
of  human  oppression.  It  provides  us 
with  the  beginnings  of  an  oppositional 
ideological  framework,  and  posits  a 
number  of  tactics  to  give  that  frame- 
work a  sturdy  material  base.  It  fails, 
however,  to  provide  us  with  a  revolu- 
tionary theory,  long  range  strategy,  or 
the  organizational  means  to  implement 
a  revolutionary  goal.  But  neither-in 
terms  of  women— have  other  revolution- 
ary ideologies. 

More  than  leaving  heterosexuality 
intact,  other  revolutions  have  perpet- 
uated it  time  and  again.  This  is  no 
little  problem  that  can  be  dealt  with 
by  making  minor  adjustments.  For 
instance,  every  time  a  Maoist  speaks 


of  the  miracle  of  modern  China,  I  re- 
member that  the  "incurable"  lesbian 
in  that  country  is  summarily  executed. 
This  example,  and  its  unbearable  im- 
plications, compel  us  to  focus  on  the 
firm,  unchallenged  institutional  roots 
of  sexism  in  non- feminist  revolutions. 

On  the  other  hand,  feminists  owe  a 
great  deal  to  those  who  struggled  be- 
fore us.  We  have  borrowed  heavily 
from  their  ideas,  their  analyses,  their 
rhetoric  and  their  methodology.  Cer- 
tainly that  borrowing  is  not  over.  But, 
while  lesbian  feminists  must  come  to 
grips  with  class  analysis  and  socialist 
revolutionary  theory,  socialists  must 
deal  with  our  indispensable  contribu- 
tion. Right  now  we  are  far  apart,  thor- 
oughly divided  and  held  obedient  by 
our  mutual  oppressors-heterosexuality 
and  capitalism. 

The  first  thing  socialists  need  to  do 
is  forget  about  incorporating  us  into 
their  theory.  The  theory  must  change. 
And  the  first  thing  lesbian  feminists 
have  to  do  is  to  create  a  national, 
radical  feminist  organization.  Nobody 
is  going  to  listen  to  us-not  the  social- 
ists, nobody-until  they  cannot  afford 
to  do  otherwise.  It  has  little  to  do 
with  whether  or  not  they  like  us,  hate 
us,  can  identify  with  our  principles  or 
not.  Rather,  it  is  because  male  suprem- 
acy, wherever  you  find  it,  is  still  a 
viable  system,  providing  everyone  (in- 
cluding socialists)  not  just  with  privi- 
lege but  with  survival  itself. 

To  end  separatism  we  must  end  the 
causes  of  it.  Unity  is  essential  but  a 
degree  of  divisiveness  is  also  essential 
and  inevitable  until  we  have  the  means 


14/Quest 


:       fl»<* 


m    / 
r  / 


The  Future  of  Female  Separatism/ 15 


to  expand  our  analysis  to  include  the 
needs  of  others-practically  and  ideo- 
logically. Collectively,  women  will  use 
separatism  in  their  struggle  for  libera- 
tion, not  because  it  is  right  or  wrong, 
realistic  or  fantastic,  difficult  or  groovy, 
but  because  we  have  no  choice.  Kings 
do  not  sit  down  with  peasants,  Ameri- 
cans don't  take  tea  with  the  Chinese, 
and  whites  will  not  reckon  with  racism 
until  the  collective  force  of  the  oppo- 
sition gives  them  no  choice. 

Unfortunately,  collective  force  is 
rarely  the  offspring  of  100%  human- 
istic, democratic  procedure.  Might 
makes  right  and  the  weaker  opposition 
must  find  a  way  to  make  itself  mightier. 
The  act  of  building  a  separate,  inde- 
pendent, collective  territory  (geogra- 
phic, economic,  political,  sexual)  and 
a  powerful  new  group  identity  is  indis- 
pensable to  this  process;  thus  both 
constellations  in  the  lesbian  com- 
munity are  making  a  vital  contribution. 

Whatever  your  opinion  of  it,  female 
separatism  has  just  as  long  and  viable  a 
future  as  male  supremacy.  That's  a 
long  haul  ahead.  In  the  meantime, 
regardless  of  the  strategical  successes  of 
feminism,  individual  women  will  con- 
tinue to  find  a  perpetual  well-spring 
of  freedom,  affirmation,  strength,  and 
joy  in  lesbianism.  That  is,  reduced  to 
its  smallest,  conceivable  contribution, 
lesbianism  remains  a  powerful  political 
force. 


Footnotes 

ISee  Pierre  L.  van  den  Berghe,  Race  and 
Racism— A  Comparative  Perspective,  (John 
Wiley  &  Sons,  New  York,  1967).  van  den 
Berghe  expands  and  details  the  relationship 
between  economic  form  and  accompanying 
distinct  expression  of  racism. 

^Carol  Edelson  and  Marlene  Schmitz, 
"great  southeastern  lesbians,"  Off  Our 
Backs,  V:  6,  July,  1975,  p.  25. 

3"Not  A  Collaborator,"  letter  to  the 
editor,  Off  Our  Backs,  V:  5,  May-June, 
1975,    p.    27. 

^For  this  analysis  I  am  indebted  to 
Lesbianism  And  The  Women's  Movement, 
eds.  Nancy  Myron  and  Charlotte  Bunch, 
(Baltimore:  Diana  Press,  1975).  The  collec- 
tion of  articles  and  essays  contained  in  this 
book  are  indispensable  reading  for  all  femi- 
nists. Most  of  the  articles  were  originally 
published  by  THE  FURIES  Collective  dur- 
ing 1971-72;  they  cover  a  great  variety  of 
issues,  with  rare  depth,  poignant  analysis, 
and  the  tremendous  originality  that  gave 
birth  to  and  powerfully  punctuated  the 
work  of  THE  FURIES  Collective.  I  must 
add  that  the  analysis  contained  in  this 
paper,  although  greedily  borrowed,  is  too 
skeletal  and  bent  to  my  own  perceptions, 
prejudices,  and  purposes  to  do  any  justice 
to  the  original.  Whatever  flaws,  exaggera- 
tions, or  misunderstandings  you  find,  come 
solely  from  me. 

->See  especially  Margaret  Small,  "Lesbians 
and  the  Class  Position  of  Women,"  Lesbian- 
ism And  The  Women's  Movement,  Myron 
and  Bunch,  eds.  (Baltimore:  Diana  Press, 
1975),   p.  49. 

"Pierre  van  den  Berghe,  Age  and  Sex  in 
Human  Societies:  A  Biosocial  Perspective 
(Belmont,  Ca.:  Wadsworth  Publishing  Co., 
1973),  p.  102. 


Lucia  Valeska  is  a  Lesbian  Mother 
teaching  Women's  Studies  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  New  Mexico. 


16/ Quest 


Wages  for  Housework : 
Subsidizing  Capitalism? 


by  Joan  Landes 

The  following  article  is  excerpted 
from  a  book-length  manuscript  not  yet 
published  entitled,  "The  Theory  Be- 
hind Women's  Liberation:  Problems 
and  prospects."  We  have  focused  on 
the  author's  conclusions,  rather  than 
include  her  critiques  of  those  writers 
(Benston,  Dalla  Costa,  Secombe,  et.  al) 
who  have  contributed  to  the  "wages 
for  housework  "  debate  . 

After  a  lapse  of  several  decades 
Marxists  have  once  again  begun  to  ad- 
dress themselves  to  the  character  of 
women's  oppression  in  capitalist  socie- 
ties. These  Marxist  feminist  writers 
have  begun  to  situate  the  nature  of 
women's  labor  within  the  family.  They 
have  approached  the  various  dimen- 
sions of  women's  oppression  from  the 
vantage  point  of  often  ignored  aspects 
of  capitalist  relations  of  production.! 
At  the  same  time,  many  of  these 
writers  have  failed  to  incorporate  into 
their  analysis  what  I  take  to  be  the 
most  distinctive  methodological  and 
theoretical  implications  of  a  fully  de- 
veloped Marxist  feminist  approach. 


graphics  by  Leslie  Montgomery 

Marxist  feminism,  then,  begins  to 
express  the  contours  of  a  dialectical 
approach  to  social  life:  Qualitative 
changes  can  be  distinguished  from 
quantitative  changes;  new  forms  of 
social  life  will  require  new  concepts; 
contradiction  not  equilibrium  will  char- 
acterize development;  historical  change 
will  be  seen  as  a  constant  component 
of  a  world  already  and  forever  in 
process. 

In  my  view,  Marxist  feminism  pro- 
ceeds from  an  approach  which  Bertell 
Oilman  has  termed  Marx's  philosophy 
of  internal  relations.  2  This  approach 
treats  the  study  of  social  relations  as 
the  subject  matter  of  social  science. 
Thus,  the  study  of  social  reality  does 
not  focus  on  things  or  essentially  iso- 
lated individuals  but  on  entire  social 
totalities  understood  from  the  vantage 
point  of  units  abstracted  for  study, 
which  to  a  certain  extent  may  be  re- 
ferred to  as  versions-albeit  one-sided 
or  partial-of  that  totality. 

I  want  therefore  to  propose  that  it 
is  possible  to  view  capitalism  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  family;  that  in 


©   Joan  Landes  1975 


Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism?/ 17 


such  a  case,  the  family  would  consti- 
tute a  specific  mode  of  production:  A 
definite  mode  of  activity,  a  definite 
way  of  producing  and  reproducing  a 
way  of  life.  And,  this  mode  of  produc- 
tion is  an  alienating  capitalist  mode 
which  comes  under  the  law  of  private 
property.  The  family  conceptualized 
as  a  mode  of  production  is  actually  a 
mode  of  production  and  reproduction 
of  the  working  class  as  a  working  class. 
It  is  a  mode   of  reproduction  of  the 


individual  worker  as  a  worker;  and  a 
mode  of  reproduction  of  the  house- 
wife as  a  housewife  as  well  as  the  re- 
production of  that  same  woman  as  a 
potential  and  often  employed  wage 
laborer. 

Throughout  the  literature  of  wom- 
en's liberation,  I  have  discovered  a  re- 
peated tendency  to  attribute  conserva- 
tive qualities  to  the  female  housework- 
er  and  conservative  content  to  her  role 
within  the  family.  It  is  now  possible  to 


18/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  2,  fall,  1975 


situate  this  conservatism  in  a  different 
way,  through  applying  the  method  of 
internal  relations. 

The  family,  viewed  as  a  mode  of 
production  of  capitalism  possesses  a 
class  dimension.  And  this  is  not  merely 
because  it  is  a  reflection  of  the  econom- 
ic base,  but  because  the  reproduction 
of  labor  occurs  within  the  working  class 
family.  The  family  itself  is  an  alienated 
form  of  production  and  reproduction. 
It  teaches  workers  to  sell  their  labor 
power  for  the  sake  of  consumption 
which  they  understand  as  leisure  time; 
it  teaches  an  instrumental  attitude 
toward  work;  and  it  teaches  that  lei- 
sure, and  not  productive  activity,  gives 
meaning  to  life.  As  Marx  said; 
The  worker  therefore  only  feels  himself 
outside  his  work;  and  in  his  work  feels 
outside  himself  He  is  at  home  when  he 
is  not  working,  and  when  he  is  work- 
ing,  he  is  not  at  horned 

Within  the  family,  patterns  of  hier- 
archy (both  of  men  over  women,  and 
of  parents  over  children)  help  to  intro- 
duce workers  to  the  hierarchical  labor 
patterns  to  be  suffered  at  the  work 
place.  The  ideology  of  the  family 
helps  to  teach  workers  that  these  pat- 
terns are  "natural"  as  well  as  legiti- 
mate. Also,  the  family  absorbs  the 
shock  of  individuals  who  fail  to  achieve 
the  freedom  which  society  promises 
them  through  their  place  in  the  social 
division  of  labor. 

Certainly,  then,  woman's  role  as  a 
producer  of  the  commodity  labor 
power*  possesses  a  conservative  dimen- 
sion insofar  as  her  labor  maintains  the 
worker    as    worker,    and    ensures   that 


both  husband  and  wife  will  never  be 
anything  but  workers.  Hierarchy  and 
repression  are  important  features  of 
this  truly  conservative  aspect  of  the 
working-class  family,  and  women  play 
an  important  role  in  these  oppressive 
relations.  At  the  same  time,  the  repro- 
duction of  the  working  class  is  itself 
founded  upon  women's  oppression 
within  this  class. 

What,  then,  are  the  actual  contradic- 
tions which  are  embodied  in  the  mode 
of  production  of  the  working-class 
family?  The  housewife  produces  use- 
values  within  the  family,  and  in  this 
way,  her  production  possesses  a  posi- 
tive dimension: 

.  .  .within  the  family  women  perform 
useful  labor  and  therefore  can,  under 
the  right  conditions,  have  access  to  a 
vision  of  a  life  of  unalienated  produc- 
tive activity.  The  recent  attempts  to 
break  down  sex  divisions  of  labor 
within  the  family  are  providing  simi- 
lar glimpses  to  men.  .  .  .These  are  only 
Utopian  insofar  as  their  partial  nature 
remains  unrecognized.  4 

Thus,  to  the  extent  that  the  house- 
wife's domestic  production  is  oriented 
toward  the  fulfillment  of  human  needs 

Marx  was  the  first  to  comprehend  that 
the  individual  worker— indeed  the  working 
class  as  a  whole-sells  to  the  capitalist  not 
his  or  her  labor  but  labor  power  (or  the 
capacity  to  labor).  In  return  the  worker  re- 
ceives wages.  Thus  the  worker's  capacity  to 
labor  must  be  produced  and  reproduced  on 
a  daily  basis  like  any  other  commodity. 
Hence,  the  term  commodity  labor  power. 
Much  of  the  work  of  producing  the  com- 
modity labor  power  is  performed  in  the 
family  by   the   woman. 


Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism?/ 19 


-and  not  toward  the  production  of 
surplus  value— for  which  she  relies  upon 
the  (husband's)  wage,  she  confronts 
the  world  of  capitalism  from  a  dif- 
ferent perspective  from  that  of  the 
male  wage-earner.  As  Lise  Vogel  has 
argued,  for  the  woman,  the  world  is 
composed  of  use-values  waiting  to  be 
consumed.  Her  consciousness-that  is, 
to  the  extent  that  she  is  a  housewife 
and  not  also  a  wage  laborer-is  there- 
fore different  from  the  consciousness 
of  her  husband,  who  sees  the  world  in 
terms  of  exchange  values.  On  this 
Vogel  states: 

Locked  in  an  increasingly  brutal  divi- 
sion of  labor,  the  two  sexes  tend  to 
experience  the  relationship  between 
the  family  and  the  capitalist  mode  of 
production  from  vastly  differing  points 
of  view.  Here  is  the  root  of  the  system 
of  contradictions  inherent  in  the  fam- 
ily under  capitalism.^ 

The  production  of  use-values  in  the 
family  therefore  resembles  the  organic, 
non-rationalized  and  qualitative  dimen- 
sions of  a  unified  work  process  char- 


acteristic of  pre-capitalist  societies.  At 
the  same  time,  the  family  is  a  solidly 
capitalist  relation.  As  such,  it  embodies 
dialectic  unity  between  production  for 
use  and  production  for  exchange.  Pro- 
duction within  the  family  is  oriented 
toward  exchange  value  obtained 
through  the  sale  of  labor  power  even 
though  this  production  is  simultan- 
eously the  production  of  use  value  for 
the  entire  family.  Therefore,  within 
the  family  we  are  able  to  situate  one 
characteristic  of  capitalist  production 
as  a  whole:  the  triumph  of  exchange- 
value  over  use-value  production. 

The  commodity  labor  power  is  pro- 
duced for  its  exchange-value  rather 
than  for  the  products  which  it  would 
have  to  produce  under  a  truly  human 
form  of  production.  The  conditions 
under  which  labor  power's  production 
in  the  home  and  the  community  oc- 
curs, are  determined  from  outside  the 
family.  Similarly,  the  sexual  potential 
of  both  man  and  woman  is  subordin- 
ated to  their  capitalist  function  of  pro- 
ducing  future   labor  power.   This  en- 


20/Quest 


courages  the  objectification  of  the 
human  sexual  potential,  so  that  finally, 
the  development  of  the  laborer  as  a 
productive  force  within  cpaitalism  is 
alienated,  one-sided,  and  brutalized: 
even  the  worker's  procreation  exists 
only  for  capital. 

The  way  in  which  workers  live,  their 
environment,  their  life  style,  are  as- 
pects of  capitalist  alienation.  There 
are  no  absolute  divisions  between  fami- 
ly and  factory  in  this  respect. 
The  high-rise  apartment  building,  by 
virtue  of  its  very  structure,  forms  the 
residential  counterpart  of  the  office 
skyscraper.  Here  private  life  is  con- 
sciously massif ied  and  publicly  admin- 
istered. .  .The  standardization  of  the 
dwellings  fosters  a  standardization  of 
private  life  that  subverts  the  physical 
and  personal  heterogeneity  so  vital  to 
the  give-and-take  of  meaningful  com- 
munication. One  can  only  put  a  limited 
amount  of  one's  authentic  personality 
into  these  strictly  functional  apart- 
ment cubicles— and  quite  often,  very 
little  of  that  personality  will  be  toler- 
ated by  the  bureaucracies  which  admin- 
ister the  structures.  That  the  archi- 
tecture of  these  developments  is  fea- 
tureless, the  corridors  of  the  buildings 
institutional,  and  apartments  them- 
selves nothing  more  than  a  suite  of  of- 
fices is  not  accidental;  the  develop- 
ments are  bureaucratic  institutions  for 
self-reproduction  and  self -maintenance, 
just  as  the  office  skyscrapers  are  bur- 
eaucratic institutions  for  commerce 
and  administration.® 

The  preceding  considerations  begin 
to  sketch  the  outlines  of  what  might 


become  a  full-scale  investigation  of 
capitalist  society  from  the  standpoint 
of  the  working-class  family.  Such  an 
examination  must  take  account  not 
only  of  the  categories  of  Marxist 
political  economy  but  also,  more  signi- 
ficantly, those  of  Marx's  theory  of 
alienation.  An  examination  of  capi- 
talist production,  as  viewed  from  the 
vantage  point  of  the  family,  brings  into 
prominence  a  series  of  contradictions. 

The  Role  of  Housework 
in  Capitalist  Production 

These  contradictions  are  grouped 
around,  or  are  aspects  of  a  central  con- 
tradiction in  capitalism  and  for  it.  To 
say  that  a  contradiction  exists  in 
capitalism  is  to  call  attention  to  a  di- 
mension of  the  system  which  counter- 
poses  its  content  and  its  form;  to  say 
that  a  contradiction  exists  for  it  is  to 
call  attention  to  features  that  distin- 
guish its  mode  of  being  from  those 
within  any  other  social  totality  and  at 
the  same  time  point  beyond  it,  to  its 
essential  transformation.  Current  Marx- 
ist-feminist literature  has  focused  atten- 
tion on  the  role  of  housework  in  capi- 
talist production;  but  at  what  central 
and  secondary  contradictions  does  the 
capitalist  character  of  housework 
point? 

(1)  The  central  contradiction  in  cap- 
italism posed  by  the  nature  of  house- 
work is  the  fundamental  integration  of 
housework  into  social  labor  (its  con- 
tent) and  its  privatized,  isolated,  "non- 
productive" (for  capital,  that  is)  form. 
And  just  as,  in  the  past,  relations  of 


Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism ?/21 


exploitation  in  the  factory  have  pro- 
duced demands  for  unionization,  high- 
er wages,  and  better  working  condi- 
tions, for  example-demands  for  work 
reforms  within  the  system-so  now  the 
productive  character  of  housework  has 
led  to  well-intended  but  mistaken  de- 
mands for  wages  for  housewives.  Those 
who  have  raised  these  demands  have 
failed  essentially  to  grasp  the  character 
of  the  problem.  They  have  not  under- 
stood that  the  awarding  of  a  wage, 
even  if  it  were  possible,  would  neither 
alter  the  relations  of  production  nor 
the  fact  that  the  housewife  already 
shares  in  the  wage-packet  of  the  male 
wage  earner.  This  is  not  to  say,  how- 
ever, that  women  should  not  struggle 
to  force  capital  to  bear  an  increasing 
share  of  the  cost  of  the  reproduction 
of  labor  power. 

(2)  Housework's  central  contradic- 
tion for  capitalism-which  touches  up- 
on some  broader  aspects  of  alienation- 
is  that  between  the  way  it  is  now  per- 
formed and  a  future,  more  truly  hu- 
man form  of  production  which  would 
not  be  measured  by  labor  time .  The 
difficulties  posed  for  post-capitalist 
societies  by  this  contradiction  will  be 
examined  below,  but  a  failure  to  under- 
stand it  has  clouded  the  vision  of  the 
socialist  movement  and  has  contri- 
buted to  the  formulation  of  mis-con- 
ceived strategies  which  hope  to  liber- 
ate women  "for  production,"  ignoring 
the  fact  that,  as  housewives,  they  are 
already  a  part  of  it.  An  aspect  of  alien- 
ated labor,  housework  cannot  be  trans- 
formed by  "freeing"  women  to  enter 
directly  into  the  labor  market.  On  the 


other  hand,  it  is  a  type  of  alienated 
labor  which,  far  more  than  factory 
work,  retains  the  connection  between 
labor  and  production  for  use,  and  pro- 
motes a  base  upon  which  social  rela- 
tions that  continue  to  be  more  per- 
sonal than  reified,  are  formed.  Proper- 
ly understood,  this  aspect  of  house- 
work points  beyond  capitalist  produc- 
tion to  a  mode  of  labor  that  is  less, 
not  more,  dehumanized  than  the  pro- 
duction of  exchange-value  under  capi- 
talism. Thus,  rather  than  "industrializ- 
ing" women's  labor  in  the  home,  so- 
cialists might  well  consider  ways  to 
"familialize"  women's  (and  men's) 
work  in  the  factory. 

These  two  central  contradictions 
reveal  a  number  of  factors  which  also 
deserve  serious  examination: 

(1)  In  fact,  the  "socialist"  call  for 
"freeing"  women  for  production  has 
been  long  since  heeded  by  capitalism 
itself.  At  the  present  time,  married 
women  are  entering  the  labor  force  in 
record  numbers  and,  in  contrast  with 
the  early  part  of  this  century,  they 
now  out-number  single  working  wom- 
en. This  development  has  sharpened 
and  extended  the  antagonism  between 
the  property  character  of  sexual  rela- 
tions under  capitalism  and  the  capi- 
talist presupposition  of  a  free  laborer 
in  a  free  market  for  labor.  In  other 
words,  it  has  deepened  women's  con- 
sciousness of  the  contradiction  between 
their  status  as  proprietors  of  their  per- 
sonal capacities  (mainly  as  sellers  of 
labor  power)  and  as  objects  of  male 
sexual  proprietorship.  It  is  in  this 
sense-and   wholly  within   capitalism- 


HlQuest 


that  women's  "liberation"  from  the 
home  has  fed  potential  political  oppo- 
sition to  capitalist  social  arrangements. 

(2)  Another  factor  revealed  in  these 
contradictions  involves  the  antagonism 
between  the  "feminine  ideal,"  which 
places  all  women  on  a  pedestal  and 
encourages  them  to  believe  they  can 
elevate  their  social  status  through  mar- 
riage, and  the  real  exploitation  of  all 
working-class  women  in  the  labor  mar- 
ket. It  is  at  this  point  that  I  situate 
the  criticisms  of  the  "feminine  mys- 
tique" and  the  emphasis  on  trans- 
forming personal  relations  within  the 
broader    dynamic    of    social    change. 

(3)  A  third  majof  factor  in  the  con- 
tradiction between  the  form  of  wom- 
an's work  in  the  home  and  its  produc- 
tive content,  is  embodied  in  the  house- 
wife's integration  into  the  productive 
process  and  her  isolation  from  the 
point  of  production  of  exchange-values. 
Those  who  have  advocated  women's 
entry  into  the  paid  labor  market  as 
opposed  to  their  being  houseworkers, 
have  often  noted  the  isolated  house- 
wife's attachment  to  conservative  neigh- 
borhood institutions  like  churches, 
small  businesses,  schools,  bingo  clubs, 
and  the  like.  For  them,  for  the  house- 
wife to  quit  the  home  and  join  the 
union  is  a  first  step  toward  her  libera- 
tion. Those  who  have  advocated  wages 
for  housework,  on  the  other  hand, 
have  also  noted  the  potential  for  the 
community  to  become  a  locus  of  social 
struggle.  While  I  have  noted  the  limita- 
tions of  the  wages-for-housework  de- 
mand, and  while  I  have  no  objection 
to  women  workers  joining  unions,  my 


perception  that  housework  is  an  aspect 
of  the  productive  process  that  internal 
ly  relates  factory  to  community,  goes 
beyond  these  positions.  It  challenges 
movements  for  social  change  to  exam- 
ine more  seriously  the  impact  of  femi- 
nist theory  upon  the  formulation  of 
strategies.  The  nature  of  productive 
labor  in  the  family,  for  me,  then,  has 
practical  as  well  as  theoretical  impli- 
cations. 

Fragmentation,  Alienation 
and  Competition 

As  the  foregoing  remarks  suggest, 
the  perspective  of  the  family  not  only 
offers  a  way  of  situating  a  range  of 
social  contradictions  in  capitalism- 
including  aspects  of  those  contradic- 
tions noted  by  liberal  feminists-but 
also  points  to  some  difficulties  faced 
by  Marxist  feminists  in  understanding 
these  contradictions  for  capitalism.  To 
the  extent  that  the  latter  have  not 
understood  in  these  antagonisms  their 
implications  for  examining  the  entire 
capitalist  social  order,  they  will  be 
forced  to  fall  back  on  limited,  liberal 
approaches  in  their  effort  to  effect 
significant  change. 

One  way  of  underscoring  that  point 
is  to  project  a  future  in  which  a  purely 
economic  transformation  of  the  mode 
of  production  is  accompanied  by  the 
retention  of  many  liberal  forms  of  so- 
cial relations.  Without  offering  any 
comment  on  the  post-capitalist  socie- 
ties of  the  present,  I  should  note  that 
Marx  himself,  in  the  "Critique  of  the 
Gotha  Programme,"  made  such  a  pro- 
jection: 


Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism?/ 23 


What  we  have  to  deal  with  here  is  a 
communist  society,  not  as  it  has  devel- 
oped on  its  own  foundations,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  just  as  it  emerges  from 
capitalist  society;  which  is  thus  in 
every  respect,  economically,  morally, 
and  intellectually,  still  stamped  with 
the  birthmarks  of  the  old  society  from 
whose  womb  it  emerges.  .  .equal  right 
is  still  constantly  stigmatized  by  a 
bourgeois  limitation.  The  right  of  the 
producers  is  proportional  to  the  labour 
they  supply;  the  equality  consists  in 
the  fact  that  measurement  is  made 
with  an  equal  standard,  labour.  .  .  .It  is 
therefore,  a  right  of  inequality,  in  its 
content,  like  every  other  right.  Right 
by  its  very  nature  can  consist  only  in 
the  application  of  an  equal  standard; 
but  unequal  individuals  (and  they 
would  not  be  different  individuals  if 
they  were  not  unequal)  are  measurable 
only  by  an  equal  standard  in  so  far  as 
they  are  brought  under  an  equal  point 
of  view,  are  taken  from  one  definite 
side  only,  for  instance,  in  the  present 
case,  are  regarded  only  as  workers.  .  .  . 
Further,  one  worker  is  married,  ano- 
ther is  not;  one  has  more  children  than 
another,  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  Thus, 
with  an  equal  performance  of  labour 
and  hence  an  equal  share  in  the  social 
consumption  fund,  one  will  in  fact  re- 
ceive more  than  another,  and  so  on. 
To  avoid  these  defects,  right  instead 
of  being  equal  would  have  to  be  un- 
equal 7 

Marx,  it  should  be  added,  felt  that 
in  the  first  phases  of  communism 
"these  defects  are  inevitable."  He  also 
held    that    "the    narrow    horizon    of 


bourgeois  right"  could  only  be  tran- 
scended at  the  end  of  the  division  of 
labor  and  "after  the  productive  forces 
have  also  increased  with  the  all-round 
development  of  the  individual.''^ 

Now,  in  the  situation  which  Marx 
forecasts,  there  seem  to  be  two  alter- 
native ways  in  which  women's  needs 
could  be  satisfied.  The  first  lies  in  the 
institution  of  something  like  the  radi- 
cal-feminist "contract"  family  (or  the 
socialist-feminist  "differentiated"  fam- 
ily). In  either,  the  woman  is  "freed" 
to  enter  directly  into  production  at 
the   factory  and   to  compete  with  all 


24/Quest 


other  workers  for  a  slice  of  the  existing 
pie  ("from  each  according  to  his  [her] 
abilities;  to  each  according  to  his  [her] 
work").  In  reality,  of  course,  given 
the  continuance  of  competition  within 
the  labor  force,  and  the  historical 
legacy  of  discrimination  in  the  capi- 
talist labor  market,  women  will  start 
out  with  two  distinct  strikes  against 
them.  Moreover,  these  might  well  be 
taken  advantage  of  by  men  so  that 
women  will  continue  to  be  "placed" 
in  lower-paying  jobs,  with  both  fewer 
opportunities  for  advancement  and 
fewer  non-monetary  rewards.  But  even 
if  the  obstacles  posed  by  continued 
sexual  discrimination  in  the  labor  mar- 
ket are  overcome,  increased  female  la- 
bor force  participation  and  contractual 
family  relations  might  lead  to  a  deep- 
ening of  social  fragmentation,  aliena- 
tion, and  competition.  For  example, 
in  order  to  prevent  being  forced  back 
into  the  defensive  housewife  position, 
with  no  direct,  enforceable  claim  on 
labor  credits,  women  will  be  led  to 
stoutly  uphold  the  principle  that  all 
human  relations  should  be  viewed  as 
contractual  relations.  Thus,  every  de- 
tail of  the  housework  contract  ("equal 
duties"-but  who  will  nurse  the  child- 
ren?), will  have  to  be  upheld  to  include 
the  smallest  of  tasks.  In  this  situation- 
which  I  have  taken  to  its  logical  con- 
clusion-socialism becomes  universal, 
competitive  egoism,  with  women  forc- 
ed into  the  "role"  of  guardians  of  the 
ultimate  in  social  atomization.  In  this 
"role,"  the  woman's  social  being  is 
forced  into  contract  being,  and  wom- 
en are  further  removed  than  ever  from 


the  chance  to  develop  their  fundamen- 
tal human  capacities-ihe  promise,  af- 
ter all,  of  the  moral  dimension  of 
socialism. 

The  second  alternative  wherein 
women  will  greet  the  attainment  of 
socialism  as  an  opportunity  to  retire 
from  unrewarding  labor  force  partici- 
pation is  equally  unpalatable.  Women, 
for  the  most  part,  will  return  to  the 
home.  Once  again,  they  will  have  no 
direct,  enforceable  claim  to  labor  cred- 
its. The  struggle  between  the  sexes  is 
now  exacerbated  and  perpetuated 
within  a  socialist  context.  For  the 
man,  marriage  and  the  assumption  of 
fatherhood  constitutes  a  definite  lia- 
bility. No  matter  how  much  "work" 
he  contributes  at  the  factory,  no  mat- 
ter how  much  he  exercises  himself, 
each  additional  obligation  which  he 
assumes  toward  his  family  must  be 
paid  for  out  of  his  earnings.  In  this 
situation  he  can  only  harbor  ill  feel- 
ings toward  his  wife  and  children.  And 
economically,  the  wife  is  forced  to 
struggle  endlessly  against  the  total  de- 
terioration of  her  position.  In  such 
circumstances,  bureaucratic  function- 
aries opine  that  the  housewife  is  noth- 
ing but  a  "parasite,"  thereby  playing 
upon  man's  resentment  of  his  wife  in 
order  to  gain  his  support  for  the  status 
quo. 

The  only  escape  Marx  envisioned 
from  this  situation  was  the  increased 
productivity  of  labor,  so  that  distribu- 
tion would  no  longer  have  to  be  tied  to 
qualitative  indicators  of  social  worth. 
With  the  achievement  of  social  abun- 
dance would  follow  the  fact  that  worn- 


Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism?/25 


an  would  no  longer  depend  upon  her 
husband's  labor  credit  or  on  his  ability 
to  compete,  despite  unfavorable  terms, 
at  the  point  of  production. 

At  this  juncture,  Marxist-feminism 
must  begin  to  apply  Marx's  method  to 
problems  not  considered  by  Marx.  At 
the  same  time,  it  must  take  issue  both 
with  some  of  the  writers  in  the  house- 
work debate  who  hope  to  liberate  wom- 
en "into  production"  and  with  liberal 
feminists,  as  well,  who  want  "equal 
opportunity"  for  women  at  the  work- 
place-that  is,  with  those  who  believe 
that  equal  access  to  the  factory  will 
end  the  question  of  who  will  do  the 
socially-necessary  labor  now  perform- 
ed by  women  in  the  family.  To  admit 
that  such  work  must  be  done  does  not 
mean  that  it  is  necessary  to  fall  back 
on  the  unpleasant  alternative  of  the 
contract  family,  as  envisioned  by  radi- 
cal feminists. 

This  projection  of  economic  social- 
ism, therefore,  further  clarifies  the 
alienation  of  the  working  class,  par- 
ticularly of  working-class  women,  and 
helps  us  to  understand  the  alienating 
alternatives  within  capitalist  society. 
For,  under  capitalism,  young  workers, 
both  male  and  female,  enter  the  labor 
force.  Men  then  necessarily  marry  and 
"settle  down,"  and  take  a  woman—but 
only  temporarily-out  of  production. 
To  grasp  this  process  it  is  necessary'  to 
view  the  working-class'  total  reproduc- 
tive cycle.  Under  both  capitalism  and 
economic  socialism,  women  are  already 
"integrated"  into  the  labor  force,  e.g., 
between  school  and  marriage.  Also, 
after  bearing  and  rearing  children,  they 


re-enter  the  labor  force.  Fundamental- 
ly, in  all  their  "functions,"  these  wom- 
en are  first,  foremost,  and  always  only 
workers,  now  playing  a  economically 
disadvantaged  role  in  the  production 
and  reproduction  of  non-human  com- 
modities, now  playing  a  crucial,  deter- 
minative role  in  the  production  and 
reproduction  of  labor  power.  Expres- 
sing itself  in  the  battle  between  the 
sexes,  woman's  dual  role  in  the  labor 
market  represents  a  secondary  contra- 
diction in  the  working  class  under  cap- 
italism; and  a  potentially  primary  con- 
tradiction in  the  class  under  economic 
socialism.  Neither  radical  feminist 
contractualism  nor  familial  conserva- 
tism offers  a  way  out  for  working- 
class  women  and  men. 

To  formulate  the  dimensions  of 
political  change  as  a  restructuring  of 
production  within  the  community  and 
the  workplace  is  also  to  criticize  one 
other  version  of  contemporary  social- 
ist theory  which  advocates  "worker's 
control  of  production"  as  a  democratic 
alternative  to  nationalization.  The  pro- 
ponents of  such  schemes  locate  control 
at  the  site  of  the  workplace  and  coun- 
terpose  it  to  the  "community"  where 
labor   power  is  produced.   Therefore, 

The  distinction  I  believe  belongs  to 
Mao.  It  provides  a  way  of  discriminating 
between  major  and  compounding  aspects 
of  a  contradiction.  Thus  in  capitalism,  the 
major  contradiction—in  one  form  or  ano- 
ther-is  always  that  between  labor  and  capi- 
tal With  the  abolition  of  this  contradiction 
under  socialism,  other  contradictions-e.g., 
possibly,  though  not  "predictably"  the  one 
alluded  to  here- will  assume  a  primary 
character. 


26/Quest 


even  "worker's  control  of  production" 
falls  far  short  of  real  control,  unless  it 
is  broadened  to  unite  control  at  the 
plant  site  with  control  at  the  commun- 
ity site,  both  of  which  are  already 
internally  related  as  a  result  of  the 
economic  alienation  of  capitalist  so- 
ciety. Such  solutions-integrating  wom- 
en into  worker-controlled  production- 
will  not  resolve  the  economic  nature 


of  this  alienation.  Nor  will  they  over- 
come the  resulting  political  disadvan- 
tages which  women  will  continue  to 
suffer,  if  only  because  they  will  have 
less  time  to  devote  to  political  activity 
at  the  plant  since  they  will  still  also  be 
houseworkers.  Like  the  economic  a- 
lienation  which  women  suffer,  their 
political  alienation  cannot  be  super- 
ceded unless  there  is  a  strategy  which 


Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism?/27 


takes  into  account  the  dual  aspects  of 
production  within  the  factory  and 
community. 

The  questions  which  liberal  femi- 
nists have  perceived  in  terms  of 
"rights"  for  women  and  "oppression" 
of  women  (in  the  home)  will  have  to 
be  re-formulated  by  Marxist  feminists 
prepared  to  explore  various  dimensions 
of  women's  oppression  within  the 
working  class.  This  will  require  the 
application  of  Marx's  method  to  hither- 
to unexamined  questions.  This  is  only 
to  reiterate  that  the  insights  of  liberal 
feminists  need  to  be  resituated  in  an 
extension  of  the  Marxist  approach  to 
aspects  of  women's  lives  within  the 
family  and  the  workplace:  the  "wom- 
an question"  per  se  must  be  transcend- 
ed, but  its  contributions  must  be  pre- 
served. 

Misdirected  Strategy 

This  analysis  demonstrates  the  in- 
adequacy, even  the  misdirection,  of  a 
political  strategy  which  begins  with  a 
demand  for  "wages  for  housework" 
without  either  analyzing  the  relation- 
ship between  families  and  housewives 
and  the  requirements  of  today's  capi- 
talist political  economy,  or  exploring 
the  relationship  between  housework 
and  productive  labor  performed  by 
working  class  women  in  the  commodi- 
ty producing  sphere.  Indeed,  the 
housework  debate  has  shown  that  any 
implications  of  this  demand  will  in  fact 
merely  reproduce  rather  than  abolish 
the  sexual  divisions  between  family 
and  economy,  between  woman's  work 


and  man's  labor  which  are  exacerbated 
by  capitalist  development.  Even  in  the 
paid  labor  force,  jobs  are  segregated  on 
the  basis  of  sex.  Wages  alone  cannot 
be  expected  to  free  women  from 
housework.  They  may  have  the  very 
opposite  effect,  in  fact,  of  freezing 
women  into  those  jobs.  For  these  rea- 
sons, alone,  the  demand  for  wages 
seems  to  be  a  shallow  one.  But  there 
are  even  deeper  difficulties  which  may 
arise  should  this  demand  be  won. 
For  example,  the  next  question,  "who 
will  pay  for  the  housewife's  wage?" 
arises  automatically.  Certainly  not  the 
capitalist!  The  first  remaining  choice 
is,  then,  the  individual  wage  package, 
which  is  already  formulated  to  include 
a  "non-working"  or  under-paid  work- 
ing wife  and  will  now  be  formally 
divided  by  the  boss  or  by  the  state.  Al- 
ternatively, the  state  will  subsidize 
this  additional  cost  by  further  taxa- 
tion of  the  working  class.  Either  of 
these  possibilities  will  lead  to  increased 
divisions  within  the  working  class,  di- 
visions which  will  aggravate  already 
existing  tensions  between  men  and 
women,  between  husband  and  wife. 
Either  choice  could  lead  to  an  addi- 
tional financial  burden  for  the  pro- 
ducing (working)  class  as  a  whole.  For 
those  who  fear  that  this  conclusion 
merely  sacrifices  women  to  the  work- 
ing class  we  need  to  ask,  "which  wom- 
en?" We  need  to  propose  political 
strategies  which  unite  rather  than  di- 
vide the  various  groups  (sexual,  racial 
and/or  ethnic)  within  the  working  class 
without  sacrificing  any  one  group's 
demands. 


28/Quest 


Looking  beyond  this  immediate  is- 
sue, it  is  possible  to  identify  questions 
which  are  not  encompassed  within  the 
"Housework  Debate",  but  which  are 
important  in  any  complete  investiga- 
tion of  capitalist  oppression  of  wom- 
en. We  need  to  explore:  (1)  the  pur- 
chasing power  of  the  wage,  and  the 
role  which  the  housewife  performs  as  a 
consumer;  (2)  the  important  role  which 
sexual  objectification  plays  in  family 
relations  and  in  commodity  relations 
in  general,  within  capitalist  society; 
(3)  the  situation  of  women  in  different 
sectors  of  the  working  class,  including 
the  contribution  which  the  employ- 
ment of  male  and  female  migrant  labor 
and  Black  and  Spanish-speaking  labor 
(citizen  and  non-citizen)  may  make 
toward  the  reinforcement  of  sexual 
divisions  within  the  working  class.  .  .  . 
such  divisions  include  reinforcing  the 
housewife  status  for  some  women  and 
perpetuating  the  dual  burden  of  work 
and  home  for  women  who  are  regualr 
wage  earners;  (4)  the  role  of  the  family 
now  and  in  the  future  as  a  locus  for 
community-wide  and  class-wide  organ- 
izing; (5)  the  tendency  to  use  working- 
class  women  in  various  ways  (i.e.,  as 
voluntary  layoffs  or  as  means  of 
stretching-the-budget  to  meet  infla- 
tion); and,  (6)  the  (related)  tendency 
for  housewives  to  serve  as  an  impor- 
tant flexible  component  of  the  labor 
reserve,  providing  cheap  and  easily 
retractable  labor.  We  can  no  longer 
separate  women  who  are  housewives 
from  women  who  are  productive  la- 
borers, even  for  the  purpose  of  analy- 
sis. We  need  to  understand  the  inter- 


12  W.  25th  Street 
Baltimore,  Maryland 
21218 

1976 


garland 


Graphics  by  Peg  Averill,  Carol  Clement, 
Casey  Czarnik,  Alexa  Freeman,  and 
Jacqui  Linard. 

A  collection  of  13  original  drawings 
printed  in  color  on  heavy  white  paper. 
Spiral  bound  in  the  middle  with  squares 
marking  off  the  days  of  the  year.     $2.50 

THE    DAY  BEFORE 

The  datebook  has  a  page  for  every  week 
in  1976  with  one  quote  for  each  week  to 
help  you  discover  the  beauty  of  female 
culture  throughout  the  year.  The  intro- 
duction and  the  powerful  quotes  were 
written  and  selected  by  Coletta  Reid. 
The  datebook  contains  53  washes  and 
ink  sketches  of  ancient  female  symbols 
and  artifacts.  120  pages,  spiral  bound, 
two-color  drawings.  13.50 


Include  1 5%  extra 
for  postage  &  handling. 


Wages  for  Housework:  Subsidizing  Capitalism?/29 


relationships  between  work  done  in  the 
home  and  work  in  production,  that  is, 
between  production  and  reproduction. 
We  need  to  appreciate  how  both  types 
of  labor  are  aspects  of  alienated  pro- 
duction within  capitalist  society. 

Although  these  are  preliminary  sug- 
gestions, they  point  to  the  directions 
in  which  future  theoretical  work  might 
move.  The  "Housework  Debate"  makes 
an  invaluable  contribution  for  it  com- 
pletes past  Marxist  investigations.  That 
is,  in  itself  the  debate  is  incomplete, 
but  it  provides  an  important  comple- 
ment to  earlier  investigations.  Finally, 
we  need  an  analysis  which  can  theore- 
tically situate  the  family  as  a  center 
for  the  reproduction  of  labor-power  as 
well  as  personal  life,  while  at  the  same 
time  clarifying  the  class  relationships 
which  characterize  the  commodity 
sphere    of   capitalist    society. 

Footnotes 

1  Margaret  Benston,  "The  Political  Econ- 
omy of  Women's  Liberation,"  in  Michele 
Garskof,  ed.,  Roles  Women  Play:  Readings 
Toward  Women's  Liberation,  Belmont,  Cali- 
fornia, 1971,  194-205;  Mariarosa  Dalla  Cos- 
ta, "Women  and  the  Subversion  of  the 
Community,"  in  The  Power  of  Women  and 
the  Subversion  of  the  Community,"  Mont- 
pelier,  Bristol,  England,  1972;  Ira  Gerstein, 
"Domestic  Work  and  Capitalism,"  Radical 
America,  VoL  7,  Nos.  4  &  5,  July-October, 
1973,  101-130;  Lise  Vogel,  "The  Earthly 
Family,"  Radical  America,  VoL  7,  Nos.  4  & 
5,  July-October,  1973,  9-50;  Wally  Secombe 
"The  Housewife  and  Her  Labour  Under 
Capitalism,"  New  Left  Review,  No.  83, 
January-February,  1973,  3-24. 

^Bertell  Oilman,  Alienation:  Marx's  Con- 
ception of  Man  in  Capitalist  Society,  Cam- 


bridge, 1971;  and,  "Marxism  and  Political 
Science:  Prolegomenon  to  a  Debate  on 
Marx's  Method,"  Politics  and  Society,  3:4, 
Summer  1973,  491-510. 

3Karl  Marx,  Economic  and  Philosophic 
Manuscripts  of  1844,  Edited  with  an  intro- 
duction by  Dirk  J.  Struik.  Translated  with 
an  introduction  by  Martin  Milligan,  New 
York,   1964,    p.   110. 

4Lise  Vogel,  "The  Earthly  Family," 
Radical  America,  Vol.  7,  Nos.  4  &  5,  July- 
October  1973,  p.  38. 

$Ibid.,  p.  33. 

"Murray  Bookchin,  The  Limits  of  the 
City  (New  York,  1974),  pp.  83-84.  Empha- 
sis added. 

?Karl  Marx,  "Critique  of  the  Gotha 
Programma"  in  Karl  Marx  and  Frederick 
Engels,  Selected  Works  (New  York,  1968), 
pp.  323-324. 

^Ibid.,  p.  324.  Too,  as  will  be  immediate- 
ly noticed,  these  models  have  their  direct 
analogues  in  the  literature  of  liberal  and 
Marxist  feminism. 

Joan  Landes  is  an  Assistant  Profes- 
sor of  Political  Science  at  Hampshire 
College,  Amherst,  Mass.  concerned 
with  an  elaboration  of  a  Marxist 
feminist  orientation. 


Errata 

Quest  regrets  an  error  which  appeared 
in  the  response  by  Marilyn  Murphy,  in 
Critique  and  Commentary  (vol  I,  no.  4), 
p.  18,  third  paragraph.  The  sentence  which 
reads:  "Do  the  61%  of  the  feminist  activists 
who  answered  'yes'  think  that  a  violent 
overthrow  is  what  the  United  States  needs?" 
should  read:  "Do  the  61%  of  the  feminist 
activists  who  answered  'no'  think  that  a 
violent  overthrow  is  what  the  United  States 
needs?*9 


30/Quest 


Critique  &  Commentary  Bj-i 


by  Emma  Price 


"Learning  from  the  Left:  Comments  on  Revolution  and  Evolution  in  the 
Twentieth  Century. "  Grace  Lee  and  James  Boggs.  New  York:  Monthly  Review 
Press,  1974.  266  pp.,  $10.00. 

Like  many  who  converted  to  the  women's  movement  in  the  late  1960s,  I 
became  so  turned  off  by  the  sexism  of  the  male-dominated  left  that  I  could 
not  give  credence  to  any  aspect  of  that  movement.  Unfortunately,  this  atti- 
tude has  had  several  consequences  which  hurt  me  as  a  feminist;  one  of  them 
is  that  it  has  prevented  me  from  exploring  the  tactics  and  strategy  of  a  move- 
ment which  has  actually  been  winning  revolutions  since  1917. 

It  is  in  this  context  that  I  find  Grace  Lee  and  James  Boggs'  recently 
published  book,  Revolution  and  Evolution  in  the  Twentieth  Century,  so 
exciting.  For  it  is  the  first  work  I  have  seen  which  analyzes  in  specific 
historical  terms  the  strategy,  tactics  and  above  all,  the  style  of  successful 
twentieth-century  revolutions  and  revolutionaries.  We  as  feminists  would  be 
smart  to  take  the  good  from  this  ideological  source,  just  as  many  of  us  have 
previously  done  with  the  experiences  of  the  nineteenth-century  women's 
rights  movement. 

The  Boggses  evaluate  four  national  liberation  struggles:  those  of  Russia, 
China,  Guinea-Bissau  and  Viet  Nam,  in  order  to  develop  their  theory  of 
revolution.  They  conclude  that  a  revolution  can  only  be  called  successful 
when  it  overthrows  the  state  and  maintains  its  own  ethical  integrity.  Thus 
they  find  the  Russian  revolution  a  positive  force  in  its  early  stages,  but  a 
failure  when  it  permitted  its  original  goals  to  be  subverted  by  its  own 
bureaucracy.  Their  elaboration  of  this  theory  can  be  summarized  in  the 
following  nine  points: 

1.  There  are  profound  differences  between  revolutions  (which  involve 
long-term  changes  in  both  state  power  and  in  the  quality-internal  and 
external-of  people's  lives),  and  rebellions,  insurrections,  revolts  and  coups 
d'etat.  Successful  revolutionaries  make  the  most  far-sighted  plans  possible, 
based  on  the  history  and  evolution  of  the  people  involved.  They  also  have  a 


Critique  and  Commentary/  31 


clear  understanding  that  the  revolution  itself  is  an  on-going  process.  Thus  in 
China,  the  Communist  Party  worked  with  the  workers  and  peasants  for  fifty 
years  before  state  power  was  seized;  since  that  time,  it  has  attempted  to  create 
a  second,  or  a  cultural,  revolution. 

2.  A  revolution  happens  only  when  those  who  consider  themselves 
revolutionaries  are  willing  to  learn  and  teach  from  experience.  As  the 
Boggses  put  it, 

That  may  sound  very  obvious  and  elementary,  but  it  stands  repetition  and 
emphasis  in  this  country  where  an  unbelievable  reluctance  exists  on  the  part 
of  those  with  experience  to  teach,  and  those  just  coming  into  the  movement 
to  learn.  This  phenomenon  has  deep  roots  in  the  anti-intellectualism,  the 
individualism,  the  youth-cultism  of  this  country,  all  of  which  lead  people  in 
the  movement  to  reject  one  of  the  chief  advantages  which  human  beings 
have  over  animals— the  capacity  to  reflect  on  the  past.  * 

3.  Protracted  struggle  over  issues  which  occur  before  the  actual  seizure  of 
power,  means  that  contradictions  can  be  worked  out  in  a  less  destructive  way 
than  they  would  be  should  the  struggle  take  place  after  the  seizure  of  power. 
Thus  the  Boggses  believe  that  one  reason  for  the  eventual  failure  of  the  Rus- 
sian revolution  is  that  it  happened  too  quickly:  the  Communist  Party,  when 
it  seized  power,  had  no  clear  understanding— derived  from  previous  small-scale 
organizing-of  the  best  methodology  for  re-organizing  the  entire  society. 

4.  Theory  and  practice  constantly  interact  in  a  successful  revolution,  as  the 
revolutionary  learns  from  both  successes  and  failures.  Successful  revolution- 
aries develop  a  theory,  apply  it  to  a  specific  situation,  and  if  it  does  not  work, 
they  change  it.  This  ability  to  analyze  and  learn  from  mistakes,  to  continuous- 
ly evolve  a  better  theoretical  basis  for  practical  actions,  is  the  hallmark  of  the 
successful  revolutionary. 

5.  Successful  revolutionaries  are  not  afraid  of  polarization.  Every  success- 
ful revolution  has  been  preceded  by  many  splits  among  those  who  consider 
themselves  to  be  members  of  the  struggle. 

6.  The  successful  revolution,  while  it  struggles  against  the  anti-human 
aspect  of  the  enemy,  leaves  the  door  open  to  "the  individual  member  of  the 
enemy  class  to  re-enter  the  social  and  moral  universe. "2  Thus  in  Viet  Nam, 
the  Provisional  Revolutionary  Government  has  stated  that  all  soldiers,  even 
those  who  fought  for  Saigon,  may  be  eligible  for  land  plots. 

7.  Successful  revolutions  have  been  led  by  revolutionary  parties.  A  party 
is  a  group  organized  around  the  purpose  of  revolution,  and  dedicates  itself  to 
serving  as  the  vanguard  of  the  movement.  The  party  propagandizes  or  politi- 
cizes the  masses  (that  is,  it  gives  the  people  a  vision  of  their  right  to  and  re- 
sponsibility for  controlling  both  their  own  lives  and  the  workings  of  their 
society),  and  then  organizes  them  for  struggle.  A  party  continuously  evaluates 


32/Quest,  vol  II  no.  2,  fall,  1975 


the  objective  situation  of  the  enemy  so  that  it  can  seize  the  right  moment  for 
administering  defeats. 

8.  The  successful  revolutionary  group  makes  many  alliances  with  other 
groups  before  it  seizes  power.  These  alliances  are  based  upon  the  United  Front 
approach:  that  two  or  more  groups  can  work  together  on  the  limited  goals 
they  have  in  common,  while  still  maintaining  their  independence  in  all  other 
areas. 

9.  Successful  revolutionaries  understand  the  times  when  leadership  is  and  is 
not  needed.  Thus,  in  a  military  situation  in  Viet  Nam,  "before  an  operation, 
commanders  and  men  were  on  an  absolutely  equal  footing;  as  long  as  any 
rank-and-file  soldier  raised  any  objection  to  an  operational  plan,  discussion 
must  continue  until  he  was  satisfied.  During  the  operation,  discipline  was 
total;  the  rank  and  file  were  expected  to  carry  out  allotted  tasks  and  execute 
every  command  of  their  superiors  without  fail.  But  after  the  action  was  over, 
commanders  and  men  were  back  on  the  same  equal  basis,  in  the  critical  sum- 
ming up  which  follows  each  operation. "3 

The  above  constitutes  only  the  baldest  summary  of  the  Boggs'  many 
points.  If  we  substitute  the  word  "women"  for  "people,"  and  the  word 
"feminist"  for  "revolutionary,"  we  can  begin  to  approach  a  valid  analysis  of 
leftist  political  theory— and  indeed,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  much  we  can 
learn  from  the  tactics  and  strategy  of  "the  left." 

Footnotes 

iGrace  Lee  and  James  Boggs,  Revolution  and  Evolution  in  the  Twentieth  Century 
(New  York,  1974),  pp.  37-38. 
2IbicL,  p.  66. 
3/bid,  p.  116. 


SISTER 

FEIYIII1IST  NEWSPAPER 

THE  WOMEN'S  CENTER  $5/YEAR  (12  ISSUES) 

P.O.  Box  597  CHECKS  PAYABLE  TO 

Venice,  Calif.  90291  "SISTER  NEWSCLUB" 


Critique  and  Commentary/  33 


by 

Linda  Phelps 


34/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  2,  fall,  1975 


In  the  last  few  years,  the  attempted 
convergence  between  feminism  and  so- 
cialism has  been  an  important  new  de- 
velopment within  the  women's  move- 
ment and  the  radical  movement  as  a 
whole.  After  a  murky  period  in  which 
the  women's  movement  was  divided 
between  various  forms  of  Marxism, 
Radical  Feminism*  and  liberal  Femi- 
nism, the  idea  of  Socialist  Feminism 
has  emerged  as  a  hopeful,  positive  sign 
of  a  new  level  of  understanding  and 
synthesis. 

To  tell  the  truth,  Socialist  Feminism 
is  still  very  murky.  It  feels  more  like 
the  beginning  of  a  new  sense  of  direc- 
tion than  an  arrived-at  position.  Never- 
theless, it  is  an  accurate  and  timely  de- 
scription of  where  many  women  find 
themselves  politically:  in  the  tension 
between  Socialism  and  Feminism, 
which  is  expressed  organizationally  by 
the  scattering  of  women  calling  them- 
selves Socialist  Feminists  in  separatist 
groups  and  mixed  organizations  with 
both  Marxist  and  non-Marxist  per- 
spectives. 

In  the  recent  discussion  about  the 
relationship  between  Socialism  and 
Feminism,  the  sexual  division  of  pro- 
duction has  emerged  as  the  major 
theoretical  link.  Sara  Evans  described 
the  concept  in  a  NAM  discussion  bul- 
letin: 

Socialist- feminists  understand  that  the 
forms  of  sexism  today  are  rooted  in  the 
sexual  division  of  production  between 

By  Radical  Feminism,  I  mean  that  form 
of  Feminism  which  defines  sexism  as  the 
major  contradiction  and  the  cause  of  all 
other  forms  of  oppression. 


the  home  (women's  realm)  and  the 
outside  workplace  (men's  realm).  The 
home  is  the  arena  of  privacy  and  per- 
sonal life.  The  woman  at  its  center 
embodies  the  qualities  of  emotion, 
nurture,  cooperation,  submissiveness, 
and  morality.  The  outside  workplace 
provides  the  arena  for  public  and  poli- 
tical life,  and  men  should  embody  the 
qualities  which  it  demands:  rationality, 
dominance,  competitiveness,  and  a- 
morality.  The  ideology  which  under- 
girds  the  sexual  division  of  production 
thus  defines  women  and  men  as  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  human  beings  and  sex- 
uality as  an  attraction  of  polar  oppo- 
sites.  In  this  sense  the  heterosexual 
norm  is  built  into  the  structure  of 
capitalism.1 

In  Socialist  Revolution,  Eli  Zaretsky 
analyzed  the  split  between  the  personal 
and  the  public  (political)  which  has 
grown  out  of  the  capitalist  organiza- 
tion of  production: 

the  overall  tendency  of  capitalist  de- 
velopment has  been  to  socialize  the 
basic  processes  of  commodity  produc- 
tion—to remove  labor  from  the  private 
efforts  of  individual  families  or  villages 
and  to  centralize  it  in  large-scale  cor- 
porate units.  .  .  With  the  rise  of  indus- 
try, capitalism  "split"  material  pro- 
duction between  its  socialized  forms 
(the  sphere  of  commodity  production) 
and  the  private  labor  performed  pre- 
dominantly by  women  within  the 
home.  In  this  form  male  supremacy, 
which  long  antedated  capitalism,  be- 
came an  institutional  part  of  the  capi- 
talist system  of  production.  .  Just  as 
capitalist  development  gave  rise  to  the 


Patriarchy  and  Capitalism/ 3  5 


idea  of  the  family  as  a  separate  realm 
from  the  econdmy,  so  it  created  a 
"separate"  sphere  of  personal  life, 
seemingly  divorced  from  the  mode  of 
production.  2 

This  divided  structure  of  capitalist 
society  has  been  paralleled  by  a  similar 
division  of  labor  between  the  Socialist 
and  the  Feminist  movements.  Femi- 
nism developed  as  a  separate  move- 
ment partly  because  Marxists  have 
largely  confined  their  analysis  and 
their  organizing  to  the  "outer"  areas 
of  life  like  the  state  and  the  economy; 
Feminism,  and  in  particular  Radical 
Feminism,  has  tried  to  change  the 
"inner  life"  while  largely  ignoring  the 
economic  structure.  Both  movements, 
Zaretsky  argued,  failed  to  understand 
that  the  proletarianization  of  the  popu- 
lation and  the  isolation  of  women  and 
children  from  the  mainstream  of  socie- 
ty were  twin  results  of  the  develop- 
ment of  capitalist  society. 

The  idea  of  the  private/public  split 
is  a  more  sophisticated  restatement  of 
the  popularly  understood  notion  of 
the  separation  of  work  and  home.  It 
brings  us  back  to  the  understanding 
that  women's  oppression,  as  well  as 
working  class  or  other  forms  of  oppres- 
sion, are  a  function  of  an  entire  social 
system,  two  viewpoints  from  which  to 
survey  the  entire  society;  and  it  is  only 
with  their  convergence  that  a  higher 
and  more  complete  revolutionary  syn- 
thesis will  be  achieved. 

I  consider  myself  a  Socialist,  but 
like  many  other  women  I  am  uncom- 
fortable with  any  mixture  of  Socialism 
and  Feminism  that  takes  its  departure, 


a  priori,  from  the  assumptions  and 
methods  of  Marxism,^  or  which  assigns 
the  "real"  social  and  economic  causal 
variables  to  the  Marxist  analysis  of 
capitalism  and  leaves  the  "cultural" 
sphere  to  the  feminist  treatment  of 
sexism.  My  major  objection,  however, 
is  that  to  incorporate  Feminism  into 
Marxism  obscures  the  crucial  task  of 
understanding  what  sexism  is,  how  it 
operates,  how  it  is  unique.  After  all 
that  has  been  written  and  said,  I  still 
do  not  think  we  can  adequately  answer 
these  basic  questions.  At  this  point  a 
marriage  between  Marxism  and  Femi- 
nism would  be  a  typical  union  in  which 
the  female  partner,  lacking  a  firm  iden- 
tity, gets  swallowed  up. 

The  task  of  Socialist  Feminists 
therefore  becomes  doubly  difficult: 
on  the  one  hand  to  develop  a  feminist 
analysis  which  can  delineate  the  unique 
character  of  sexism;  on  the  other  hand, 
to  help  us  understand  the  whole  pic- 
ture which  emerges  in  an  organic  fash- 
ion from  the  interaction  of  many  dif- 
ferent structures  of  oppression.  A 
Marxist  would  argue,  of  course,  that 
both  understandings  can  come  only 
through  the  use  of  the  Marxist  method, 
but  I  say  that  the  Marxist's  conceptual 
apparatus  is  too  tied  to  a  partial  under- 
standing of  modern  society.  I  would 
like  to  offer  an  alternative  model  to 
draw  our  attention  back  to  some  of  the 
crucial  questions. 

Power  and  Authority 

Every  new  revolutionary  point  of 
view  faces  the  problem  of  finding  con- 


36/Quest 


cepts  adequate  to  describe  its  new  per- 
ceptions. When  women  began  looking 
at  some  old,  familiar  experiences  from 
a  Feminist  point  of  view,  such  a  new 
set  of  perceptions  was  generated;  but 
like  other  newly  born  perspectives, 
Feminism  has  been  operating  largely 
with  borrowed  concepts.  As  women, 
we  have  been  trying  to  understand  our 
own  situation  and  our  own  history 
through  a  series  of  analogies:  women 
as  caste  or  colony,  women  as  slave  or 
worker,  and  (the  greatest  analogy  of 
all)  women  as  black.  We  still  have  no 
adequate  descriptive  concepts  to  help 
us  understand  women's  roles  or  the 
power  relations  between  women  and 
men.  We  still  do  not  know  what  sex- 
ism is. 

The  relationship  between  women 
and  men  cannot  be  derived  from  any 
other  authority  relationship:  capitalist- 
worker,  white-Third  World,  master- 
slave.  Of  course  individual  women 
make  up  roughly  50%  of  all  these  cate- 
gories. But  the  experience  of  being 
oppressed  as  a  female  cannot  be  made 
to  fit  any  of  these.  Nor  is  the  exper- 
ience of  female  subordination  a  uni- 
form one.  There  is  not  just  one  rela- 
tionship between  women  and  men.  The 
problem  is  rather  to  develop  some  de- 
scriptive concepts  that  can  help  us 
better  understand  the  range  of  rela- 
tionships that  do  occur. 

One  problem  in  understanding  the 
variety  of  relationships  between  the 
sexes  has  been  the  Women's  Move- 
ment's treatment  of  history.  The  Move- 
ment has  put  forward  an  image  of  uni- 
versal  and  timeless  male   dominance: 


Patriarchy  and  Capitalism/37 


women  have  always  been  oppressed. 
While  this  may  be  true,  it  does  not 
mean  that  women  have  never  had  any 
power.  We  know  of  many  societies, 
including  our  own,  in  which  some 
women  wield  a  great  deal  of  power, 
from  owning  property  to  controlling 
the  behavior  of  others. 

To  understand  this  paradox  of  wom- 
en's history— apparent  universal  male 
dominance  but  some  real  female  pow- 
er-it is  necessary  to  make  a  distinction 
between  "power"  and  "authority." 
While  power  is  the  simple  ability  to 
elicit  from  another  person  a  behavior 
not  necessarily  of  her/his  own  choos- 
ing, authority  is  legitimate  power,  pow- 
er which  is  accepted  as  valid  by  those 
subjected  to  it.  Non-legitimate  power— 
the  kind  usually  exercised  by  women- 
is  uncertain,  disjointed,  and  often  dis- 
guised; legitimate  power  or  authority 
is  continuous  and  formalized,  institu- 
tionalized in  power  arrangements  and 
also  in  thought  patterns. 

The  distinction  between  power  and 
authority  can  be  seen  in  the  old  sexist 
joke  about  the  woman  who  "wears 
the  pants  in  the  family".  When  we  use 
such  an  expression,  we  grudgingly  ac- 
knowledge the  power  that  a  woman 
temporarily  holds  and  at  the  same 
time,  we  remind  her  that  the  structure 
of  authority  seems  essential  for  any 
analysis  of  relationships  of  dominance 
and  subordination. 

We  must  remember  that  power  and 
authority  are  not  mutually  exclusive. 
In  fact,  female  power  has  usually 
existed  within  the  framework  of  male 
authority.  In  examining  universal  male 


authority,  we  are  also  dealing  with  a 
wide  range  of  behavior  in  terms  of  the 
extent  and  severity  of  male  dominance. 
It  is  a  range  of  behavior  whose  lower 
limits  make  women  almost  beasts  of 
burden  and  whose  upper  limits  ap- 
proach (though  never  reach)  a  kind  of 
equality. 

Building  on  these  concepts,  we  can 
arrive  at  a  working  definition  of  sexism 
as  a  social  relationship  in  which  males 
have  authority  over  females.  If  we  de- 
fine sexism  in  this  way,  that  is,  not 
only  as  a  power  relationship,  but  one 
that  is  accepted  for  the  most  part  by 
females  as  well  as  males,  then  we  can 
understand  the  basic  paradox  of  wom- 
en's history  without  violating  its  com- 
plexity. We  can  establish  the  fact  of 
universal  male  authority,  but  in  under- 
standing the  variety  in  female  power, 
we  can  search  for  the  dynamic  variables 
of  change.  By  defining  sexism  as  the 
authority  of  males  over  females,  we 
can  also  incorporate  into  the  term  all 
the  social-psychological  attitudes,  tra- 
ditions, self-perceptions  and  meanings 
whose  acceptance  by  women  has  kept 
them  in  their  place  and  which  have 
been  such  an  important  part  of  Femi- 
nist analysis.  We  can  integrate  social- 
psychological  reality  as  part  of  power 
relationships  instead  of  removing  them 
to  some  other  plane  as  "superstructure" 
or  "false  consciousness". 

If  sexism  is  a  social  relationship  in 
which  males  have  authority  over  fe- 
males, patriarchy  is  a  term  which  de- 
scribes the  whole  system  of  interaction 
which  arises  from  that  basic  relation- 
ship, just  as  capitalism  is  a  system  built 


3S/Quest 


on  the  relationship  between  capitalist 
and  worker.  Patriarchal  and  capitalist 
social  relationships  are  two  markedly 
different  ways  that  human  beings  have 
interacted  with  each  other  and  have 
built  social,  political,  and  economic 
institutions.  Thus,  the  oppression  of 
women,  while  shaped  in  its  present 
form  by  the  rise  of  capitalism,  must 
be  understood  first  in  its  pre-capitalist 
origins  as  a  separate,  distinctly  different 
form  of  domination  and  subordination. 
This  dual  character  of  sexism-as  a 
pre-capitalist  form  and  as  a  capitalist 
form-makes  it  quite  complex  and  dif- 
ficult to  analyze.  We  must  first  under- 
stand the  historical  roots  of  sexism 
and  then  understand  its  present  form. 

Types  of  Authority 

Sexism  and  capitalism  are  represen- 
tative of  two  larger  systems  of  author- 
ity, different  in  their  power  dynamics, 
sources  of  dependency,  types  of  inter- 
action, ideology  of  legitimation,  and 
economic  underpinnings.  These  two 
larger  systems  are  a  "traditional"  sys- 
tem of  authority  and  a  "rational-legal" 
system  of  authority.  According  to 
Max  Weber,  a  rational  system  of  author- 
ity rests  on  "a  belief  in  the  'legality' 
of  patterns  of  normative  rules  and  the 
right  of  those  elevated  to  authority 
under  such  rules  to  issue  commands"- 
a  kind  of  legal  authority.  Traditional 
authority  rests  on  "an  established  be- 
lief in  the  sanctity  of  immoral  tradi- 
tions and  the  legitimacy  of  the  status 
of  those  exercising  authority  under 
them."    "Obedience    is   owed   to   the 


person.  .  .who  occupies  the  traditional- 
ly sanctioned  position  of  authority 
and  who  is  (within  its  sphere)  bound 
by  tradition."  The  obligation  of  obed- 
ience in  a  rational  legal  system  is  im- 
personal-something owed  to  offices, 
while  the  obedience  owed  in  a  tradi- 
tional system  is  personal  loyalty  de- 
fined by  tradition.^ 

In  this  paper,  I  will  be  using  the 
terms  "patriarchal  relations  or  rela- 
tionship" in  the  same  way  that  I  de- 
fined sexism  as  the  authority  relation- 
ship of  male  over  female.  "The  patriar- 
chy" will  refer  to  the  whole  system  of 
male  authority  and  will  be  explained 
in  more  detail  later.  I  will  be  using 
"traditional"  relations  to  describe  those 
status  and  authority  relationships  which 
are  organized  along  patriarchal  lines 
but  which  occur  (primarily  in  pre- 
industrial  society  but  also  in  part  to- 
day) between  many  different  types  of 
people  and  on  all  levels  of  society.  An 
example  of  this  kind  of  relationship  in 
a  traditional  society  would  be  the  rela- 
tionship in  European  feudalism  in 
which  a  landlord  or  a  king  would  grant 
either  land  or  partial  rights  in  land  to 
subordinates  in  exchange  for  obliga- 
tions and  services  which  the  lord  could 
call  upon  when  needed;  a  type  of  rela- 
tionship which  bound  two  individuals 
together  and  went  beyond  the  imper- 
sonality and  limited  nature  of  the 
modern  business  contract.  I  will  indi- 
cate some  of  the  differences  between 
traditional  and  rational-legal  systems 
of  authority. 

Marx  analyzed  one  type  of  power 
relationship  and  the  authority  patterns 


Patriarchy  and  Capitalism/ 39 


that  grow  out  of  it:  class  relationships 
which  come  from  the  ownership  and 
control  of  the  means  of  production. 
Marx,  by  pointing  to  class  relationships, 
reformulates  the  concept  of  rational- 
legal  systems  of  authority,  and  expli- 
citly recognizes  the  distinction  between 
rational-legal  authority-in  which  indi- 
viduals seem  free,  and  traditional,  more 
personal  systems  of  authority  in  which 
personal  dependence  is  clear. 

Capitalist  relations  and  the  class 
roles  arising  from  them  develop  out  of 
a  situation  where  economic  resources 
(along  with  political  and  military  re- 
sources) are  far  enough  developed,  in 
size  and  density,  so  that  they  can  be 
easily  appropriated.  Patriarchal  rela- 
tions, on  the  other  hand,  arise  out  of 
the  opposite  situation,  where  power 
resources  are  varied  and  dispersed,  and 
where  people  are  in  close  personal  con- 
tact, with  face-to-face  interaction-as 
in  most  pre-industrial  societies  and  in 
the  structure  of  resources  characteristic 
of  a  household. 

In  contrast  to  the  class  roles  which 
Marx  described  as  arising  from  capital- 
ism, relationships  in  a  traditional  socie- 
ty are  defined  and  experienced  as  "sta- 
tus roles".  As  Weber  defines  it,  "Class 
has  to  do  with  the  probability  that  an 
individual  or  group  will  have  a  given 
state    of  "a)    provision    with    goods, 

b)  external    conditions    of   life,    arid 

c)  subjective  satisfaction  or  frustra- 
tion"^ "Status"  by  contrast,  refers  to 
a  claim  of  privilege  which  rests  on 
"a)  mode  of  living,  b)  a  formal  process 
of  education  which  may  consist  of  em- 
pirical   or    rational    training    and   the 


40/Quest 


acquisition  of  the  corresponding  modes 
of  life,  or  c)  on  the  prestige  of  birth,  or 
of  an  occupation.  "6  A  status  role  is  a 
complex  of  rights,  obligations  and  be- 
haviors conferred  on  groups  over  time; 
it  is  a  social  role  whose  main  function 
is  to  maintain  legal  and/or  prestige  dis- 
tinctions in  the  actual  relations  be- 
tween people.  In  modern  democratic 
societies,  status  can  be  legally  con- 
ferred or,  as  is  usually  the  case,  main- 
tained by  custom  and  unspoken  rule. 

High  status  tends  to  coincide  with 
high  class  position,  as  those  with  access 
to  the  most  resources  find  themselves 
able  to  maintain,  or  rather  create,  as 
standards  change,  the  clearly  defined 
and  often  exclusive  life  styles  which 
often  make  up  status.  But  status  is  a 
different  concept  from  class  and,  ex- 
cept for  the  highest  and  lowest  posi- 
tions in  a  society,  class  and  status  are 
different  types  of  social  organization. 
The  position  of  women  is  perhaps  one 
of  the  best  examples  of  the  difference 
between  class  and  status.  In  the  United 
States  today,  women  have  a  special 
status  which  takes  both  a  legal  form 
(in  terms  of  jury  duty,  protective  legis- 
lation, etc.)  and  a  customary  form  (in 
terms  of  traditional  definitions  of  wom- 
en as  wives  and  mothers).  Different 
class  positions  cut  across  this  general 
"status"  of  women. 

The  status  relations  characteristic 
of  both  patriarchal  and  traditional 
organization  become  institutionalized 
on  every  level,  so  that  in  most  pre- 
industrial  societies  people  step  into 
status  patterns  of  interaction  which 
were  established  long  before  they  were 


born  and  which  have  little  to  do  with 
the  individual  traits  of  the  persons 
involved.  Similarly,  today,  men  and 
women  often  interact  according  to 
customary  roles. 

American  society  for  the  most  part 
is  characterized  by  a  lack  of  formal 
behavior  patterning.  Yet  American  cul- 
ture seems  to  have  incorporated  along 
with  customary  relations  between  the 
sexes  a  strange  mixture  of  traditional 
deference  patterns  (wife  gives  the  hus- 
band the  best  place,  the  best  food,  is 
not  supposed  to  contradict  him  in 
public,  etc.)  with  a  form  of  romantic 
chivalry  in  which  men  nominally  defer 
to  women  (man  stands  when  she  en- 
ters, opens  doors,  walks  on  the  out- 
side). The  difference  would  seem  to  be 
that  in  chivalry,  men  'protect'  women 
or  through  some  gesture  like  raising 
their  hats  acknowledge  women's  frailty 
or  purity.  In  deferential  behavior,  the 
woman  acknowledges  the  superiority 
and  precedence  of  the  man,  his  work, 
his  goals.  Such  female  behaviors  in 
American  society  are  not  formalized 
deference  patterns  but  somewhere  a- 
long  the  line  most  women  pick  up  a  set 
of  learned  behavior  through  which  they 
are  always  giving  way  to  men.  Patriar- 
chal relations  are  thus  hard  to  get  at 
because  they  exist  almost  uncon- 
sciously. 

Uses  and  Limits  of  Authority 

A  traditional  society  encompasses 
a  system  of  relationships  in  which  peo- 
ple of  unequal  power  and  resources  and 
clearly  accepted  unequal  status  work 


Patriarchy  and  Capitalism/41 


and  live  closely  together.  By  contrast  a 
capitalist  authority  system  is  one  where 
people  of  unequal  resources  are  separ- 
ated and  segregated,  each  developing 
their  own  subculture  and  sometimes 
laboring  under  the  ideological  illusion 
that  they  are  all  equal  or  at  least  have 
the  inherent  opportunity  to  be  so. 

Capitalism  represents  one  type  of 
organization  within  a  rational-legal  sys- 
tem of  authority,  just  as  patriarchal  re- 
lations are  a  type  of  traditionalism.  In 
order  for  the  capitalist  economy  to 
function,  economic  relations  had  to  be 
abstracted  and  set  free  from  the  mesh 
of  personal  ties,  rights,  and  obligations 
characteristic    of   traditional    society. 

Like  any  system  of  authority,  ra- 
tional-legal authority  is  in  part  an  ide- 
ology which  legitimates  existing  power 
relations.  In  the  U.S.  this  legitimation 
is  tied  to  the  impartial  rule  of  law. 
Americans  accept  authority  (when  they 
do)  if  they  understand  the  rules  on 
which  that  authority  is  based  and  be- 
lieve that  the  game  is  played  fairly  and 
is  (potentially)  open  to  all.  7  The  rules 
of  a  workplace  or  the  laws  of  a  govern- 
ment characteristic  of  a  rational-legal 
system  of  authority  are  supposed  to  be 
universalistic,  applying  impartially  to 
all  persons  who  come  within  their  do- 
main. A  rational  system  is  a  leveller, 
disregarding  all  special  status,  in  theory 
at  least,  giving  civil  rights  to  all  groups. 
Of  course,  in  a  rational  capitalist  sys- 
tem, behind  the  facade  of  equality  for 
all  is  the  reality,  not  only  of  special 
status  groups  that  are  oppressed,  but 
also  of  a  class  system. 

Rational-legal     authority    is    more 


than  an  ideology  to  mask  class  oppres- 
sion, however.  It  is  also  a  way  that 
power  is  experienced  and  carried  out 
and  a  way  that  people  relate.  Rational 
authority  is  familiar  to  us  because  it  is 
the  type  of  human  interaction  charact- 
eristic of  much  of  modern  industrial 
society-impersonal,  objective,  rational. 
It  is  the  set  of  rules  and  understandings 
in  terms  of  which  groups,  classes,  sexes, 
etc.  come  together  for  specific,  limited 
tasks-work,  education,  "politics",  etc. 
It  marks  not  only  the  way  that  large 
groups  of  people  can  interact  imper- 
sonally, but  also  the  boundaries  attach- 
ed to  the  power  exercised  in  these  larg- 
er arenas.  The  capitalist  exercises  au- 
thority over  the  workers,  for  example, 
only  under  specifically  defined  condi- 
tions-as  they  work  in  a  designated 
workplace,  for  specified  wages,  during 
certain  hours.  The  workers'  private 
lives  are  certainly  affected  by  their 
roles  as  workers  and  their  experiences 
on  the  job,  but  the  capitalist  has  nei- 
ther personal  rights  nor  responsibilities 
for  them.  This  fragmentation  of  the 
individual  and  of  authority  is  an  im- 
portant aspect  of  the  social  relations 
of  a  rational-legal  society  and  is  in 
sharp  contrast  to  the  bonds  in  a  tradi- 
tional system. 

It  is  this  fragmentation  that  has 
given  rise  to  the  alienation  of  the  per- 
sonal and  the  public,  to  the  develop- 
ment of  "personal  life"  as  an  area  of 
fulfillment  which  is  perceived  as  being 
outside  work  or  public  life.  The  imper- 
sonality and  fragmentation  of  rational- 
legal  relations  leaves  people  unsatisfied 
and    often    unanchored  personally:   it 


42/Quest 


causes  two  different  responses.  Some 
people  preserve  and  strengthen  what 
remains  of  patriarchal  family  and  love 
relations  and/or  create  and  cling  to 
"new",  sometimes  hereditary  types  of 
traditional  statuses,  such  as  the  system 
of  private  schools  among  the  ruling 
classes.  A  second  response  to  the  imper- 
sonality of  rationalism  has  been  the 
counter-culture  lifestyle  which  is  seen 
by  its  participants  as  existing  outside 
the  "system". 

While  the  source  of  legitimacy  in  a 
rational  system  is  law,  legitimacy  in  a 
traditional  system  is  the  sanction  of 
time-not  mere  habit,  but  the  sacred- 
ness  of  time-honored  ways.  This  kind 
of  thinking  is  hard  for  most  Americans 
to  understand  until  we  realize  that  it 
describes  the  unthinking  justification 
for  women's  roles.  Commonsense  think- 
ing about  women's  roles  is  particularly 
characteristic  of  traditionalism:  it  is 
taken  for  granted— one  of  the  few 
things  in  our  society  which  is  accepted 
in  this  way-because  "it  has  always 
been  that  way".  Its  origin  is  unimpor- 
tant, lost  in  time.  It  is  simply  that 
way,  "natural"  (which  becomes  a  bio- 
logical argument,  only  when  pushed  to 
become  rational). 

Authority  in  a  traditional  system 
has  its  own  dynamic.  It  is  by  no  means 
unlimited;  rather  it  is  not  clearly  speci- 
fied. In  contrast  to  a  "position"  in  a 
rational  system  where  authority  is  con- 
fined to  specifically  designated  areas, 
traditional  authority  covers  all  areas 
where  it  is  not  specifically  restricted. 
Those  boundaries  are,  first  of  all,  the 
traditional  rules  and  regulations  that 


Patriarchy  and  Capitalism/43 


govern  the  acceptable  conduct  of  mem- 
bers. Custom  puts  limits  on  how  far 
power  can  go,  for  example,  in  wife- 
beating. 

In  traditional  relations,  people  are 
seen  as  unequal  but  at  the  same  time 
the  relationship  is  more  clearly  recipro- 
cal, involving  an  exchange  of  services 
on  both  sides.  Unlike  capitalist  rela- 
tions, higher  status  in  a  traditional  sys- 
tem carried  with  it  increasing  obliga- 
tions. In  illness  or  during  a  bad  harvest, 
for  example,  the  upper  classes  had  re- 
sponsibility to  take  care  of  and  guide 
the  working  people  who  were  part  of 
their  sphere  of  power,  just  as  they 
did  their  womenfolk  and  children. 

Power  and  authority  in  a  traditional 
system  are  organized  as  a  system  of 
statuses,  designating  who  can  legiti- 
mately exercise  authority.  This  hier- 
archical system  of  statuses  puts  another 
boundary  on  traditional  authority.  The 
severity  and  contours  of  male  authority 
differ  depending  on  how  it  is  limited 
or  supported  by  other  authorities  in 
the  hierarchy-in  the  past  by  the  au- 
thority of  the  feudal  lord  or  king;  to- 
day, by  the  authority  of  the  state,  the 
educational  system,  etc. 


Because  patriarchal  relations  in  the 
household  involve  some  benefits  on  both 
sides  (although  unequal  ones),  lesbians  and 
other  women  not  in  traditional- father-headed 
families  are  in  a  slightly  different  position, 
failing  to  derive  the  benefits  of  male-female 
relations  (heterosexual  privileges),  but  also 
free  to  be  more  mobile  (in  so  far  as  they  are 
allowed  to  by  sexism  in  the  world  outside 
the  family). 


Another  characteristic  of  traditional 
power  is  a  certain  amount  of  arbitrari- 
ness which  states  that  if  there  are  no 
traditions  limiting  it,  power  is  exercised 
by  the  person  in  authority  by  virtue 
of  his  superior  status,  a  system  which 
survives  today  as  "male  prerogative", 
or  the  unbounded  contours  of  the 
"male  ego".  In  such  a  system,  power  is 
more  immediately  and  personally  ex- 
perienced. Loyalty  is  due  not  to  the 
order,  the  position,  or  the  offlce-but 
to  the  person  of  the  master.  We  often 
have  failed  to  do  justice  to  the  com- 
plexity of  female-male  relations  by 
ignoring  this  characteristic  of  patriar- 
chal authority.  Much  of  the  power  that 
men  have  (particularly  in  pre-capitalist 
days,  but  also  in  part  today)  derives 
from  the  status  of  maleness,  a  hard-to- 
define  but  clearly  present  social  reality 
which  cannot  be  understood  by  reduc- 
ing it  to  the  economic  function  of 
breadwinner  or  protector. 

Finally,  we  can  understand  the  dif- 
ference between  the  oppression  of 
women  and  that  of  workers  by  noting 
that  the  working  class  passed  from  tra- 
ditional to  rational  authority  relations 
while  women  underwent  a  transition 
within  traditional  relations.  It  is  this 
different  historical  experience  with 
capitalism  and  its  consequences  today 
that  is  the  key  to  the  split  between 
Socialism  and  Feminism. 

Sources  of  Patriarchal  Authority 

What  are  the  sources  of  male  status 
and  female  dependency  in  the  patriar- 
chy?  While   the   source  of  power  and 


44/Quest 


authority  of  the  capitalist  class  is  their 
ownership  and  control  of  the  means  of 
production,  males  derive  power  in 
patriarchal  social  relationships  from 
their  ability  to  have  greater  access  to 
and  mediate  the  resources,  rewards 
and  gratifications  of  authority  struc- 
tures outside  the  context  of  the  house- 
hold. The  household  is  the  setting  of 
the  economic  provision  of  daily  life 
but  it  is  not  the  nature  of  productive 
activity  either  inside  or  outside  the 
household  which  is  the  crucial  factor. 
Studies  which  have  attempted  to  ex- 
plore the  correlation  between  wom- 
en's contribution  to  productive  acti- 
vity, and  their  status,  have  shown  that 
there  is  no  clear  relationship.^ 

The  crucial  variable  in  distinguish- 
ing men's  status  from  women's  seems 
to  be  the  demographic  fact  of  child- 
bearing  and  childrearing.  It  is  not  only 
the  fact  that  women  give  birth,  but  also 
that  they  provide  nursing  and  childcare 
that  imprisons  women  as  mothers,  or 
potential  mothers,  within  the  house- 
hold's demand  for  everyday  routine. 
Men,  therefore,  have  greater  mobility 
and  range  of  movement  than  women 
and  this  mobility  lies  at  the  base  of 
male  dominance.  Christy  and  T.  A. 
Caine,  in  a  recent  paper  on  the  subject, 
describe  the  many  facets  of  this  differ- 
ence in  power,  a  power  which  relates 
to  economic  resources,  but  is  more 
broadly  based  than  that: 
It  is  the  man  who  can  occupy  the  inter- 
face between  groups.  It  is  men  who 
discover  novel  people  and  goods,  re- 
new old  acquaintances  and  control 
many  of  the  networks  of  communica- 


tion, .  .The  human  pattern  of  inter- 
facing is  such  that  it  is  the  source  of  a 
great  deal  of  power  over  the  distribu- 
tion of  surplus  commodities.  Not  only 
are  men  able  to  seek  out  surplus  com- 
modities, they  can  also  create  value  in 
surplus  commodities  by  having  the 
means  of  converting  them  into  some- 
thing else.  Occupying  the  interface, 
males  also  have  access  to  the  different 
and  innovative,  again  another  source  of 
power.  It  is  axiomatic  that  the  capacity 
to  control  the  distribution  of  rewards 
tends  to  generate  a  consolidation  of 
power.9 

It  seems  a  reasonable  working  hy- 
pothesis, then,  that  the  base  of  wom- 
en's dependence  is  contingent  on  the 
demands  of  everyday  life  as  institu- 
tionalized by  the  wider  society  within 
the  context  of  the  household  and 
which   require  a  tremendous  amount 


LONGTIME 

COMING 


CANADIAN       LESBIAN 
FEMINIST  NEWSPAPER 


BOX    218 
STATION    E 
MONTREAL.  RQ. 


SUBS:  $5  00  YR  INDIVIDUALS 
$10  00  YR  INSTITUTIONS 
50  C  SAMPLE  COPY 


Patriarchy  and  Capitalism/45 


of  labor,  primarily  in  regard  to  children 
and  secondarily  in  terms  of  everyday 
maintenance. 

I  have  constructed  a  model  of  pa- 
triarchy as  a  structure  of  authority  re- 
lations between  women  and  men.  What 
does  it  tell  us  about  our  position  as 
women  today  and  how  we  got  to  where 
we  are?  It  directs  our  focus  first  to  the 
nature  of  our  relations  with  men  with- 
in the  context  of  the  household  and 
then  to  the  ways  outside  authority 
structures  have  influenced  that  basic 
relationship,  either  by  reinforcing  it 
or  by  providing  women  with  alterna- 
tive sources  of  power.  Women  are  not 
oppressed  only  by  the  family  or  house- 
hold, because  the  household  does  not 
function  in  isolation  from  the  rest  of 
society.  Rather,  patriarchy  is  the  whole 


FOR  FlLtA  INFORMATION  WftJTE: 

THE  WOMEN'S  FILM  COOP 

ZOO  MAIN  sr.     _ 

MORrHAMPID^MiVSSACHUSfl^ 


ofo«*o 


system  of  male  authority  which  devel- 
ops as  a  result  of  the  interaction  of  all 
the  structures  of  a  society.  As  a  result, 
women's  secondary  status  is  built  into 
every  institution. 

Oppression  in  Two  Worlds 

The  development  of  capitalism  and 
the  differentiation  of  new  rational 
structures  outside  the  household  did 
not  eliminate,  but  did  change  the  na- 
ture of  patriarchal  oppression.  Capital- 
ism's destruction  of  traditional  society 
strengthened  the  patriarchy  by  placing 
the  major  resources  within  the  house- 
hold in  the  hands  of  men  and  by  dimin- 
ishing women's  access  to  resources 
outside  the  home;  it  weakened  the 
patriarchy  in  the  long  run  because  it 
created  new  structures  outside  the 
home  which  would  later  enable  wom- 
en to  find  a  place  to  stand  on  their 
own  outside  the  family. 

Understanding  the  contradictions 
between  capitalist  and  patriarchal 
spheres  (and  the  contradictions  within 
each  sphere)  can  help  us  sort  out  the 
complex  situation  of  women  today. 
The  status  of  the  American  woman 
changes,  for  example,  as  she  moves 
back  and  forth  between  the  conflicting 
definitions  of  the  rational  and  the  tra- 
ditional world.  How  else  can  we  ex- 
plain why  motherhood  is  both  exalted 
and  despised  in  our  culture?  Mother- 
hood is  one  of  the  highest  expressions 
of  devotion  in  the  traditional  world, 
ridiculous  in  the  rational  world  where 
its  ascriptive  status  has  little  to  do  with 
rationally    measured   achievement.    In 


46/Quest 


this  sense,  women  are  all  right  as  long 
as  they  stay  in  their  place.  They  are 
tolerated  elsewhere.  They  are  tolerated 
in  particular  if  their  activities  in  the 
real  world  are  combined  with  tradition- 
al female  behavior.  The  servicing  na- 
ture of  women's  traditional  roles  has 
become  a  necessary  part  of  modern 
society,  a  sort  of  social  lubricant  which 
makes  rational  society  run  more 
smoothly.  In  this  sense  traditional  fe- 
male behavior  has  itself  become  ration- 
alized. It  is  rationalized  in  the  concept 
of  private  charity  which  is  really  moth- 
ering writ  large,  involving  as  it  does 
thousands  of  organized  women  volun- 
teers ringing  doorbells  in  their  capacity 
as  caring  individuals.  It  is  rationalized 
into  "women's  jobs"  in  the  role  of  the 
secretary,  for  example,  who  must  be 
wife  and/or  mother  to  the  boss  as  well 
as  employee,  as  also  in  the  low  pay 
and  high  expectations  for  caring  placed 
on  teachers,  nurses  and  social  workers. 
The  contradictions  and  interactions 
of  capitalist  and  patriarchal  spheres 
may  have  strategic  implications  par- 
ticularly in  terms  of  the  old  dilemma 
of  reform  vs.  revolution.  In  some  ways, 
women  are  two  steps  back,  oppressed 
by  both  capitalist  and  patriarchal 
forms  of  male  supremacy.  We  are  im- 
prisoned in  traditional  definitions  of 
ourselves  and  for  many  of  us  a  rational 
style  is  the  only  immediate  alternative- 
whether  it  be  in  work,  sexual  relations, 
or  education.  The  women's  movement 
should  give  critical  support  to  rational 
reforms  that  help  women  transcend 
traditional  identities,  increase  their  mo- 
bility and  provide  room  to  change.  We 


should  withhold  support  from  reforms 
which  rationalize  traditional  behaviors. 
Using  these  criteria,  for  example,  the 
proposal  that  women  be  paid  wages  by 
their  husbands  for  work  they  do  in  the 
home  would  be  a  backward  step  be- 
cause it  would  rationalize  and  further 
institutionalize  women's  dependence 
in  the  home.  An  alternative  proposal- 
that  women  receive  Social  Security 
benefits  from  the  Government  for  the 
work  they  do  at  home— carries  some  of 
the  same  dangers  but  should  be  sup- 
ported because  it  would  give  women 
an  independent  income.  Similarly,  the 
ERA  will  at  last  secure  for  women,  at 
least  on  the  books,  their  equal  place  in 
a  rational  society.  Women  will  be  able 
to  experience-and  benefit  from-the 
equality  of  a  rational  order  at  the 
same  time  that  they  experience  the 
limits  of  that  equality. 

There  is  always  the  danger  that  we 
will  not  go  far  enough,  that  our  roles 
as  wage-earners  will  be  just  another 
adjustment  or  rationalization  of  our 
primary  patriarchal  identities;  or  that 
the  alternatives  we  have  created  in  the 
form  of  communal  living  may  backfire 
and  be  nothing  more  than  a  nostalgic 
return  to  a  simpler,  more  traditional 
life  where  people  know  their  neighbors 
and  women  are  oppressed  as  the  moth- 
ers again. 

Our  new  vision  must  extract  what 
is  good  and  healthy  in  both  the  tradi- 
tional and  the  rational  world  and  com- 
bine these  with  hope  for  what  human 
beings  can  become.  This  will  be  diffi- 
cult, because  we  have  all  been  social- 
ized into  the  hierarchical  structures  of 


Patriarchy  and  Capitalism/47 


these  two  systems  and  do  not  know 
what  an  alternative  would  look  like. 
But  we  are  taking  the  first  steps  by 
understanding  more  clearly  what  we 
are  trying  to  change.  Through  the  in- 
sights of  Socialism  we  began  to  under- 
stand our  subordination  through  large, 
impersonal  structures.  Through  Femi- 
nism, we  are  beginning  to  grasp  the 
more  intimate  dimensions  of  power. 
Both  understandings  are  necessary  for 
creating  a  new  vision  of  the  future. 

Footnotes 

ISara  Evans,  "Socialist  Feminism  and 
NAM:  a  political  debate  whose  time  has 
come"  in  NAM  Discussion  Bulletin,  No.  8, 
July-Sept.,  1974,  pp.  36-37. 

^Eli  Zaretsky,  "Capitalism,  the  Family 
and  Personal  Life"  in  Socialist  Revolution, 
Vol.  3,  nos.  1  &  2,  Jan.-April,  1973, 
pp.    83-84. 

^See  Juliet  Mitchell's  statement  that 
"we  should  ask  the  Feminist  questions,  but 
try  to  come  up  with  some  Marxist  answers", 
in  Woman's  Estate  (New  York:  Vantage, 
1973),  p.  99. 

^Max  Weber,  The  Theory  of  Social 
and  Economic  Organization,  ed.  Talcott 
Parsons  (New  York:  Free  Press,  1964), 
p.    328. 

5 Weber  op.  cit.,  p.  424. 

^Ibid.,  p.  428. 

^Robert  Lane,  "Political  Ideology:  Why 
the  American  Common  Man  Believes  What 
He  Does",  (New  York:  Free  Press  of  Glen- 
coe,  1962). 

°See  Peggy  Sanday,  "Toward  a  Theory 
of  the  Status  of  Women",  in  American  An- 
thropologist, 1973,  p.  75. 

9Christy  and  T.  A.  Caine,  "The  Evolu- 
tion of  Male  Dominance  Patterns",  a  paper 
presented  at  the  39th  Annual  Meeting  of 
the  Midwest  Sociological  Society,  April, 
1975. 


Linda  Phelps  is  a  member  of  the 
Kansas  City  Women's  Liberation  Un- 
ion, and  has  done  academic  work  in 
both  history  and  sociology. 


FEMINIST  QUARTERLY  OF  WOMEN'S  ART  &  POLITICS 

O  oo 


ARTICLES,  FICTION,  GRAPHICS,  POETRY 


THE 

LESBIAN 
TIDE 

A  VOICE  OF  THE 

FEMINIST  LESBIAN 

COMMUNITY 

sisters  subscribe  now! 


$7.50  per  year  in  U.S. 
$  .65  for  sample  copy 
$10.00  Institutional  rate 

send  to:  tide  collective 

1005  Ocean  Ave. 
#B,    S.M.,Ca. 
90if03 

bulk  rates  available 
upon  request 


48/Quest 


[untitled] 

She  stands 

in  line 
another  Saturday  morning 
of  torn  stockings 
and  lost  food  stamps 
her  eyes  their  tarnished  rage 
reflecting  blue 
she  is  no 

ivory  soap  princess 
Campbells  soup  sweetheart 
the  figures  in  the 

newspaper  come  and  go 
but  the  realities  stay 
so  every  morning 
she  stuffs  herself 

into  the  borrowed  skirt 
and  smiles  slowly 

behind 
clinched  teeth  and  toothless  anger 
the  check  that  never  came 

the  woman  that  she  is  not 
the  new  lies  some  how 
superimposing  the  old 
in  a  cloudy  montage  of 

double  exposed  photographs 
she  looks  in  the  mirror 

at  the  end  of  another 
job  searching  day 
and  wonders  if  she  is  still 
the  wild  mustard  seed  ready  to  bloom 
the  sulphur  match  waiting  only  to  be  lit . 


by  Margaret  Talbot 


Untitled- A  Poem/49 


r§ 


'W 


m 


/ 


LEZZIES  QUEERS  BUTCH 


by  Charlotte  Bunch 


graphic  by  Nancy  Myron 


The  following  is  an  expanded  and  revised  version  of  a  speech  given  at  the 
Socialist-Feminist  Conference,  Antioch  College,  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio,  July  5,  1975. 
Many  of  the  ideas  expressed  here  about  lesbian-feminist  politics  were  first  developed 
several  years  ago  in  The  Furies.  Nevertheless,  I  am  continually  discovering  that 
most  feminists,  including  many  lesbians,  have  little  idea  what  lesbian-feminist  poli- 
tics is.  This  speech  takes  those  basic  political  ideas  and  develops  them  further, 
particularly  as  they  relate  to  socialist-feminism. 

I  am  listed  in  your  program  as  Charlotte  Bunch-Weeks-a  rather  ominous 
slip-of-the-tongue  (or  slip  in  historical  timing)  which  reflects  a  subject  so  far 
avoided  at  this  conference  that  I,  for  one,  want  to  talk  about. 

Five  years  ago,  when  I  was  Charlotte  Bunch-Weeks,  and  straight,  and  married  to 


SO/Quest,  vol.  II,  no.  2,  fall,  1975 


a  man,  I  was  also  a  socialist-feminist.  When  I  left  the  man  and  the  marriage,  I  also 
left  the  newly  developing  socialist-feminist  movement— because,  for  one  reason,  my 
politics  then,  as  now,  were  inextricably  joined  with  the  way  I  lived  my  personal,  my 
daily  life.  With  men,  with  male  politics,  I  was  a  socialist;  with  women,  engaged  in 
the  articulation  of  women's  politics,  I  became  a  lesbian-feminist-and,  in  the  gay- 
straight  split,  a  lesbian-feminist  separatist. 

It's  that  gay-straight  split  that  no  one  here  seems  to  want  to  remember-and  I 
bring  it  up  now,  not  because  I  want  to  relive  a  past  painful  to  all  concerned,  but 
because  it  is  an  essential  part  of  our  political  history  which,  if  ignored,  will  even- 
tually force  lesbians  to  withdraw  again  from  other  political  women.  There  were 
important  political  reasons  for  that  split,  reasons  explicitly  related  to  the  survival  of 
lesbians—and  those  reasons  and  the  problems  causing  them  are  still  with  us.  It  is 
important-especially  for  political  groups  who  wish  to  give  credence  and  priority 
to  lesbian  issues-to  remember  why  separatism  happened,  why  it  is  not  an  historical 
relic  but  still  vital  to  the  on-going  debate  over  lesbianism  and  feminism. 

In  my  own  personal  experience,  I,  and  the  other  women  of  The  Furies  collec- 
tive, left  the  women's  movement  because  it  had  been  made  clear  to  us  that  there 
was  no  space  to  develop  a  lesbian-feminist  politics  and  life  style  without  constant 
and  non-productive  conflict  with  heterosexual  fear,  antagonism  and  insensitivity. 
This  was  essentially  the  same  experience  shared  by  many  other  lesbian-feminists  at 
about  the  same  time  around  the  country.  What  the  women's  movement  could  not 
accept  then-and  still  finds  it  difficult  to  accept— is  that  lesbianism  is  political: 
which  is  the  essence  of  lesbian-feminist  politics.  Sounds  simple.  Yet  most  feminists 
still  view  lesbianism  as  a  personal  decision  or,  at  best,  as  a  civil  rights  concern  or  a 
cultural  phenomenon.  Lesbianism  is  more  than  a  question  of  civil  rights  and  culture, 
although  the  daily  discrimination  against  lesbians  is  real  and  its  alleviation  through 
civil  libertarian  reforms  is  important.  Similarly,  although  lesbianism  is  a  primary 
force  in  the  emergence  of  a  dynamic  women's  culture,  it  is  much  more.  Lesbian- 
feminist  politics  is  a  political  critique  of  the  institution  and  ideology  of  hetero- 
sexuality  as  a  cornerstone  of  male  supremacy.  It  is  an  extension  of  the  analysis  of 
sexual  politics  to  an  analysis  of  sexuality  itself  as  an  institution.  It  is  a  commitment 
to  women  as  a  political  group  which  is  the  basis  of  a  political/economic  strategy 
leading  to  power  for  women,  not  just  an  "alternative  community." 

There  are  many  lesbians  still  who  feel  that  there  is  no  place  in  socialist  feminist 
organizations  in  particular,  or  the  women's  movement  in  general,  for  them  to 
develop  that  politics  or  live  that  life.  Because  of  this,  I  am  still,  in  part,  a  separatist; 
but  I  don't  want  to  be  a  total  separatist  again:  few  who  have  experienced  that  kind 
of  isolation  believe  it  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  liberation.  Since  unity  and  coalition 
seem  necessary,  the  question  for  me  is  unity  on  what  terms?  with  whom?  and 
around  what  politics?  For  instance,  to  unify  the  lesbian-feminist  politics  developed 
within   the    past   four   years   with    socialist   feminism   requires  more   than  token 


Not  for  Lesbians  Only/ 51 


reference  to  queers.  It  requires  an  acknowledgement  of  lesbian-feminist  analysis  as 
central  to  understanding  and  ending  woman's  oppression. 

The  heart  of  lesbian-feminist  politics,  let  me  repeat,  is  a  recognition  that  hetero- 
sexuality  as  an  institution  and  an  ideology  is  a  cornerstone  of  male  supremacy. 
Therefore,  women  interested  in  destroying  male  supremacy,  patriarchy,  and 
capitalism  must,  equally  with  lesbians,  fight  heterosexual  domination-or  we  will 
never  end  female  oppression.  This  is  what  I  call  "the  heterosexual  question"— it  is 
not  the  lesbian  question. 

Although  lesbians  have  been  the  quickest  to  see  the  challenge  to  heterosexuality 
as  a  necessity  for  feminists'  survival,  straight  feminists  are  not  precluded  from 
examining  and  fighting  against  heterosexuality.  The  problem  is  that  few  have  done 
so.  This  perpetuates  lesbian  fears  that  women  remaining  tied  to  men  prevents  them 
from  seeing  the  function  of  heterosexuality  and  acting  to  end  it.  It  is  not  lesbianism 
(women's  ties  to  women),  but  heterosexuality  (women's  ties  to  men),  and  thus  men 
themselves,  which  divides  women  politically  and  personally.  This  is  the  "divisive- 
ness"  of  the  lesbian  issue  to  the  women's  movement.  We  won't  get  beyond  it  by 
demanding  that  lesbians  retreat,  politics  in  hand,  back  into  the  closet.  We  will  only 
get  beyond  it  by  struggling  over  the  institutional  and  ideological  analysis  of  lesbian- 
feminism.  We  need  to  discover  what  lesbian  consciousness  means  for  any  woman, 
just  as  we  struggle  to  understand  what  class  or  race  consciousness  means  for  women 
of  any  race  or  class.  And  we  must  develop  strategies  that  will  destroy  the  political 
institutions  that  oppress  us. 

It  is  particularly  important  for  those  at  this  conference  to  understand  that 
heterosexuality-as  an  ideology  and  as  an  institution-upholds  all  those  aspects  of 
female  oppression  which  have  been  discussed  here.  For  example,  heterosexuality  is 
basic  to  our  oppression  in  the  workplace.  When  we  look  at  how  women  are  defined 
and  exploited  as  secondary,  marginal  workers,  we  recognize  that  this  definition 
assumes  that  all  women  are  tied  to  men.  I  mention  the  workplace  because  it  upset 
me  yesterday  at  the  economics  panel  that  no  one  made  that  connection;  and  fur- 
ther, no  one  recognized  that  a  high  percentage  of  women  workers  are  lesbian  and 
therefore  their  relationship  to,  and  attitudes  toward,  work  are  fundamentally  dif- 
ferent from  those  assumed  by  straight  workers.  It  is  obvious  that  heterosexuality 
upholds  the  home,  housework,  the  family  as  both  a  personal  and  economic  unit.  It 
is  apparently  not  so  obvious  that  the  whole  framework  of  heterosexuality  defines 
our  lives,  that  it  is  fundamental  to  the  negative  self-image  and  self-hatred  of  women 
in  this  society.  Lesbian-feminism  is  based  on  a  rejection  of  male  definitions  of  our 
lives  and  is  therefore  crucial  to  the  development  of  a  positive  woman-identified 
identity,  of  re-defining  who  we  are  supposed  to  be  in  every  situation,  including  the 
workplace. 

What  is  that  definition?  Basically,  heterosexuality  means  men  first.  That's  what 
it's  all  about.  It  assumes  that  every  woman  is  heterosexual;  that  every  woman  is 


SllQuest 


defined  by  and  is  the  property  of  men.  Her  body,  her  services,  her  children  belong 
to  men.  If  you  don't  accept  that  definition,  you're  a  queer-no  matter  who  you 
sleep  with;  if  you  do  not  accept  that  definition  in  this  society,  you're  queer.  The 
original  imperialist  assumption  of  the  right  of  men  to  the  bodies  and  services  of 
women  has  been  translated  into  a  whole  variety  of  forms  of  domination  throughout 
this  society.  And  as  long  as  people  accept  that  initial  assumption— and  question 
everything  but  that  assumption-it  is  impossible  to  challenge  the  other  forms  of 
domination. 

What  makes  heterosexuality  work  is  heterosexual  privilege-and  if  you  don't  have 
a  sense  of  what  that  privilege  is,  I  suggest  that  you  go  home  and  announce  to  every- 
body that  you  know— a  roommate,  your  family,  the  people  you  work  with— every- 
where you  go-that  you're  a  queer.  Try  being  a  queer  for  a  week.  Do  not  walk  out 
on  the  street  with  men;  walk  only  with  women,  especially  at  night,  for  example . 
For  a  whole  week,  experience  life  as  if  you  were  a  lesbian,  and  I  think  you  will  know 
what  heterosexual  privilege  is  very  quickly.  And,  hopefully,  you  will  also  learn  that 
heterosexual  privilege  is  the  method  by  which  women  are  given  a  stake  in  male 
supremacy-and  that  it  is  therefore  the  method  by  which  women  are  given  a  stake 
in  their  own  oppression.  Simply  stated,  a  woman  who  stays  in  line-by  staying 
straight  or  by  refusing  to  resist  straight  privileges— receives  some  of  the  benefits  of 
male  privilege  indirectly  and  is  thus  given  a  stake  in  continuing  those  privileges  and 
maintaining  their  source-male  supremacy. 

Heterosexual  women  must  realize— no  matter  what  their  personal  connection  to 
men— that  the  benefits  that  they  receive  from  men  will  always  be  in  diluted  form 
and  will  ultimately  result  in  their  own  self-destruction.  When  a  woman's  individual 
survival  is  tied  to  men,  she  is  at  some  intrinsic  place  separated  from  other  women 
and  from  the  survival  needs  of  those  other  women.  The  question  arises  not  because 
of  rhetorical  necessity-whether  a  woman  is  personally  loyal  to  other  women-but 
because  we  must  examine  what  stake  each  of  us  has  in  the  continuation  of  male 
supremacy.  For  example,  if  you  are  receiving  heterosexual  benefits  through  a  man 
(or  through  his  social,  cultural  or  political  systems),  are  you  clear  about  what  those 
benefits  are  doing  to  you,  both  personally,  and  in  terms  of  other  women?  I  have 
known  women  who  are  very  strong  in  fighting  against  female  job  discrimination,  but 
when  the  battle  closes  in  on  their  man's  job,  they  desert  that  position.  In  univer- 
sities, specifically,  when  a  husband's  job  is  threatened  by  feminist  hiring  demands,  I 
have  seen  feminists  abandon  their  political  positions  in  order  to  keep  the  privileges 
they  receive  from  their  man's  job. 

This  analysis  of  the  function  of  heterosexuality  in  women's  oppression  is  avail- 
able to  any  woman,  lesbian  or  straight.  Lesbian-feminism  is  not  a  political  analysis 
"for  lesbians  only."  It  is  a  political  perspective  and  fight  against  one  of  the  major 
institutions  of  our  oppression-a  fight  which  heterosexual  women  can  engage  in.  The 
problem  is  that  few  do.  Since  lesbians  are  materially  oppressed  by  heterosexuality 


Not  for  Lesbians  Only/53 


daily,  it  is  not  surprising  that  we  have  seen  and  understood  its  impact  first— not 
because  we  are  more  moral,  but  because  our  reality  is  different-and  it  is  a 
materially  different  reality.  We  are  trying  to  convey  this  fact  of  our  oppression  to 
you  because,  whether  you  feel  it  directly  or  not,  it  also  oppresses  you;  and  because 
if  we  are  going  to  change  society  and  survive,  we  must  all  attack  heterosexual 
domination. 

Class  and  Lesbianism 

There  is  another  important  aspect  of  lesbian-feminism  which  should  be  of  interest 
to  a  socialist-feminist  conference:  the  connection  between  lesbianism  and  class. 
One  of  the  ways  that  lesbianism  has  affected  the  Movement  is  in  changing  women's 
individual  lives.  Those  of  us  who  are  out  of  the  closet  have,  in  particualr,  learned 
that  we  must  create  our  own  world— we  haven't  any  choice  in  the  matter,  because 
there  is  no  institution  in  this  society  that  is  created  for  us.  Once  we  are  out,  there  is 
no  place  that  wholeheartedly  accepts  us.  Coming  out  is  important,  partly  because 
it  puts  us  in  a  materially  different  reality  in  terms  of  what  we  have  to  do.  And  it 
is  the  impact  of  reality  that  moves  us  (or  anyone)  to  understand  and  change.  I  don't 
believe  that  idealism  is  the  primary  force  that  moves  people;  necessity  moves 
people.  And  lesbians  who  are  out  are  moved  by  necessity-not  by  choice-to  create 
our  own  world.  Frequently  (and  mistakenly),  that  task  has  been  characterized  as 
cultural.  While  the  culture  gives  us  strength,  the  impetus  is  always  economic:  the 
expression  of  necessity  is  always  material.  For  middle  class  women  this  is  especially 
true-  lesbianism  means  discovering  that  we  have  to  support  ourselves  for  the  rest  of 
our  lives,  something  that  lower  and  working  class  women  have  always  known.  This 
discovery  makes  us  begin  to  understand  what  lower  and  working  class  women  have 
been  trying  to  tell  us  all  along:  "What  do  you  know  about  survival?" 

I  heard  a  lot  about  class  analysis  when  I  was  in  the  left,  and  some  of  it  was 
helpful.  But  it  wasn't  until  I  came  out  as  a  lesbian  and  had  to  face  my  own  survival 
on  that  basis-as  an  outlaw,  as  a  woman  alone— that  I  learned  about  class  in  my  own 
life.  Then  I  learned  what  the  left  had  never  taught  me-what  my  middle  class 
assumptions  were  and  the  way  in  which  my  background  crippled  me  as  a  woman.  I 
began  to  undertsand  how  my  own  middle  class  background  was  holding  me  back 
personally  and  the  ways  in  which  middle  class  assumptions  were  holding  back  the 
growth  of  our  movement.  Class  affects  the  way  we  operate  everyday-as  has  been 
obvious  in  much  of  what  has  happened  in  this  conference.  And  theories  of  class 
should  help  us  understand  that.  The  only  way  to  understand  the  function  of  class  in 
society,  as  far  as  I'm  concerned,  is  to  understand  how  it  functions  right  here,  on  the 
spot,  day  to  day,  in  our  lives. 

Another  way  in  which  class  consciousness  has  occured  in  the  lesbain  community— 
and  I  want  to  acknowledge  it  because  it  is  frequently  one  of  the  things  kept  locked 


54/Ques* 


in  the  bedroom  closet—is  the  cross-class  intimacy  that  occurs  among  lesbians.  This 
intimacy  usually  leads  to  an  on-the-spot  analysis  of  class  oppression  and  conflict 
based  on  the  experience  of  being  hit  over  the  head  with  it  over  and  over  again. 
Understand  that  I  am  not  advising  every  middle  class  woman  to  go  out  and  get  her- 
self a  lower  class  lesbian  to  teach  her  about  class-in-the-raw;  but  also  understand 
that  I  am  saying  that  there's  no  faster  way  to  learn  how  class  functions  in  our  world. 

Cross-class  contact  occurs  all  the  time  in  the  lesbian  community,  frequently 
without  any  self-conscious  politics  attached  to  it.  For  example,  in  lesbian  bars,  a 
political  process  that  is  often  misinterpreted  as  a  purely  social  process  is  going  on  in 
women's  lives.  Because  there  are  no  men  in  that  environment,  the  conflicts  around 
class  and  race— those  issues  basic  to  women's  survival-become  crystal  clear,  if  you 
understand  them  not  in  rhetorical  or  theoretical  terms,  but  in  the  ways  that 
womens'  lives  are  interacting  with  each  other's.  This  is  one  reason  why  a  lot  of  class 
analysis,  particularly  the  practical  kind,  has  come  out  of  the  lesbian-feminist  move- 
ment-analysis based  on  our  experience  of  class  contact  and  conflict,  our  recogni- 
tion of  it,  and  our  integration  of  its  meanings  in  the  way  we  live  our  lives.  This 
material  experience  of  class  realities  produces  real  commitment  to  struggle  and  to 
the  class  question  not  out  of  idealism  but  as  integral  to  our  survival.  Idealism  can  be 
abandoned  at  any  time.  Survival  cannot. 

I  want  to  be  clear  about  what  it  is  that  I  am  not  saying.  I  am  not  saying  that  all 
lesbians  are  feminists;  all  lesbians  are  not  politically  conscious.  I  am  saying  that  the 
particular  material  reality  of  lesbian  life  makes  political  consciousness  more  likely; 
we  can  build  on  the  fact  that  it  is  not  in  the  interests  of  lesbians  to  maintain  and 
defend  the  system  as  it  is. 

I  am  also  not  saying  that  the  only  way  to  have  this  political  analysis  is  to  be  a 
lesbian.  But  I  am  saying  that  so  far  most  of  the  people  with  lesbian-feminist 
politics  who  have  challenged  heterosexuality  are  lesbians.  But  ours  is  not  the  only 
way,  and  we've  got  to  make  it  not  the  only  way.  We,  as  lesbians,  are  a  minority.  We 
cannot  survive  alone.  We  will  not  survive  alone,  but  if  we  do  not  survive  the  entire 
women's  movement  will  be  defeated  and  female  oppression  will  be  reenacted  in 
other  forms.  As  we  all  understand  survival  more  clearly,  we  see  that  the  politics  and 
analysis  of  women's  oppression  coming  out  of  the  lesbian's  life  experience  has  got 
to  be  integrated  into  the  politics  of  socialist-feminism  and  the  rest  of  the  women's 
movement. 

It  is  not  okay  to  be  queer  under  patriarchy-and  the  last  thing  we  should  be 
aiming  to  do  is  to  make  it  okay.  Nothing  in  capitalist-patriarchal  America  works  to 
our  benefit  and  I  do  not  want  to  see  us  working  in  any  way  to  integrate  ourselves 
into  that  order.  I'm  not  saying  that  we  should  neglect  work  on  reforms-we  must 
have  our  jobs,  our  housing,  etc.  But  in  so  doing  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  our 
ultimate  goal.  Our  very  strength  as  lesbians  lies  in  the  fact  that  we  are  outside  of 
patriarchy;  our  existence  challenges  its  life.  To  work  for  "acceptance"  is  to  work 


Not  for  Lesbians  Only/ 5 5 


for  our  own  disintegration  and  an  end  to  the  clarity  and  energy  we  bring  to  the 
women's  movement. 

It  is  not  okay,  and  I  do  not  want  it  ever  to  be  okay,  to  be  queer  in  patriarchy. 
The  entire  system  of  capitalism  and  patriarchy  must  be  changed.  And  essential  to 
that  change  is  an  end  to  heterosexual  domination.  Lesbians  cannot  work  in 
movements  that  do  not  recognize  that  heterosexuality  is  central  to  all  women's 
oppression:  that  would  be  to  work  for  our  own  self-destruction.  But  we  can 
coalesce  with  groups  which  share  the  lesbian-feminist  analysis  and  are  committed  to 
the  changes  essential  to  our  survival.  This  is  the  basis  upon  which  we  can  begin  to 
build  greater  unity  and  a  stronger,  more  powerful  feminist  movement. 


THE  FEMINIST  ART  JOURNAL 

is  a  unique  quarterly  dealing  exclusively  with  women 
in  the  arts.  It  is  essential  reading  for  anyone  con- 
cerned with  women  artists  and  the  latest 
developments  in  the  art  world.  The  Journal  publishes 
scholarly  articles  on  women  artists  past  and  present, 
interviews  and  profiles  of  distinguished  contem- 
porary women  artists  plus  spirited  accounts  of  the 
current  undertakings  of  the  women  artists'  move- 
ment. 

Also  features  pieces  dealing  with  art  world  issues  in 
key  areas  such  as  criticism,  museumology  and  art 
education.  Articles  are  abundantly  illustrated  with 
photographs  of  the  works  discussed. 

Subscription  Rates: 

Individuals — U.S.A.  &  Canada 

[  ]  One  year  (4  issues) $5.00 

[  ]  Two  years  (8  issues) $9.00 

Institutions:  Libraries,  colleges,  universities,  museums,  et  al  and  foreign 

[]One  year $10.00 

[  ]  Two  years • $1 8.00 

Bulk  Rate:  40%  discount  on  25  issues  or  more.  Postage  paid  by  purchaser. 

Make  check  payable  to:  THE  FEMINIST  ART  JOURNAL 

Payable  in  U.S.  currency  only 

THE  FEMINIST  ART  JOURNAL 

41  Montgomery  Place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.  11215 


56/Quest 


by  Linda  Teixeira 

graphics  by  Jacqui  Linard 


Change  is  born  in  the  mind  of  a  dream- 
er-with  a  prophetic  cry  from  the  un- 
conscious inspiring  plans  to  nurture  the 
spirit  to  its  maturity. 

The  American  Politics  Game 

Political  analyst  Richard  Reeves  has 
said  that  politics  is  the  most  masculine 
of  professions.  If  asked  for  an  analogy 
which  would  clarify  its  bullishness,  one 
might  point  to  football  or  baseball-to 
professional  team  sports  whose  accou- 
terments  line  up  readily  for  compari- 
son with  the  props  in  politics.  Locker 


rooms  and  clubhouses  match  cloak- 
rooms and  party  headquarters,  and  cri- 
tical downs  are  played  out  on  the  field 
with  the  same  rough  zeal  that  marks 
fights  on  the  Floor— complete  with  cat- 
calls. 

Politics  is  a  people's  sport,  but  like 
the  professional  team  sports,  is  open 
only  to  a  small  number  of  specially- 
equipped  individuals  wjio  can  pass  the 
test  of  judgment  by  peers.  It's  a 
closed  occupation,  designed  for  those 
with  the  potential  to  play  along  with 
the  partisan  team  and  to  survive  the 
stress  of  in-season  travel  and  big- 
league    competition. 

The  game  spirit,  so  much  a  part  of 
American  life  and  politics,  has  its 
basis  in  a  tradition  whose  cornerstones 
are  Puritanism,  Capitalism,  and  Darwin- 


The  Next  American  Revolution/57 


ism.  It  is  also  a  tradition  whose  found- 
ers are  fathers  and  whose  players  are 
males:  the  surface  documented  in  the 
pages  of  history  texts  is  the  social  and 
political  equivalent  to  professional  ath- 
letic records.  And  just  as  athletes  play 
before  sexually-integrated  audiences, 
the  evolving  power  elite  plays  out  its 
schemes  and  makes  decisions  affecting 
both  men  and  women,  but  extends  the 
privilege  of  participation  effectively 
only  to  men.  Only  since  1920  have  we 
had  the  vote-and  today,  the  women  on 
the  Hill  can  almost  be  counted  on  one 
hand.  In  such  a  tradition,  the  sexes 
could  never  be  equal. 

So  sexism  in  America  is  rather  bla- 
tant, and  the  problem  is  further  com- 
plicated by  the  fact  that  the  nation  was 
founded  in  a  spirit  of  revolution  and 
idealism  theoretically  based  in  the  prin- 
ciples of  equality,  freedom,  and  indi- 
vidual independence.  The  conflict  of 
philosophy  and  its  practice,  however, 
has  made  the  United  States  not  only  a 
schizophrenic  nation  but  also  one  with 
the  ability  to  apply  innocent,  idealistic 
motives  to  the  most  insidious  kinds  of 
behavior. 

Women,  perceiving  their  exclusion 
and  realizing  that  the  right  to  vote  was 
no  more  than  the  chance  to  go  to  the 
stadium,  are  striking  back  with  a  force 
that  reflects  the  American  spirit  of 
directness  and  determination.  Yet  as 
some  sexist  obstacles  crumble  in  the 
wake  of  female  assault,  the  politics 
bastion  is  increasingly  enigmatic.  Wom- 
en trying  to  break  down  the  locker 
room  door  are  finding  out  for  them- 
selves the  discrepancy  between  rhetoric 


and  practice,  for  those  who  are  being 
let  in  are  not  being  admitted  as  team- 
mates. Women  are  in  politics  in  in- 
creasing numbers,  but  without  increas- 
ed power. 

None  know  this  less  than  many  hard- 
working political  women  who  measure 
their  accomplishments  in  terms  of  tra- 
ditional political  achievement  instead 
of  in  the  reality  of  political  sexism. 
Political  observers,  mostly  men,  further 
validate  the  myth  of  progress  by  count- 
ing female  heads,  but  until  there  is  a 
change  in  the  way  those  who  are  tra- 
ditionally regarded  as  outsiders  .are 
viewed,  women  will  play  no  real  role. 
And  that  perspective  shows  little  signs 
of  coming.  What  excludes  women  from 
politics  is  not  their  lack  of  "clout," 
but  their  sex,  for  in  politics  there  is 
no  room  for  sexual  equality  or  even 
for  association,  short  of  use  as  servants 
or  prostitutes  to  support  and  perpetu- 
ate the  Standard  Operating  Procedure. 

The  Push  Toward  Interdependence 

In  order  for  social  change  to  occur, 
those  involved  in  reform  movements 
must  somehow  convey  their  views  and 
impatience  to  those  in  power.  Such 
expression  may  well  be  ignored  unless 
it  in  some  way  threatens  the  powerful, 
who  then  grant  what  is  sought  out  of 
self-defense  rather  than  conviction.  In 
the  most  successfully  controlled  socie- 
ties, where  the  powerful  are  in  the 
least  danger  of  being  challenged,  move- 
ments for  social  change  are  either  ruth- 
lessly curtailed  or  are  manipulated  so 
that  the  powerful  appear  to  adhere  to 


58/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  2,  fall,  1975 


The  Next  American  Revolution/59 


the  whims  of  the  populace  when  in 
fact  they  do  nothing  of  the  sort.  Such 
an  elite  is  an  oligarchy  whose  power 
base  is  ultimately  not  dependent  on 
what  the  population  thinks,  but  on 
those  who  keep  the  government  and 
economy  operating. 

In  the  United  States,  the  power 
elite  is  a  business-law  partnership  which 
controls  both  government  and  the  eco- 
nomy in  the  American  tradition.  The 
former  adheres  to  a  Darwinist  concept 
of  national  development,  and  the  lat- 
ter governs  with  an  idealistic  rhetoric 
and  the  administration  of  human  con- 
trol. 

Those  who  are  not  in  the  oligarchy 
are  the  masses,  all  outsiders  excluded 
because  they  are  not  in  the  select  rul- 
ing class:  for  Americans  instinctively 
adhere  to  the  philosophy  that  those 
who  have  not  succeeded  are  to  blame 
for  their  failure.  Only  the  independent 
can  succeed  because  only  they  have 
the  qualities  necessary  for  surviving 
the  forces  of  a  hostile  environment. 
Thus  the  oligarchy  represents  the  best 
of  our  people:  in  such  a  philosophy, 
one  gets  what  one  deserves—no  more. 
It  is  a  cruel  fate  but  has  its  roots  in  the 
Puritan  concept  of  predestination  which 
damned  the  excluded  as  unfit  and  not 
to  be  pitied. 

Women  were  systematically  exclud- 
ed from  the  start,  and  so,  in  a  sense  are 
damned.  The  rewards  and  symbols  of 
personal  greatness  that  can  be  register- 
ed in  capitalistic  successes  cannot  open 
any  doors  for  us  since  we  are  barred 
from  achieving  economic  advancement: 
it  is  a  vicious  circle.  Prohibited  from 


playing  the  game,  we  have  no  access  to 
the  victories.  In  such  an  atmosphere, 
male  supremacy  flourishes,  and  under- 
lying it  is  the  assumption  that  for  the 
oligarchy  to  be  strong,  it  must  forever 
be  exclusive. 

But  all  theories  of  the  triumph  of 
the  fittest  preclude  the  possibility  of 
violent  change  or  mutation  so  extensive 
that  what  is  successful  can  fail.  The 
twentieth  century,  though,  brought 
impressive  signs  that  the  theories  of 
predestination  and  evolution,  as  bases 
for  claiming  power,  have  some  flaws, 
or  at  least  can  be  challenged.  Born  in 
the  very  spirit  of  idealism  and  early 
nineteenth-century  Romanticism,  a  ma- 
jor philosophy  developed:  that  progress 
is  made  through  change.  The  prevalent 
aristocratic  view  of  a  pre-ordained 
Great  Chain  of  Being  was  shaken. 

This  major  philosophical  shift  is 
naturally  attractive  to  those  who  are 
systematically  excluded  from  the  re- 
wards and  privileges  of  "success."  It 
was  the  basis  for  revolutions  that 
brought  about  Communist  and  Social- 
ist regimes,  and  it  inspired  other  social 
movements  such  as  the  Indian  libera- 
tion and  the  British  and  the  U.S.  Civil 
Rights  upheaval. 

It  also  makes  today's  feminism  dif- 
ferent from  past  waves  of  women's 
confrontations  for  equality.  Though  in 
past  efforts  there  was  belief  in  the  idea 
that  women  are  mistreated  and  that 
substantive  change  in  every  area  of 
our  lives  is  the  ultimate  solution,  the 
basic  problem  of  where  women  stand 
in  relation  to  men  was  perceived  only 
by  the  most  radical. 


60/Quest 


The  revolutionary  spirit  is,  then, 
an  outsiders  philosophy.  It  counters 
the  belief  that  evolution  is  the  basis  for 
success,  and  thus  is  the  first  philosophy 
to  challenge  the  power  elites.  Its  prov- 
en successes  have  sent  some  chilly 
breezes  to  the  comfortable  enclosures 
of  the  oligarchs.  With  its  rise  among 
the  oppressed,  the  enslaved,  the  disin- 
franchised  and  the  totally  dependent, 
came  increasing  calls  for  breaking  away 
from  oligarchies.  Imperialism  reached 
its  zenith  in  the  nineteenth  century, 
but  revolution  soon  saw  to  it  that  few 
countries  had  foreign  sovereigns.  And 
in  view  of  their  numbers  and  resources, 
revolutionary  nations  had  to  be  con- 
sidered as  constituents  in  a  world  that 
has  undergone  its  own  technological, 
industrial,  and  material  revolutions. 
Oligarchs  naturally  found  it  hard  to 
cope  with  both  their  own  capitalistical- 
ly-induced  revolution  and  the  spiritual 
revolution  affecting  those  who  were 
supposed  to  be  both  subservient  and 
unable  to  express  an  energy  and  perva- 
sive sense  of  purpose. 

The  breakdown  of  the  evolutionary 
oligarchical  power  structure  is  express- 
ed today  in  the  anger  of  those  who 
have  resources  that  before  were  not 
their  own.  The  redistribution  of  re- 
sources, the  population  increase  and 
its  attendant  material  pressures,  the 
decline  of  affluence  in  those  countries 
from  which  oligarchies  seek  global  con- 
trol, and  the  communications  sophis- 
tication that  educates  the  masses  in 
instances  of  change— all  have  weakened 
the  base  of  oligarchical  power.  In  that 
light,    women    challenge    the    system 


today,  and  like  those  who  challenged 
before  them,  do  so  in  a  spirit  of  revo- 
lution. 

America  and  the  Spirit 
of  Revolution 

The  American  power  elite  is  a  team 
running  scared.  It  finds  itself  bereft 
of  friendly  spectators,  its  fans  having 
divided  into  camps  which  cheer  for 
themselves.  Perhaps  the  United  States 
was  never  the  strongest  oligarchy  since 
it  suffered  from  an  idealism  that  made 
it  at  least  preach  those  axioms  its  ori- 
gins demanded.  But  still,  Puritan  in- 
tolerance for  the  excluded  assured  that 
even  here  some  semblance  of  rule-by- 
privilege  would  maintain.  The  idealis- 
tic rhetoric  only  served  to  protect  the 
rulers  from  serious  attack;  government 
exists  for,  by,  and  of  the  people.  To 
believe  otherwise  is  to  be  "unameri- 
can."  So  the  country  has  continued  to 
flourish,  and  today  is  in  a  prime  of  life 
characteristic  of  youthful  success  and 
fortunate  birth:  an  arrogant  prime 
intolerant  of  those  less  fortunate.  Se- 
cure in  the  rhetoric  of  a  revolutionary 
past,  it  could  hope  to  preserve  itself, 
for  America  was  good. 

The  first  break  in  the  armor  of  the 
official  power  elite  came  when  those 
on  the  outside  adopted  the  revo- 
lutionary ethic  but  elected  to  use  a 
subtle  approach.  Traditional  outsiders, 
beginning  notably  with  blacks  in  the 
Civil  Rights  movement,  did  not  call 
for  surrender  on  the  part  of  the  oli- 
garchy, nor  even  for  participation,  but 
instead  for  extension,  within  the  frame 


The  Next  American  Revolution/61 


of  authority,  of  certain  privileges  that 
were  rights.  They  assumed  the  role  of 
dependent  constituents  who  were  in 
need  because,  in  Darwinist  terms,  they 
were  excluded. 

Combining  their  belief  in  revolution 
with  projecting  to  the  oligarchy  a  be- 
lief in  rule  by  evolutionary  right,  they 
were  able  to  have  their  demands  met. 
But  in  meeting  them,  the  oligarchy 
unwittingly  opened  a  hole  in  its  hither- 
to closed  suite.  For  those  privileges  it 


considered  were  matters  of  entitlement 
were  actually  earned,  and  so  the  status 
of  outside  revolutionaries  was  some- 
what improved.  To  continue  their 
drive  toward  the  inner  sanctum  of 
power,  they  simply  came  up  with  more 
rights  (as  opposed  to  earnings),  and 
pulled  the  rug  of  rule  by  evolutionary 
fitness  from  under  the  oligarchy.  In 
addition,  various  other  outsiders  began 
the  chorus  for  their  rights.  The  oligar- 
chy found  itself  capitulating  to  more 


62/ Quest 


and  more  constituent  demands,  and 
suddenly  the  competition  was  getting 
keener. 

This  is  where  women  find  them- 
selves today,  in  the  knowledge  that 
entry  into  the  system  lies  in  competing 
with  those  alleged  to  be  our  superiors. 
We  are  challenging  on  the  grounds  of 
right— the  right  to  share  power.  It  is 
not  what  the  powerful  elite  bargained 
for  when  they  preached  social  justice. 
It  is  what  they  got. 

Evolution  is  essentially  the  indivi- 
dual against  environment,  blessed  or 
cursed  by  destiny.  Revolution,  how- 
ever, is  collective,  a  gathering  of  indi- 
viduals for  a  common  purpose.  This  al* 
so  means  a  sharing  of  destiny  not 
assumed  in  the  lonely  life  of  the  evolu- 
tionary. And  though  the  concept  of 
interdependency  is  alien  to  the  United 
States'  male  oligarchy,  it  is  not  alien  to 
those  on  the  outside.  Women  especially 
have  learned  the  concept  of  interde- 
pendence; it  is  the  traditional  female 
counterpart  to  male  independence.  As 
providers  of  services,  organizers  of  re- 
sources and  chief  distributors  of  fin- 
ished products,  we  have  managed  cap- 
ably, creatively  and  imaginatively  in  a 
structure   of  interdependency. 

The  principle  of  interdependency  is 
fundamentally  the  feminist  principle 
of  attending  to  human  needs.  It  rejects 
the  competitive,  Darwinist  survival-of- 
the-fittest  philosophy.  This  conflict 
is  likely  to  be  the  catalyst  which 
could  bring  about  permanent  revolu- 
tionary change  and  with  it  comes  a 
new,  reversed  seat  of  vulnerability-the 
oligarchy.    Already    it    shows   all   the 


signs  of  its  perception  of  decline. 
Lashing  out  at  those  who  were  once 
its  dependents,  the  oligarchy  struggles 
to  grab  hold  again  and  assume  control, 
relying  on  the  old  belief  in  its  super- 
iority, and  that  is  not  working.  Presi- 
dent Ford,  for  instance,  can  call  for  a 
new  commitment  to  independence- 
but  it  is  a  negative  independence, 
spawned  by  self-denial  and  rejection  of 
need.  The  irony  is  that  for  the  first 
time,  the  powerful  must  reach  out, 
but  do  not  know  how  to  do  so. 

A  New  Definition  of  Privilege 

The  application  of  interdependency 
to  the  dispensation  of  power  means  a 
new  order  of  privilege,  indeed,  a  new 
definition.  Those  who  have  brought 
the  concept  of  interdependency  to  the 
fore  define  it  as  collective  sharing,  and 
in  that  climate,  the  politics  of  human 
need  will  take  precedence  over  defense, 
state,  and  corporate  business  require- 
ments. Life  will  be  a  matter  of  human, 
not  individual,  survival  in  which  we 
must  depend  on  each  other. 

The  politics  of  independence,  of 
evolutionary  right  practiced  by  the 
power  elite  oligarchy,  however,  is  also 
the  politics  of  asexuality,  for  it  denies 
in  its  lonely  aspirations  any  relation- 
ship to  others.  There  is  a  sterility  in 
American  politics.  It  is  the  sterility  of 
loneliness;  a  relinquishing  of  control  of 
self  to  an  external  force.  The  sterility 
of  the  political  atmosphere  is  like  that 
of  the  arena-there  is  no  room  for  com- 
passion, human  perspective  or  emo- 
tion, and  no  sense  of  the  immediacy  of 


The  Next  American  Revolution/63 


life.  And  for  women,  the  atmosphere 
of  sterility  is  an  alien  concept,  contrary 
to  our  positive  approach  to  human 
problems  and  needs.  Interdependency, 
simply,  is  relationship  between  human 
beings. 

This  is  a  change  in  control  from 
the  point-of-view  of  the  sexes,  since 
the    all-male    oligarchy   is    now   bom- 


barded by  an  outside  including  wom- 
en. We  have  recognized  that  issues 
such  as  health,  environment,  welfare 
and  education  are  human  issues,  not 
abstracts.  In  that  recognition  we  are 
able  to  begin  to  take  control. 

For  revolutionaries  to  be  successful, 
they  must  be  able  to  withstand  coun- 
ter-pressures as  well  as  to  understand 


64/Quest 


the  principles  they  defend  and  those 
they  would  oust.  In  the  case  of  the 
United  States  revolutionary  spirit,  there 
is  an  unprecedented  degree  of  under- 
standing of  the  issues:  women  have 
broadened  the  issue  of  privilege  to 
encompass  the  interests  of  an  entire 


sex. 


Will  There  Be  Revolution? 

Given  the  vulnerability  of  the  oli- 
garchy and  the  rise  in  the  politics  of 
interdependence  (and  if  the  power 
elite  can  be  kept  from  employing  a 
strategic  independence  policy),  there 
is  a  good  chance  for  revolutionary 
change.  But  it  will  not  be  easy.  Part  of 
the  problem  is  that  a  sense  of  in- 
adequacy, a  perceived  lack  of  virility, 
have  been  responsible  for  the  American 
need  to  prove  itself  in  combat.  And 
fear  of  inadequacy  in  performance  is 
essentially  a  male  fear-and  a  sexual 
one.  So  it  is  no  wonder  that  women, 
as  we  assert  the  politics  of  interdepen- 
dence, are  unwelcome  and  feared  by 
the  powerful  men  who  control  the 
nation's  politics.  Impotence  in  the  face 
of  danger  is  a  paralyzing  fear  for  one 
who  must  not  lose.  But  if  it  is  no  longer 
able  to  control  outside  and  inside 
forces,  the  oligarchy  must  respond  to 
change  lest  change  overtake  its  very 
existence. 

Second,  to  bring  about  a  politics  of 
interdependence  and  drive  out  the 
politics  of  inadequate  independence  is 
to  feminize  the  political  institution. 
It  is  truly  to  open  the  closed  locker 
rooms.  And  the  feminization  of  politics 


is  the  feminizing  of  all  institutions  of 
power.  It  would  replace  a  team  of 
individuals  with  a  collective.  But  there 
is  another  danger  the  revolutionary 
movement  for  change  must  recognize. 
Besides  avoiding  becoming  subjects  of 
the  values  we  aim  to  discard,  we  in  the 
fight  for  change  must  aim  our  strategy 
toward  the  creation  of  a  new  order. 
In  times  of  stress,  the  powerful  will 
reach  out  to  traditional  subordinates 
for  support,  and  tactics  of  deception 
will  likely  be  employed.  For  example, 
allowing  women  into  the  power  circles 
would  be  a  likely  defense  mechanism 
and  not  necessarily  a  sign  of  progress. 
We  should  not  allow  ourselves  to  be 
misled. 

Third,  in  the  battle  with  the  oli- 
garchy, the  conflict  is  between  the 
competitive  independent  individual  and 
the  collectivist.  We  should  remember 
that  as  long  as  we  measure  our  power 
and  legitimacy  in  terms  of  the  muscle 
we  have,  we  are  being  controlled  in 
the   old  way.  Instead,  we  would  seek 


The  Next  American  Revolution/ 6  5 


to  have  humanitarian  concerns  as  our 
cornerstone-to  attain  a  collective  con- 
cept of  survival. 

Conclusion 

Success  cannot  be  predicted,  but 
the  longevity  of  the  American  revolu- 
tion of  interdependence  is  a  sign  that 
we  may  succeed.  The  spirit  of  revolu- 
tion will  have  to  fight  that  of  evolu- 
tion and  its  intent  to  maintain  the 
system  that  has  been.  For  those  who 
aspire  to  the  evolutionary  concept,  the 
future  will  be  lonely:  what  will  be,  will 
depend  entirely  on  one's  ability  to 
weather  hostile  odds.  It  will  be  a  future 
of  increased  confrontation-more  of 
the  same  confrontation  that  has  led  us 
to  the  brink  of  national  destruction. 

For  those  of  the  revolutionary  spirit 
however,  for  those  who  would  move 
from  independence  to  interdependence, 
the  future  is  conceivable  in  human 
terms.  Women  have  determined  that 
we  are  to  share  in  the  future  privilege 
of  the  collective,  and  we  have  seen  our 
selves  as  the  vulnerable  people  we  have 
always  been.  Thus  we  stand  a  chance 
of  being  leaders  in  the  next  American 
revolution,  the  upsurge  of  the  spirit 
of  interdependence  and  human  need. 
Though  the  male  power  structure  may 
insist  that  its  evolutionary  position  is 
what  puts  it  in  control  and  makes  it 
superior  to  the  challenging  second 
class,  we  might  well  think  of  alterna- 
tive solutions  to  the  problems  of  sur- 
vival. 

In  an  inhuman  future,  individuals 
will  struggle  to  survive  independent  of 


each  other.  But  in  view  of  history,  it 
would  seem  safe  to  predict  that  we  will 
all  be  victims  if  we  continue  in  the 
rituals  of  sportsmanship,  competition, 
and  teamwork.  The  ultimate  sport 
gear  will  be  the  weaponry  of  war. 


Linda  Teixeira  is  a  Washington, 
D.C.-based  free-lance  writer,  and  is  re- 
searching a  book  on  the  emergence  of 
the  new  political  woman. 


%  %  * 


CYCLAR:  a  women's  community 
calendar.  Monthly  photos,  date  grid  has 
room  for  notes,  info  on  famous  women, 
facts  and  female  firsts.  9-J4"x12-1/2", 
spiral  bound,  recycled  paper.  Woman- 
made  and  distributed. 

Checks,  money-orders  ok.  Bulk  rates 
to  women's  groups  for  money-raising. 
Prepaid  orders  only.  Available  by 
Halloween.  Add  50o"  single  copy  orders 
only.  Bulk  shipping  to  be  billed. 


1-4,  $4.00 

5-14,$3.00 

15-49,  $2.75 

50  &  up,  $2.50 


traveling  light 
p.o.  box  6063 
austin,  texas  78762 
(512)  474-2834 


66/Quest 


FUNDAMENTAL  FEMINISM 

PROCESS 
anc 

PERSPECTIVE 

by     NanCy    HartSOCk  photographs  by  Robin  Birdfeather 


Several  of  the  Quest  staff  went  to 
the  Socialist  Feminist  Conference  in 
Yellow  Springs,  Ohio,  in  July.  We  went 
because  we  thought  of  ourselves  as 
feminists  who  were  socialists,  but  we 
discovered  that  despite  the  obvious  dis- 
agreements among  the  speakers,  most 
of  the  views  expressed  from  the  speak- 
ers' platform  were  in  conflict  with  our 
politics.  This  article  began,  then,  from 
a  discussion  among  the  five  of  us  who 


went,  and  represents  our  attempts  to 
respond  constructively  to  the  Confer- 
ence. We  do  not  intend  the  article  to 
be  primarily  a  criticism  of  the  Con- 
ference, but  rather  an  attempt  to  set 
out  our  own  concerns  as  they  emerged 
through  our  experience  in  Yellow 
Springs. 

We  found  ourselves  in  opposition 
not  to  the  stated  goals  of  the  Confer- 
ence-the    destruction    of    capitalism, 


Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective/ 6 7 


imperialism,  and  patriarchy*  but  rath- 
er to  the  framework  of  analysis  in 
which  these  concerns  were  presented. 
Since  the  framework  was  defined  by 
the  white,  male-dominated  Left  in  the 
United  States  (hereafter  referred  to 
simply  as  the  male  Left),  it  is  clear 
that  as  such,  it  can  only  lead  a  social- 
ist feminist  movement  to  the  same 
paralysis  that  has  immobilized  the 
male  Left. 

Patriarchal  Socialism 
and  Socialist  Feminism 

The  role  of  the  male  Left  in  defin- 
ing the  terms  on  which  socialist  femi- 
nism is  to  develop  was  clear.  For  exam- 
ple, the  speaker  who  opened  the  Con- 
ference stated  that  its  concern  was 
with  the  ways  racism,  class,  and  imper- 
ialism affect  women:  she  did  not  say 
that  the  Conference  was  concerned 
with  the  ways  patriarchy  affects  wom- 
en. She  added  that  socialist  feminism 
as  a  movement  was  concerned  with 
transforming  the  Left.  In  response  to 
such  positions,  the  Lesbian  Caucus 
was  driven  to  state  that  it  is  legitimate 
to  struggle  against  sexism  "whether  or 
not  it  is  the  direct  result  of  capitalism 
and  imperialism."^ 

The  conference  in  general  assumed 
that  feminism  is  a  culture,  while  social- 
ism is  a  politics.  A  comparison  of  the 
statements  of  the  tasks  of  two  work- 

Although  we  would  not  include  the 
destruction  of  white  supremacy  under  the 
heading  of  destroying  imperialism,  that  seem- 
ed to  be  a  frequent  interpretation  at  the 
Conference. 


shops-one  relating  to  the  autonomous 
women's  movement  and  one  working 
with  mixed  left  and  anti-imperialist 
groups-highlights  this  assumption.  In 
discussing  the  relation  of  socialist  fem- 
inism to  the  autonomous  women's 
movement,  the  session  description 
stresses  the  need  for  "politicization 
(infusing  our  politics  into  other  groups 
.  .  ,)."2  in  contrast,  sessions  on  work- 
ing with  mixed  left  groups  were  to  dis- 
cuss ways  to  build  the  left  and  to  "en- 
sure that  our  analysis  is  heard  in  our 
joint  work-the  integration  of  sex,  class, 
race,  and  lesbianism."^  (My  italics.) 
The  difference  between  infusing  poli- 
tics into  an  apolitical  group,  and  inte- 
grating or  making  one's  voice  heard 
in  a  more  powerful  political  group, 
makes  it  clear  that  the  Conference 
looked  to  the  male  Left  to  define 
what  is  political. 

But  male  Left  politics  lead  to  prob- 
lems in  the  way  we  do  political  work 
and  think  about  politics-problems  re- 
sulting from  their  mode  of  analysis. 
And  these  problems  of  method  lead  in 
turn  to  difficulties  in  dealing  with 
substantive  areas  of  concern— how  to 
organize  against  class  society,  against 
racism,  and  against  imperialism-no t 
to  speak  of  sexism. 

The  history  of  the  male  Left  dem- 
onstrates that  it  has  no  concept  of 
process.  As  a  result,  it  has  been  unable 
to  understand  the  fundamental  unity 
of  theory  and  practice.  This  separation 
of  theory  and  practice  surfaced  in  a 
very  traditional  form  at  the  Confer- 
ence. "Theory"  meant  reading  and  stu- 
dying  a   few   sacred   texts  which  are 


68/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  2,  fall,  1975 


frequently  recited  but  seldom  con- 
nected with  reality.  "Practice/5  in  con- 
trast, meant  organizing  other  people 
(never  one's  self)  by  applying  text- 
book teachings  to  their  situations.  The 
male  Left  has  forgotten  that  "it  is  es- 
sential to  educate  the  educator  him- 
self. [Their]  doctrine  must,  therefore, 
divide  society  into  two  parts,  one  of 
which  is  superior  to  society. "4 

The  separation  of  theory  from  lived 
reality  leads  the  male  Left  to  adopt  the 
elitist  assumptions  of  capitalist  society. 
Their  unexamined  and  unresisted  class- 
ism  surfaces  most  clearly  in  the  assump- 
tion that  the  "working  class"  is  in- 
capable of  working  out  its  own  future; 
that  it  needs  a  vanguard  party  to  lead 
it  to  freedom;  and  that  the  core  of  the 
vanguard  party  will  be  made  up  of  a 
group  of  people  who  have  memorized 
the  sacred  texts  and  are  thus  equipped 
to  organize  the  world.  The  clear  as- 
sumption is  that  the  male  Left  will 
come  to  the  oppressed  masses  with 
Truth,  and  will  make  for  them  a  revolu- 
tion they  cannot  make  for  themselves. 

The  separation  of  theory  and  prac- 
tice and  the  unconscious  classism 
which  accompanies  it,  result  in  the  no- 
tion that  we  work  for  revolution,  not 
for  ourselves  and  out  of  necessity,  but 
for  others,  out  of  an  idealistic  com- 
mitment. The  refusal  to  recognize 
that  revolution  begins  in  our  own  lives 
first,  and  that  it  concerns  our  own 
identities  as  human  beings,  took  many 
forms  at  the  Conference.  For  example, 
the  subsumption  of  racism  under  the 
more  impersonal  heading  of  "imper- 
ialism" makes  it  possible  to  avoid  the 


racism  we  participate  in  and  practice. 
The  inclusion  of  a  workshop  on  les- 
bian organizing  among  a  number  of 
sessions  on  community  organizing  lets 
us  avoid  the  tensions  between  lesbians 
and  straight  women,  and  the  problems 
created  by  heterosexual  privilege.  To 
see  questions  in  this  way  means  that 
we  accept  the  terms  of  capitalist  socie- 
ty in  which  politics  has  to  do  with 
"public"  life,  and  in  which  our  person- 
al lives  can  be  kept  at  a  distance  from 
our  politics. 

The  separation  of  theory  from  prac- 
tice leads  the  male  Left  mechanically 
to  apply  Marx's  paradigm  of  capitalist 
society  as  made  up  of  two  classes-the 
bourgeoisie  and  the  proletariat.  Many 
Conference  speakers  gave  the  impres- 
sion that  once  this  had  been  said,  the 
analysis  was  complete.  That  the  analy- 
sis is  not  complete  was  obvious  in  the 
confusion  of  so  many  speakers  about 
the  reality  of  class  itself.  The  reitera- 
tion that  we  are  almost  all  working- 
class  (because  90%  of  the  United  States 
population  has  nothing  to  sell  but 
labor  power),  and  the  repeated  expres- 
sion of  concern  that  most  of  the  wom- 
en at  the  conference  were  white  and 
middle-class,  indicate  the  difficulties 
of  mechanically  applying  the  two-class 
formula  to  concrete  reality. 5 

The  divisions  among  those  who  are 
not  part  of  the  bourgeoisie  were  not 
seen  as  fundamentally  important.  Prob- 
lems of  sexism  and  racism,  and  other 
barriers  between  people  were  only  seen 

And  hetero-sexism  is  an  essential  part 
of  sexism. 


Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective/69 


International  Women's  Day— Cuba 


as  worth  noticing  because  they  prevent- 
ed united  action,  not  because  they  rep- 
resent important  social  forces  in  them- 
selves. Thus,  the  kind  of  tokenism 
which  has  occurred  at  male  Left  con- 
ferences, where  women's  concerns  are 
often  relegated  to  a  single  session,  was 
directed  at  third-world  women  and  les- 
bians. Rather  than  integrate  their  con- 
cerns into  all  the  panels  as  aspects  of 
the  issues  taken  up  by  each  session, 
Conference  organizers  asked  that  third 
world  women  and  lesbians  share  a 
single  morning.  The  implication  of  this 
kind  of  scheduling  is  that  such  con- 
cerns are  special  interests  which  are 
fundamentally  irrelevant  to  the  "real" 
questions  raised  by  monopoly  capital- 
ism. 

A  final,  profoundly  disturbing  as- 
pect of  the  Socialist  Feminist  Confer- 
ence was  its  lack   of  feminism.  Very 


few  of  the  speakers  had  any  concept 
of  patriarchy  or  saw  patriarchy  as  an 
important  and  autonomous  social 
force.  Rather,  the  Conference  focused 
almost  exclusively  on  the  problems 
and  needs  of  an  ill-defined  but  unitary 
"workers'  movement."  The  Confer- 
ence provided  little  aid  in  analyzing 
how  the  forces  of  white  supremacy, 
patriarchy,  capitalism,  and  imperialism 
interact  in  a  specific  setting;  yet  if  we 
do  not  understand  how  we  are  divided 
from  each  other  in  everyday  life,  how 
can  we  work  against  the  forces  that 
divide  us? 

While  we  cannot  define  ourselves  as 
socialist  feminists  in  the  terms  used  at 
the  Conference,  we  feel  that  the  Con- 
ference itself  was  very  useful  in  asking 
what  we  mean  by  a  feminism  which 
includes  a  socialist  analysis.  The 
exploration       of      feminism       which 


70/Quest 


follows  should  make  it  clear  that  if 
those  who  call  themselves  socialist 
feminists  read  and  understand  Karl 
Marx,  they  should  develop  a  better 
understanding  of  feminism.  As  Georg 
Lukacs  has  pointed  out,  orthodox 
Marxism  is  not  the  uncritical  accept- 
ance of  Marx's  results:  "On  the  con- 
trary, orthodoxy  refers  exclusively  to 
method.  "6 

Feminism  as  a  Mode 
of  Analysis 

Women  who  call  themselves  femi- 
nists disagree  on  many  things.  Many 
are  not  socialists  at  all.  One  would  be 
hard-pressed  to  find  a  set  of  beliefs  or 
principles,  or  even  a  list  of  demands 
that  could  safely  be  applied  to  all  fem- 
inists. Still,  when  we  look  at  the  con- 
temporary feminist  movement  in  all  its 
variety,  we  find  that  while  many  of  the 
questions  we  addressed  were  not  new, 
there  is  a  methodology  common  among 
feminists  which  differs  from  the  prac- 
tice of  most  social  movements,  particu- 
larly from  those  in  advanced  capitalist 
countries.  At  bottom,  feminism  is  a 
mode  of  analysis,  a  method  of  ap- 
proaching life  and  politics,  rather  than 
a  set  of  political  conclusions  about  the 
oppression  of  women. 

The  practice  of  small  group  con- 
sciousness raising,  with  its  stress  on 
examining  and  understanding  exper- 
ience and  on  connecting  personal  ex- 
perience to  the  structures  which  de- 
fine our  lives,  is  the  clearest  example 
of  the  method  basic  to  feminism. 
Through  this  practice,  we  learned  that 


it  is  important  to  build  an  analysis  of 
patriarchy  from  the  ground  up-begin- 
ning with  our  own  experience.  We 
examined  our  lives  not  only  intellect- 
ually, but  with  all  our  senses.'  We 
drew  connections  between  our  per- 
sonal experiences  and  political  gener- 
alities about  the  oppression  of  women; 
in  fact,  we  used  our  personal  exper- 
ience to  develop  political  generalities. 
We  came  to  understand  our  exper- 
ience, our  past,  in  a  way  that  trans- 
forms both  our  experiences  and  our- 
selves. 

The  power  of  a  feminist  method 
grows  out  of  the  fact  that  it  enables 
us  to  connect  everyday  life  with  an 
analysis  of  the  social  institutions 
which  shape  that  life.  Application 
of  a  feminist  method  means  that 
the  institutions  of  capitalism  (in- 
cluding its  imperialist  aspect),  pa- 
triarchy, and  white  supremacy  cease 
to  be  abstractions  we  read  about. 
Through  their  impact  on  us  they  be- 
come lived,  real  aspects  of  daily  exper- 
ience and  activity.  In  this  way,  femi- 
nism provides  us  with  a  way  to  under- 
stand our  anger  and  direct  our  anger 
and  energy  toward  change. 

Integrating  Personal 
and  Political  Change 

Feminism  as  a  mode  of  analysis 
relies  on  the  idea  that  we  come  to 
know  the  world,  to  change  it  and  be 
changed  by  it,  through  our  everyday 
activity.  The  focusing  on  daily  life 
and  experience  makes  it  clear  not  only 
that    we    are    active    in   creating   and 


Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective/71 


changing  our  lives,  but  that  reality 
itself  consists  of  "sensuous  human 
activity,  practice."**  We  ourselves  pro- 
duce our  existence  as  a  response  to 
specific  problems  posed  for  us  by 
reality.  As  feminists,  we  cannot  avoid 
the  realization  that  we  experience 
patriarchy  on  a  daily  basis,  and  that 
we  must  oppose  the  institutions  of 
male  supremacy  daily  as  well,  in  every 
area  of  our  lives. 

Feminism  as  a  method  makes  us 
recognize  that  human  activity  is  also 
self-changing. "  A  fundamental  redefi- 
nition of  the  self  is  an  integral  part  of 
action  for  political  change.  But  our 
selves  are  social  phenomena,  and  take 
their  meaning  from  the  social  whole 
of  which  we  are  a  part.  10  We  do  not 
act  in  a  vacuum  to  produce  and  repro- 
duce our  lives;  changed  consciousness 
and  changed  definitions  of  self  can 
only  occur  in  conjunction  with  re- 
structuring the  social  (societal  and 
personal)  relationships  in  which  each 
of  us  is  involved.  Thus,  feminism  leads 
us  to  oppose  the  institutions  of  capital- 
ism, white  supremacy,  and  patriarchy. 

A  feminist  mode  of  analysis  makes 
it  clear  that  patriarchy,  capitalism, 
white  supremacy,  certain  forms  of 
social  interaction,  and  language— all  ex- 
ist for  us  as  historic  "givens."  While 
they  are  not  unalterable,  the  historical 
structures  which  mold  our  lives  pose 
the  questions  to  which  we  must  re- 
spond, and  define  the  immediate  pos- 
sibilities for  change.  11  Thus,  although 
we  recognize  that  human  activity  is 
the  structure  of  the  social  world,  this 
structure  is  imposed  not  by  individuals 


but  by  masses  of  people,  building  on 
the  work  of  those  who  came  before. 
The  shape  of  social  life  at  any  point 
depends  on  needs  already  developed 
as  well  as  embryonic  needs— needs 
whose  production,  formation  and  satis- 
faction are  historical  processes.  Devel- 
oping new  selves,  then,  requires  that 
we  recognize  the  importance  of  large- 
scale  forces  for  change  and  recognize 
as  well  that  the  fully-developed  individ- 
uals we  are  trying  to  become  can  only 
be  products  of  history  and  struggle.  12 
We  can  only  transform  ourselves  by 
simultaneously  struggling  to  transform 
the  social  relations  which  define  us: 
self-changing  and  changed  social  insti- 
tutions are  simply  two  aspects  of  the 
same  process. 

Thus,  although  we  found  that  many 
socialists  at  the  Conference  believe 
that  beginning  with  personal  exper- 
ience is  invalid,  a  cultural  if  not 
bourgeois  enterprise,  we  have  come  to 
think  that  "the  coincidence  of  the 
changing  of  circumstances  and  of  hu- 
man activity  or  self-changing  can  be 
conceived  and  rationally  understood 
only  as  revolutionary  practice."^ 

Recognizing 
Process  and  Interaction 

By  beginning  with  everyday  life  and 
experience,  feminism  has  developed  a 
politics  which  incorporates  an  under- 
standing of  process  and  of  the  import- 
ance of  appropriating  our  past  as  an 
essential  element  of  political  action. 
We  find  that  we  constantly  confront 
new  situations  in  which  we  act  out  of 


72/Quest 


our  changed  awareness  of  the  world 
and  ourselves,  and  experience  the 
changed  reactions  of  others.  What  pa- 
triarchal socialism  sees  as  static,  femi- 
nism sees  as  structures  of  relations  in 
process— a  reality  constantly  in  evolu- 
tion. 

Feminist  reasoning  "regards  every 
historically-developed  social  form  as  in 
fluid  movement,  and  therefore  takes 
into  account  its  transient  nature  no 
less  than  its  momentary  existence."  14 

Each  of  the  interlocking  institutions 
of  capitalism,  patriarchy  and  white 
supremacy  conditions  the  others,  but 
each  can  also  be  understood  as  a  dif- 
ferent expression  of  the  same  relation- 
ships. 15  This  mode  of  understanding 
allows  us  to  see  the  many  ways  pro- 
cesses are  related  and  provides  a  way 
to  understand  a  world  in  which  events 
take  their  significance  from  the  set  of 
relationships  which  come  to  focus  in 
them. 

Since  each  phenomenon  changes 
form  constantly  as  the  social  relations 
of  which  it  is  composed  take  on  dif- 
ferent meanings  and  forms,  the  pos- 
sibility of  understanding  processes  as 
they  change  depends  on  our  grasp  of 
their  role  in  the  social  whole.  16  For 
example,  in  order  to  understand  in- 
creased wage  work  by  women  in  the 
U.S.,  we  need  to  understand  the  rela- 
tion of  this  work  to  the  needs  of  capi- 
talism. But  we  must  also  look  at  the 
conditions  of  work  and  the  kind  of 
work  prescribed  for  women  by  patri- 
archy and  white  supremacy  as  different 
aspects  of  the  same  social  system.  In 
this  context,  production,  consumption, 


Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective/ 7 3 


distribution,  and  exchange  are  not  iden- 
tical but  are  different  aspects  of  a 
unity;  a  mutual  inter-action  occurs 
between  these  various  elements. 

Feminists  cannot  separate  work- 
place organizing  from  community  or- 
ganizing from  building  a  movement. 
We  begin  from  the  perspective  that 
possibilities  for  change  in  any  area  are 
tied  to  change  in  other  areas.  The  pre- 
cise forms  of  human  activity  as  it  ap- 
pears in  the  family,  the  work  place,  or 
elsewhere  are  intelligible  only  in  the 
context  of  the  whole  society-including 
both  its  past  and  its  future. 

When  patriarchal  socialists  separate 
work  place  from  community  organ- 
izing, they  demonstrate  that  they  have 
forgotten  that  the  significance  of  any 
form  of  human  activity  depends  on  its 
relation  to  the  whole.  They  have  for- 
gotten that  both  capitalism  and  social- 
ism are  more  than  economic  systems, 


and  that  capitalism  does  not  just  re- 
produce the  physical  existence  of  indi- 
viduals: "rather  it  is  a  definite  form  of 
activity  of  these  individuals,  a  definite 
form  of  expressing  their  life,  a  definite 
mode  of  life  on  their  part.  .  .  [and  this 
coincides  with]  both  what  they  pro- 
duce and  how  they  produce."  18  A 
mode  of  life  is  not  divisible.  It  does 
not  consist  of  a  public  part  and  a  pri- 
vate part,  a  part  at  the  work  place  and 
a  part  in  the  community-each  of  which 
makes  up  a  certain  fraction,  and  all  of 
which  total  100%.  A  mode  of  life,  and 
all  the  aspects  of  that  mode  of  life, 
take  meaning  from  the  totality  of 
which  they  are  parts. 

Appropriation,  Necessity 
and  Revolution 

The   feminist  method  of  analyzing 
experience  is  a  way  of  appropriating 


74/Quest 


reality.  Appropriation  (or  constructive 
incorporation)  means  the  incorpora- 
tion of  experience  in  such  a  way  that 
our  life  experience  becomes  a  part  of 
our  humanity  itself.  Clearly,  appropria- 
tion of  things  or  experiences  does  not 
mean  simple  possession  or  gratifica- 
tion. Our  knowledge  of  ourselves  and 
our  world  is  an  aspect  of  our  appro- 
priation of  that  world,  just  as  the  in- 
corporation of  our  knowledge  into  who 
we  are  as  people  changes  our  world. 
Appropriation,  then,  refers  to  the  ex- 
pansion of  human  powers  and  poten- 
tialities through  the  transforming  im- 
pact of  experience. 

By  appropriating  our  experience  and 
incorporating  it  into  our  selves,  we 
transform  what  might  have  been  a 
politics  of  idealism  into  a  politics  of 
necessity.  By  appropriating  our  col- 
lective experience,  we  are  creating 
people  who  recognize  that  we  cannot 
be  ourselves  in  a  society  based  on 
hierarchy,  domination,  and  private 
property.  We  are  acquiring  a  con- 
sciousness which  forces  us  "by  an 
ineluctable,  irremediable  and  imperious 
distress— by  practical  necessity— to  re- 
volt against  this  inhumanity."  19  jn_ 
corporating,  making  part  of  ourselves 
what  we  learn,  is  essential  to  the  meth- 
od of  feminism.  It  is  a  way  of  making 
both  our  past  and  our  future  belong  to 
us. 

Feminist  Theory  and  Practice 

The  feminist  mode  of  analysis  has 
important  results  for  questions  of 
theory    and    practice.    For    feminists, 


theory  is  the  articulation  of  what  our 
practical  activity  has  already  appropri- 
ated in  reality.  In  theorizing,  we  ex- 
amine what  we  find  within  ourselves; 
we  attempt  to  clarify  for  ourselves  and 
others  what  we  already,  at  some  level, 
know. 

Theory  itself,  then,  can  be  seen  as 
an  aspect  of  appropriation,  a  way  of 
taking  up  and  building  on  our  exper- 
ience. This  is  not  to  say  that  feminists 
reject  all  knowledge  that  is  not  first 
hand,  that  we  can  learn  nothing  from 
books  or  from  history.  But  rather  than 
read  a  number  of  sacred  texts,  we  make 
the  practical  questions  posed  for  us  in 
life  the  basis  for  our  study.  Feminism 
recognizes  that  political  philosophy 
and  political  action  do  not  take  place 
in  separate  realms.  On  the  contrary, 
the  concepts  with  which  we  under- 
stand the  social  world  emerge  from 
and  are  defined  by  human  activity.  We 
agree  with  Antonio  Gramsci  that  the 
philosophy  of  each  person  "is  con- 
tained in  its  entirety  in  [her]  political 
action."20 

For  feminists,  the  unity  of  theory 
and  practice  refers  to  the  use  of  theory 
to  make  coherent  the  problems  and 
principles  expressed  in  our  practical 
activity.  Feminists  argue  that  the  role 
of  theory  is  to  take  seriously  the  idea 
that  all  of  us  are  theorists  since  we 
"engage  in  practical  activity  and  in 
[our]  guiding  lines  of  conduct  there  is 
implicitly  contained  a  conception  of 
the  world,  a  philosophy." 21  The  role 
of  theory,  then,  is  to  articulate  for  us 
what  we  know  from  our  practical  acti- 
vity, to  bring  out  and  make  conscious 


Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective/ 7 5 


the  philosophy  embedded  in  our  lives. 
Feminists  are  in  fact  creating  social 
theory  through  our  political  action. 
We  need  to  conceptualize,  to  take  up 
and  specify  what  we  have  already 
done,  in  order  to  make  the  next  steps 
clear.  2  2 

New  Directions 

Because  feminists  begin  from  our 
own  experience  in  a  specific,  advanced 
capitalist  society,  we  recognize  that 
the  lived  realities  of  different  segments 
of  a  society  are  varied.  While  it  is  true 
that  most  people  have  only  their  labor 
power  to  sell  (for  wages  or  not),  there 
are  real  differences  in  power,  privilege, 
ability  to  control  our  lives,  and  even  in 
our  survival  chances.  We  cannot  ignore 
these  divisions.  Only  by  recognizing 
our  different  situations  in  their  com- 
plexity can  we  use  our  anger  con- 
structively. Feminists  have  begun  to 
learn  about  the  meaning  of  class  and 
race  by  looking  at  the  impact  of  these 
divisions  on  everyday  life.  We  are  be- 
ginning to  understand  that  our  class  is 
not  defined  by  our  relationship  to  the 
mode  of  production  in  the  simple  sense 
that  if  we  sell  our  labor  power  (for  a 
day  or  a  lifetime),  or  are  part  of  the 
family  of  someone  (presumably  male) 
who  does,  we  are  working-class.  Being 
working-class  is  a  mode  of  life,  a  way 
of  living  life  based  on,  but  not  exclu- 
sively defined  by,  the  simple  fact  that 
we  must  sell  our  labor  power  to  stay 
alive. 

Class  distinctions  in  capitalist  soci- 
ety are  part  of  a  totality,  a  mode  of 


life  which  is  structured  as  well  by  sex- 
ism and  racism.  Class  distinctions  in 
the  United  States  affect  the  everyday 
lives  of  women  and  men,  whites  or 
black  or  third  world  people,  m  dif- 
ferent ways.  Feminism  leads  us  to  ask 
questions  about  the  nature  of  class 
distinctions  and  what  they  mean  in  the 
lives  of  people  every  day.  It  compels 
questions  which  recognize  that  we  al- 
ready know  a  great  deal  about  class, 
but  need  to  appropriate  what  we  know 
-to  make  it  into  theory. 

The  method  of  feminism  means  as 
well  that  we  need  to  look  at  the  ways 
patriarchy  and  white  supremacy  inter- 
lock with  capitalism.  Our  experience 
provides  us  with  many  examples  of  the 
ways  patriarchy,  capitalism  and  white 
supremacy  interlock.23  The  myth  of 
black  matriarchy,  women's  role  as 
houseworkers,  their  functions  as  part 
of  a  reserve  labor  force,  and  the  parti- 
cipation of  women  and  minorities  in  a 
separate  and  secondary  labor  market- 
all  these  fulfill  specific  functions  for 
capitalism,  but  would  be  impossible 
without  the  institutions  of  white  su- 
premacy and  patriarchy.  We  need  to 
know  more  about  the  nature  of  these 
relationships.  What  are  the  processes 
which  define  them?  How  are  they 
changing?  What  are  they  becoming? 

Feminism  as  a  mode  of  analysis 
leads  us  to  respect  experience  and  dif- 
ferences, to  respect  people  enough  to 
believe  that  they  are  in  the  best  posi- 
tion to  make  their  own  revolution. 
Thus  we  cannot  support  the  elitism 
implicit  in  the  concept  of  a  vanguard 
party.    Patriarchal  socialists  have  for- 


76/Quest 


gotten  that  the  Leninist  model  of  a 
vanguard  party  was  developed  to  "re- 
place a  part  of  the  historical  process 
by  conscious  intervention."^  That 
is,  it  was  developed  to  create  a  vehicle 
which  could  function  in  the  absence  of 
the  kind  of  political  education  which 
grows  from  the  experience  of  capitalist 
society. 

Luxemburg  argued  that  even  in 
nineteenth-century  Russia,  the  van- 
guard party  was  inappropriate,  since 
there  is  no  "ready  made,  pre-estab- 
lished, detailed  set  of  tactics  which  a 
central  committee  can  teach  its  mem- 
bership as  if  they  were  army  re- 
cruits."^ in  general,  the  tactics  of  a 
mass  party  cannot  be  invented.  They 
are  "the  product  of  a  progressive  series 
of  great  creative  acts  in  the  often  rudi- 
mentary experiments  of  the  class  strug- 


gle. Here  too,  the  unconscious  comes 
before  the  conscious.  .  .  ."26 

Organizations  and  Strategies 

Feminism,  while  it  does  not  pre- 
scribe an  organizational  form,  leads  to 
a  set  of  questions  about  organizational 
priorities.  First,  a  feminist  mode  of 
analysis  suggests  that  we  need  organi- 
zations that  include  theory-building  as 
the  appropriation  of  experience,  as  a 
part  of  the  work  of  the  organization 
itself.  We  need  systematically  to  ana- 
lyze what  we  learn  as  we  work  in  or- 
ganizations. Too  often,  we  have  left 
analysis  of  our  experience  to  small 
groups,  and  have  limited  ourselves  to 
understanding  the  relationship  between 
personal  experience  and  social  institu- 
tions. While  this  is  valuable,  we  need  to 


Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective/77 


develop  ways  to  appropriate  our  organi- 
zational experience  and  to  use  it  to 
transform  our  organizations  themselves. 
Some  feminist  organizations  are  begin- 
ning to  raise  questions  about  the  pro- 
cess of  meetings  or  about  the  way  work 
is  and  should  be  done.  But  because  so 
many  of  us  reacted  to  our  experience 
of  the  male  Left  organizations  by  refus- 
ing to  build  any  organizational  struc- 
tures at  all,  we  have  only  begun  to 
think  about  the  way  we  should  work 
in  organizations  with  some  structure, 
as  opposed  to  the  way  we  should  work 
in  small  groups. 

We  need  to  build  the  latitude  for 
change  and  growth  into  our  organiza- 
tions rather  than  rely  on  small  groups 
for  these  forces.  This  means  we  need 
systematically  to  teach  and  respect 
different  skills,  and  allow  our  organiza- 
tions to  change  and  grow  in  new  direc- 
tions. We  need  to  use  our  organizations 
as  places  where  we  begin  to  redefine 
the  social  relations  of  work,  where  we 
begin  to  live  as  whole  people.  We  can 
begin  now  to  create  new  ways  of 
working  which  do  not  follow  the  pat- 
terns of  domination  and  hierarchy  set 
by  the  mode  of  production  as  a  whole. 

In  terms  of  strategies,  we  can  begin 
to  make  coalitions  with  other  groups 
who  share  our  approach  to  politics. 
We  will  not  go  into  places  where  we 
do  not  work  to  pass  out  leaflets,  or  try 
to  bring  people  who  do  not  share  our 
experience  into  our  organizations  with- 
out changing  those  organizations  to 
take  account  of  and  respect  their  dif- 
ferences. We  cannot  work  in  coalitions 
with  people  who  refuse  to  face  their 


responsibility  for  everyday  life,  with 
people  who  will  not  use  their  own 
experience  as  a  fundamental  basis  for 
knowledge,  with  people  who  refuse  to 
take  an  active  part  in  their  own 
existence.  We  cannot  work  with  those 
who  treat  theory  as  a  set  of  conclusions 
to  be  pasted  onto  reality,  and  who, 
out  of  their  own  moral  commitment, 
make  a  revolution  for  the  benefit  of 
their  "inferiors." 

As  feminists,  we  must  work  on  is- 
sues which  are  real  for  us,  which  have 
real  impact  on  daily  life.  These  issues 
can  vary-housing,  public  transporta- 
tion, inflation,  food  prices  and  short- 
ages, to  name  a  few.  We  can  work  on 
these  issues  either  with  women  only, 
or  in  coalitions  including  men.  So  long 
as  others  in  the  coalition  share  our 
method,  and  so  long  as  those  we  work 
with  are  working  for  change  out  of 
necessity  (because  they,  like  us,  have 
no  alternative),  there  is  a  real  basis  for 
coalition. 

As  we  work  on  particular  issues,  we 


RT 


: A  JOURNAL  OF 
"RADICAL  THERAPY 

FORMERLY 
ROUGH  TIMES  and  THE  RADICAL  THERAPIST 

articles,   poetry,   analysis,  ideas,  and  news  of 
the  growing  mental  health  movement 
work ii ig  towards  human  liberation 


RT,   PO.  BOX  89,  W.  SOMERVILLE,  MASS. 

02144 


name  . 
street , 
city 


O  subscriptions  (8  issues)  $6      O foreign  $10 
O  current  issue    $.75 


ISlQuest 


must  continually  ask  how  we  can  use 
these  issues  to  build  our  collective 
power.  We  must  ask  how  our  work  will 
help  to  educate  ourselves  and  others  to 
see  the  connections  and  interactions 
among  social  institutions.  Finally,  we 
must  ask  how  work  in  a  particular 
area  weakens  the  institutions  which 
structure  our  lives  and  how  our  work 
uses  the  processes  which  define  our 
society  to  change  it.27 

Conclusion 

Feminism  makes  us  recognize  that 
struggle  itself  must  be  seen  as  a  process. 
We  must  avoid,  on  the  one  hand, 
developing  a  narrow,  sectarian  outlook, 
and  on  the  other,  abandoning  our  goal 
of  revolution.  We  must  continue  to 
base  our  work  on  the  necessity  for 
change  in  our  lives.  Our  political 
theorizing  can  only  grow  out  of  ap- 
propriating the  work  we  have  done. 
While  the  answers  to  our  questions 
can  only  come  slowly  and  with  diffi- 
culty, we  must  remember  that  we  are 
involved  in  a  continuous  process  of 
learning  what  kind  of  world  we  want 
to  create  as  we  work  for  change. 


Footnotes 

^ "Lesbianism  and  Socialist  Feminism" 
(paper  read  at  the  Socialist  Feminist  Confer- 
ence, July,  1975,  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio), 
p.   1.   (Mimeographed.) 

^"Building  Our  Movement  and  Relating 
to  the  Autonomous  Women's  Movement" 
(paper  read  at  the  Socialist  Feminist  Con- 
ference, July,  1975,  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio), 


p.  2.  (Mimeographed.) 

^"Alphabet  Soup:  Or,  Working  With 
Mixed  Left  and  Anti-Imperialist  Groups" 
(paper  read  at  the  Socialist  Feminist  Con- 
ference, July,  1975,  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio), 
p.  1.  (Mimeographed.) 

^Karl  Marx,  "Theses  on  Feuerbach," 
in  Karl  Marx  and  Frederick  Engels,  The 
German  Ideology,  ed.  C.  J.  Arthur  (New 
York:  International  Publishers,  1970),  p  121. 

Son  the  inaccuracy  of  this  account  of 
Marx's  theory,  see  Georg  Lukacs,  "What  is 
Orthodox  Marxism,"  History  and  Class  Con- 
sciousness (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press, 
1971),    p.    8. 

bibid.,  p.  1. 

?On  this  point,  compare  Karl  Marx, 
Economic  and  Philosophic  Manuscripts  of 
1844,  ed.  Dirk  Struik  (New  York:  Interna- 
tional Publishers,  1964),  p.  140;  and  An- 
tonio Gramsci,  Selections  From  the  Prison 
Notebooks,  tr.  Quinton  Hoare  and  Geoffrey 
Nowell  Smith  (New  York:  International 
Publishers,    1971),    p.    324. 

^Karl  Marx,  "Theses  on  Feuerbach," 
op.    cit.,    p.    121. 

^Ibid.,  passim.  See  also  Gramsci,  Selec- 
tions, op.  cit.,  p.  360. 

l^See  Gramsci,  Selections,  op.  cit,, 
p.    352,    on    this    point. 

UMarx  and  Engels,  The  German  Ideol- 
ogy, op  cit.,  p.  59. 

l^Marx,  1844  Manuscripts,  op.  cit., 
p.  141.  See  also  Karl  Marx,  Grundrisse,  tr. 
Martin  Nicholaus  (Middlesex,  England:  Pen- 
guin Books,  1973),  p.  162. 

l^Marx,  "Theses  on  Feuerbach,"  op. 
cit.,    p.    121. 

14Karl  Marx,  Capital,  VoL  I  (Moscow: 
Foreign  Language  Publishing  House,  1954), 
p.  20. 

l^Marx,  1844  Manuscripts,  op.  cit., 
p.    119. 

l"See  Lukacs,  op.  cit.,  p.  13. 

Wlbid. 

l^Marx  and  Engels,  The  German  Ideolo- 
gy, op.  cit.,  p.  114. 

l^Karl  Marx,  Selected  Writings  in  Soci- 
ology   and    Social    Philosophy,    tr.    T.    B. 


Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective/79 


Bottomore  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1956), 
p.  232. 

20Gramsci,  op.  cit.,  p.  326. 

21Ibid\,  p.  344. 

22on  this  point,  compare  Marx,  "Theses 
on  Feuerbach,"  op.  cit.,  p.  122. 

23i  have  described  this  at  greater  length 
in  Nancy  Hartsock,  "Political  Change:  Two 
Perspectives  on  Power,"  Quest:  a  feminist 
quarterly,  I:  1,  Summer,  1974,  pp.  10-25. 

24Rosa  Luxemburg,  "Organizational 
Questions  of  Russian  Social  Democracy," 
Selected  Writings  of  Rosa  Luxemburg,  ed. 
Dick  Howard  (New  York:  Monthly  Review 
Press),  p.  285. 


25/bid,  p.  289. 

^IbicL,  p.  293. 

^Criteria  for  choosing  strategies  are 
discussed  more  extensively  in  Charlotte 
Bunch,  "The  Reform  Tool  Kit,"  and  Hart- 
sock,  "Political  Change,"  Quest:  a  feminist 
quarterly,  I:  1,  Summer,  1974. 


Nancy  Hartsock  is  an  assistant  pro- 
fessor of  political  science  at  the  Johns 
Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  Mary- 
land. 


SO/Quest 


Notes  for  prospective  contributors 

We  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling  material 
for  each  issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off  the 
presses,  a  small  development  committee  prepares  a  list  of  ques- 
tions and  ideas  which  we  hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  This 
list  is  available  to  anyone  who  is  considering  submitting  ideas  for 
the  issue,  outlines  for  potential  articles,  manuscripts,  poetry,  gra- 
phics, etc.  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out  writers  and 
artists  known  to  have  definitive  political  perspectives  on  issues 
related  to  the  theme. 

All  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members.  If  it  is  not 
appropriate  for  Quest  purposes  the  manuscript  or  graphic  will  be 
returned  to  the  author.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered,  it  is 
then  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible  for 
working  with  the  author  through  whatever  processes  of  rewriting 
and  editing  required.  This  process  includes  soliciting  comments  and 
suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and  Advisory  Committee 
members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review 
before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8V2  by  11  paper,  using 
a  black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy). 
Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10  type- 
written pages)  for  reviews,  responses  and  short  articles,  to, 
at  most,  7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where 
appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  collected  and 
typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manu- 
scripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  are  requested.  For  information 
concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspondence 
to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


future  issues 

ORGANIZATIONS  and  STRATEGIES 
Winter,  1975-76  vol.  II  no.  3 

Organizations  and  Strategies  picks  up  where  Theories  of  Revolution 
left  off— on  the  relationships  between  our  priorities,  needs  and  ideology 
and  our  actions.  Areas  for  articles  include:  how  to  measure  success  and 
effectiveness  of  an  organization;  how  to  build  coalitions;  what  is  the  role 
of  political  parties,  national  groups,  community  organizing  and  other 
forms  of  networks;  how  will  feminist  programming  deal  with  race  and 
economic  conditions?  Copy  Deadline:  September  1,  1975 

LEADERSHIP 

Spring,  1976  vol.  II    no.  4 

Leadership  is  vital  to  achieving  social  change*  but  we  need  to  examine 
the  role  and  function  of  leaders  in  a  feminist  movement.  Areas  for 
articles  include:  concepts,  types  and  problems  of  leadership;  how  to 
achieve  collectivjty  and  accountability  without  destroying  initiative  and 
imagination;  problems  of  fame  and  public  recognition;  the  process  of 
training,  sharing  and  developing  skills  that  create  more  and  stronger 
leaders.  Copy  Deadline:  November  15,  1975 

KALEIDOSCOPE  ONE 

Summer,  1976  vol.  Ill  no.l 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  two  years  of  publication  and 
for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics 
and  ideas  that  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous 
articles.  Copy  Deadline:  February  15,  1976 

COMMUNICATION  and  CONTROL 

Fall,  1976  vol.   Ill  no.  2 

The  selection  and  transmission  of  information  is  an  index  to  power 
in  mass  society:  feminists  must  analyze  how  this  power  affects  women 
and  determine  how  we  can  use  it  to  better  political  effect.  Areas  for  ar- 
ticles include:  the  role  and  functions  of  the  media  in  our  society;  com- 
munication and  art;  communication  and  political  organization;  feminist 
forms  of  communication.  Copy  Deadline:  May  15,  1976 


