$2.00 


quarterly 


ORGANIZATIONS 
and    STRATEGIES 


/^"XT   TT^fl'T'  vol.  lino.  3 

V^UJiO    1  Winter,  1976 

a  feminist  quarterly 
ORGANIZATIONS 

and    STRATEGIES 

contents 

FEMINISM  in  ACTION 

Karen  Kollias  2 

ALTERNATIVES  to  INDIVIDUALISM 

Jean  Elshtain  8 

TAKING  OUR  FUTURE  SERIOUSLY 

Joan  Rothschild  17 

REASSESSING  BASICS 

Karen  Browne  31 

REPORT  to  OUR  READERS,  Part  I 

Quest  Staff  38 

USE  and  MISUSE  of  COALITIONS 

Sandra  Flowers  44 

COME  OUT  SLUGGING! 

Vicki  Gabriner  52 

DESIGNS  for  INCOME  SHARING 

Caroline  Sparks,  Bat-Ami  Bar-On  and  Cherlyn  B.  Paul      58 

ORGANIZING   for    IMPACT 

Liz  O 'Sullivan  68 

Copyright  ©  1976  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All 
rights  reserved.  Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  pro- 
hibited. Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in 
January,  April,  July,  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly, 
Inc.,  1909  Que  St.,  N.W.  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Applica- 
tion to  mail  at  second-class  postage  rates  is  pending  at  Washington 
D.C.  Quest  is  a  tax-exempt,  non-profit  organization. 

Printed  by  Diana  Press,  Baltimore,  Maryland,  U.S.A.  Effective 
March  15,  1976  subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to 
individuals;  $10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  over- 
seas surface,  $14.50/ycar  overseas  air;  $15.00/year  to  institutions; 
$2.75  and  .35  postage  and  handling/single  issues.  Address  all  cor- 
respondence to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843, 
Washington,  D.C.  20003.  Bulk  rates  available  upon  request. 
Advertising    rates    and    deadlines    available    upon    request. 


staff 


Copy  Editor 

Charlotte  Bunch 
Managing  Editor 

Beverly  Fisher 
Design  Editor 

Alexa  Freeman 
Promotion  Editor 

Karen  Kollias 
Editors 

Jane  Dolkart 

Nancy  Hartsock 

Mary-Helen  Mautner 

Sidney  Oliver 

Gerri  Traina 

assistants 

Denise  Burch 
Sandra  Flowers 
Liz  Frazer 
Prudence  MacKinney 

Linda  McGonigal 
Margaret  Streitenberger 
Cricket  Whipple 


Cover  design  by 
Casey  Czarnik 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministqua23wash 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth 
feminist  political  analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is 
not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the 
women's  movement  possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as 
regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization  or  a  poli- 
tical party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the 
movement  for  several  years  and  have  reached  a  point  where  each 
answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have  been  through  various 
ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle 
brought  us?  Closer  to  real  economic,  political,  and  social  power 
for  women?  Closer  to  an  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence 
against  women?  Closer  to  self-determination  for  all  women?  We  do 
not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect  that  feminists  across 
the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of  seeking. 


New  Prices 


Individuals  $9.00/year  4  issues 

Institutions  1 5. 00/ye  ar 

Single  Issues  2.75  +  .35  postage 

&  handling 

Canada/Mexico     $10. 00/year 
Overseas  11. 00/year  Surface 

14.50/year  Air 

Effective  March   15,   1976  with   orders  for 
Volume  II  Number  4,  "Leadership". 


graphic  by  Catherine  Leonardo 
g)  by  Catherine  Leonardo 


Feminism 


Action 


by  Karen  Kollias 

In  its  second  year,  Quest  presents  a 
series  of  interrelated  topics.  The  ques- 
tions raised  for  this  particular  issue 
feed  right  into  to  other,  major  feminist 
concerns,  whether  of  the  future,  of 
leadership,  or  of  political  theory.  First, 
for  example,  there  is  a  relationship 
between  a  group's  goals,  visions  and 
politics,  and  what  it  does  and  how  its 
processes  are  established.  Second,  an 
organization  will  either  produce  strong 
individual  leadership,  collective  leader- 
ship, or  no  leaders  at  all;  many  organi- 
zations become  too  dependent  on 
leadership  and  are  rendered  ineffective, 
or  on  the  other  hand,  stifle  true  leader- 
ship supposedly  in  the  interests  of  the 
whole  group.  Third,  there  are  groups 
which  have  developed  ideologies  and 
theories  without  any  real  means  for 
implementation-or  on  the  other  hand, 
programs  and  strategies  for  specific 
tasks  which  lack  any  governing  poli: 
tical  analysis  of  either  the  problems  or 
the  situations  involved.  And  fourth, 
there  are  huge  gaps  between  our  future 
visions  and  our  actual  present  strategies 
-primarily    due    to    our    inability    to 


graphic  by  A  lexa  Freeman 

assess  effectively  the  relationship  be- 
tween how  much  change  and  what 
kind,  occurs  as  a  result  of  various 
feminist   activities. 

This  issue,  "Organizations  and  Stra- 
tegies," is  part  of  the  continuing  pro- 
cess of  examining  our  major  concerns 
as  feminists;  it  is  an  approach  to  our 
theories,  our  development  of  leaders, 
and  our  future.  Quest  does  not  pretend 
to  have  answers  to  all  our  questions, 
nor  do  we  even  have  a  handle  on  all  the 
questions  which  need  to  be  asked. 
However,  we  do  wish  to  provide  a 
forum  in  which  more  analysis  and 
evaluation  can  occur,  hopefully  lead- 
ing to  greater  coordination  and  more 
effective  implementation  of  our  goals. 

It  is  useful  to  note  the  climate  in 
which  we  chose  to  do  this  issue.  Socie- 
ty is  suffering  from  widespread  cyni- 
cism and  confusion;  people  are  feeling 
more  powerless  and  alienated  than 
ever  from  the  political  institutions 
which  govern  us.  There  is  a  growing 
mistrust  of  any  form  of  structure  or 
system  which  pretends  to  be  of  service 
to  us-e.g.,  the  White  House.  For  the 


2/ Quest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


first  time  in  history,  we  have  both  a 
President  and  a  Vice-President  who 
were  not  elected  by  the  people-re- 
gardless of  how  the  voting  procedure  is 
defined.  In  addition,  no  real  national 
leaders  are  emerging-particularly  of  the 
kind  who  represent  many  of  our  real 
concerns. 

It  is  important  for  feminists  to 
understand  this  national  mood,  espe- 
cially since  many  of  us  believe  that  we 
need  more  organizational  structure  to 
provide  our  activities  with  more  coor- 
dination and  more  visibility.  We  must 
bear  in  mind,  that  creating  such  an 
organization  is  never  an  easy  task— let 
alone  convincing  people  at  this  time 
that  the  systems  and  solutions  we  offer 
are  different,  more  responsive  and 
workable.  We  must  convince  ourselves 
first.  Moreover,  we  have  to  be  able  to 
understand  what  problems  are  being 
perceived  by  whom  as  feminist  con- 
cerns, and  we  must  understand  the  im- 
portance of  timing  as  it  becomes  clear- 
er that  there  is  a  necessity  for  funda- 
mental structural  change.  And  finally, 
if  women's  groups  are  to  achieve  more 
responsive  alternatives  and  a  redistribu- 
tion of  power  and  wealth,  then  we 
must  understand  why  distrust  develops, 
why  leadership  falls  apart,  and  be  able 
to  show  what  will  make  our  structural 
changes  and  solutions  both  different 
and  successful. 

While  some  hoped  that  the  Water- 
gate revelations  would  spur  on  greater 
movement  activity,  the  majority  of 
"left-to-liberal"  organizations  have 
been  relatively  inactive.  There  are  some 
national    issues    (with    local    impact), 


however,  that  affect  a  great  number  of 
people:  the  economic  crisis,  unemploy- 
ment, negative  attention  to  welfare 
and  childcare  programs,  and  so  on. 
But  what  little  movement  action  has 
occurred  around  these  events  has  been 
led  primarily  not  by  feminist  groups, 
but  by  civil  rights  and  black  militant 
organizations.  They  have  taken  on 
economic  issues  as  their  goals,  not  only 
as  a  means  for  gaining  power,  but  also 
out  of  necessity-for  survival.  Of  course 
there  are  other  issues  which  haven't 
been  raised  here,  but  the  point  is, 
where  have  feminists  been  lately? 

Structural  Trends  in 
the  Women's  Movement 

The  women's  movement  has  been 
steadily  growing  and  is  made  up  of 
many  groups  which  call  themselves 
feminist— yet  which  are  marked  by 
distinctly  different  purposes  and  meth- 
ods of  action.  Feminists  these  days 
include  women  real-estate  speculators, 
women  taking  karate,  bankers,  single 
women,  professors  of  feminist  studies, 
movie  actresses  playing  strong-woman 
roles-and  those  who  use  ERA  liquid 
detergent.  This  is  the  commercial  defi- 
nition of  the  movement.  I  however, 
define  it  differently,  and  would  also 
include  welfare  mothers,  working  wom- 
en, women  active  in  their  neighbor- 
hoods through  networks  like  PTA, 
consumer  groups,  tenants  groups  and 
the  like,  who  provide  examples  of 
strong  female  leadership.  While  they 
are  not  often  identified  as  feminists, 
their  impact  on  our  growth,  goals  and 


Feminism  in  Action/3 


direction  cannot  be  overlooked. 

Since  the  1960s  when  feminist  acti- 
vity began  its  steady  growth,  we  have 
not  given  enough  attention  to  the 
nature  of  our  organizations,  strategies 
and  structures,  or  to  the  realism  of  our 
demands.  There  are  still  important 
questions  about  whether  "feminism" 
is  an  ideology,  lifestyle,  or  process; 
apparently,  in  some  ways,  it  is  all 
these.  The  strengths  and  weaknesses  of 
these  different  characteristics  have  yet 
to  be  determined,  but  given  them,  we 
must  zero  in  on  their  implications  for 
organization  and  strategy,  and  define 
what  it  is  that  makes  them  "feminist." 

Since  the  early  'seventies,  sever- 
al basic  kinds  of  feminist  groups  have 
emerged;  three  of  the  major  ones  will 
be  examined  briefly  here.  First,  there 
are  the  cultural  and  separatist  feminists 
who  integrate  their  personal  lives  and 
their  political  activity.  Much  of  their 
attention  has  been  given  to  developing 
a  "women's  culture"  and  "women's 
community,"  and  their  political  analy- 
sis and  subsequent  strategies  have 
moved  toward  the  development  of 
women's  economic  self-sufficiency  and 
independence  from  male-dominated 
(and  primarily  heterosexual)  institu- 
tions. 

In  other  words,  their  relationship  to 
strategies  for  change  has  been  primarily 
at  the  personal  level.  Large  numbers  of 
women,  because  of  the  impact  of 
economic  self-sufficiency  and  com- 
munity, have  been  able  actively  to 
come  out  as  lesbians;  additional  choices 
for  lifestyles  have  opened  up,  and 
many  mechanisms  and  alternative  pro- 


grams have  been  created  to  support 
these  changes.  Business  activities  and 
advances  in  the  arts,  literature,  music, 
and  so  on,  have  been  met  with  enthu- 
siasm, and  the  politics  of  gaining  con- 
trol and  feeling  strong  about  one's  own 
life  has  been  a  major  element  of  the 
strategies  carried  out  by  such  groups. 

But  while  cultural  and  political 
separatist  groups  have  been  very  visible 
on  a  local  level  in  the  implementation 
of  self-sufficient  feminist  alternatives, 
they  have  devoted  only  minimal  efforts 
toward  national  coordination  and  the 
large-scale  organization  of  these  local 
communities.  These  groups  have  not 
advocated  changes  for  women  within 
today's  societal  framework.  They  have 
offered  no  alternatives  (except  for 
small,  self-sufficient  collectives)  for 
women  at  large,  nor  have  they  develop- 
ed large-scale  programs  for  recruiting 
or  appealing  to  other  women.  In  short, 
they  have  had  little  to  do  with  other 
forms  of  political  and  economic  change. 

Second,  socialist-feminist  groups 
and  others  who  identify  themselves  as 
feminists  and  work  with  male  left 
organizations  have  also  been  growing. 
They  have  some  things  in  common 
with  cultural  feminists-primarily  a- 
round  such  matters  as  feminist  alter- 
native services,  programs  and  coopera- 
tives. Some  of  these  groups  give  atten- 
tion to  their  local  communities,  through 
grassroots  and  worksite  organizing, 
and  their  personal  and  growth  needs 
are  usually  met  in  political  discussion 
groups.  But  the  relation  between  the 
socialist-feminist  organizations  and  sys- 
temic change  has  been  practically  non- 


4/Quest 


existent.  Again,  this  has  been  out  of 
choice;  they  do  not  believe  in  the  basic 
soundness  of  the  institutions  which 
govern  us.  Their  demands  cannot  be 
met  by  our  government-nor  are  they 
meant  to  be.  For  whatever  value  this 
provides,  much  of  their  impact  is  lost 
on  the  public,  since  their  demands  are 
notoriously  slow  in  being  met  and 
rarely  offer  interim  improvements.  Be- 
sides, many  of  the  ideas,  directions  and 
politics  which  come  out  of  their  dis- 
cussion groups  have  not  been  tested. 
In  fact  the  greatest  weakness  here  has 
been  the  lack  of  strategies  for  attract- 
ing women  on  a  larger  scale.  There 
seems  to  be  more  emphasis  on  living  as 
"good  socialists"  rather  than  on  con- 
fronting many  of  the  problems  that 
women  face  daily  because  of  patriar- 
chal realities. 

Finally,  in  terms  of  organization, 
the  majority  of  socialist-feminist  groups 
operate  as  either  political  discussion 
groups,  women's  caucuses  in  the  male- 
dominated  left,  or  as  splinters  from 
other  organizations.  With  few  actions 
or  programs  to  make  them  more  visible, 
socialist-feminists  are  the  least  known 
and  the  most  isolated  group  in  the 
women's  movement.  Their  structures 
and  their  origins  thus  far  have  imposed 
serious  limitations  on  their  ability  to 
create  real  change. 

The  third  group,  the  reformist  wing 
of  the  women's  movement,  is  the 
most  visible  and  best  organized  of 
feminist  groups.  They  provide  the  only 
nationally-recognizable  organizations 
to  serve  the  needs  of  women,  But 
most  of  their  strategies  can  be  absorb- 


ed by  the  government;  they  are  meant 
to  be.  Reformist  actions  and  directions 
are  geared  toward  specific  issues  and 
their  major  tactics  for  change  include 
legislation,  hearings,  suits  and  other 
one-shot  approaches.  On  the  whole, 
the  reformist  organizations  are  primar- 
ily concerned  with  making  existing  in- 
stitutions (both  public  and  private) 
more  responsive  to  women.  As  a  result, 
there  are  limits  to  the  kinds  of  changes 
women  can  achieve  through  them. 
They  generally  do  not  see  much  beyond 
what  we've  got  here  and  now,  and 
while  the  reform  perspective  is  desir- 
able for  some  women,  it  is  not  ade- 
quate for  meeting  the  needs  of  others. 
All  too  often,  these  groups  are  trapped 
into  seeing  reform  as  an  end  in  itself. 

Despite  the  diversity  in  and  the 
problems  of  the  women's  movement, 
there  have  been  concrete  results:  a 
variety  of  publications;  credit  unions 
and  women's  banks;  women's  studies 
programs  and  political  discussion 
groups;  alternative  women's  businesses; 
women's  centers;  rape  crisis  centers; 
more  turf  for  lesbians;  homes  for  bat- 
tered wives;  child  care  centers;  con- 
tinuing education  for  women;  asser- 
tiveness  training  and  leadership  -devel- 
opment, and  collectives  for  every  de- 
sired life-style,  politics  or  project. 
Attitudinal  changes,  while  harder  to 
measure,  have  also  occurred,  as  have 
programmatic  changes  and  legislative 
revisions,  and  all  of  these  have  been 
possible  through  the  efforts  of  the 
women's  movement.  But  though  a 
great  deal  has  been  achieved,  much 
more  remains  to  be  done. 


Feminism  in  Action/  5 


"Organizations  and  Strategies" 

The  articles  presented  in  this  issue 
cover  a  wide  area.  There  are  discussions 
of  specific  strategies  for  feminists 
(income-sharing,  coalition-building  and 
athletic  activities),  as  well  as  evaluations 
of  larger  theoretical  frameworks  for 
directing  specific  tactics,  and  the  use- 
fulness of  short-  and  long-term  actions 
and  goals. 

One  issue  raised  in  some  of  the 
articles  is  the  relationship  of  the  indi- 
vidual to  various  organizations  and 
strategies.  Elshtain  cautions  against 
strategies  which  offer  only  personal 
solutions  and  fail  to  touch  on  the 
institutions  which  have  created  and 
supported  the  very  problems  confront- 
ing all  women.  Gabriner  discusses  the 
capacity  for  personal  change  and  poli- 
tical exposure  in  athletic  activities, 
and  describes  how  recreational  organi- 
zations (which  we  often  dismiss  as  not 
serious)  help  strengthen  women's  self- 
concepts. 

Two  additional  issues  which  open 
more  extensive  discussion  for  the  fu- 
ture are  the  relationship  between  stra- 
tegies and  the  capacity  for  change, 
and  strategies  as  they  affect  today's 
situations  and  tomorrow's  directions. 
Both  Flowers  and  O' Sullivan  discuss 
how  various  groups  (whether  they  dif- 
fer in  strategic  preferences  or  in  poli- 
tical analysis)  can  work  both  separately 
and  together  around  common  issues. 
Through  her  research  and  personal 
experience  in  the  area  of  rape  preven- 
tion and  care,  O'Sullivan  exposes  in 
general    terms    a    wide   parameter   of 


change  possibilities,  emphasizing  the 
need  to  develop  processes  which  will 
most  effectively  utilize,  direct  and  co- 
ordinate the  different  approaches  to 
making  progress  around  women's  con- 
cerns. And  as  Rothschild  notes,  just  as 
feminist  strategies  and  organizations 
should  not  be  without  a  political 
framework,  they  should  have  the  capa- 
city to  expand  to  meet  the  future  and 
to  outline  new  directions. 

Looking  ahead,  we  as  feminists 
should  give  more  attention  to  the 
development  of  our  organizations;  the 
relationship  between  the  kinds  of  stra- 
tegies we  choose  and  the  kinds  of 
changes  which  result;  toward  streng- 
thening the  legitimacy  and  visibility 
of  the  feminist  movement,  and  to  de- 
termining what  actions  and  organiza- 
tions can  best  meet  the  differing- 
as  well  as  common-needs  of  women. 
And  certain  questions  need  to  be 
asked  in  evaluating  our  future  direc- 
tions, including,  for  example,  ques- 
tions such  as:  What  are  "feminist" 
issues?  How  do  certain  needs-basically 
economic  ones  affecting  large  groups 
of  women-tie  in  with  activist  feminism? 
Which  strategies  and  organizations  hold 
women  together?  What  "feminist  char- 
acteristics" are  there  in  the  processes 
and  strategies  of  such  groups?  And 
how  can  existing  women's  groups  pres- 
ently in  the  business  of  determining 
what  "feminist  structures"  are,  be 
adopted  on  a  wider  scale? 

Perhaps  most  important,  there  must 
be  a  clearer  understanding  of  long- 
term  and  immediate  goals  and  how 
they  affect  the  strategies  we  choose. 


6/Quest 


For  example,  while  ideology  might 
prevent  some  women's  groups  from 
undertaking  certain  kinds  of  action  on 
the  long  term,  these  groups  may  never- 
theless participate  in  such  actions  for 
their  short-term  goals.  We  need  to 
know  how  certain  issues  interrelate, 
and  how  this  interrelationship  can  be 
clarified  and  utilized  in  our  actions. 
And  along  this  same  vein,  we  must 
understand  and  identify  those  actions 
which  benefit  certain  groups  of  wom- 
en and  yet  have  detrimental  effects  on 
others.  These  are  mistakes  we  cannot 
afford  to  make— now  or  ever.  Finally, 
we  must  give  real  attention  to  com- 
munications and  resources  networks 
in  the  movement,  since  growth  is  con- 
tinuous, and  by  definition,  means 
change.  This  is  especially  important 
since  women  are  forming  different 
kinds  of  groups  around  their  particular 


needs.  Communication  also  lends  itself 
to  examining  how  we  tie  local  feminist 
efforts  into  a  national  framework,  as 
well  as  how  we  can  make  national  ef- 
forts more  responsive  to  local  needs. 
In  summary,  we  need  more  understand- 
ing of  the  relationship  between  leader- 
ship, organization,  political  ideology 
and  strategy. 

If  we  are  truly  a  women's  move- 
ment, our  representation  as  well  as 
our  actions,  directions  and  goals  must 
reflect  our  diversity  and  our  perma- 
nence. Quest's  function,  here  and  in 
other  issues,  is  to  help  in  the  develop- 
ment of  strategies  and  organizations 
that  lead  to  this  objective. 

Karen  Kollias,  Promotion  Editor 
for  Quest,  works  as  a  policy  analyst 
at  the  National  Center  for  Urban  Eth- 
nic Affairs,  Washington,  DC. 


Feminism  in  Action/7 


Alternatives  to  Individualism 


by  Jean  Els h tain 

graphic  by  Nan  Mot  an 


I  hope  to  defend  what  I  take  to  be 
a  crucial  link  between  theory  and 
strategy.  The  connection  is  always  pre- 
sent. It  can  remain  an  implicit,  un- 
examined set  of  assumptions  in  a  per- 
spective encouraging  social  change.  Or 
it  can  be  examined  as  part  of  an  effort 
to  defend  a  feminist  position  from  the 


inside  out.  A  feminist  perspective— 
whether  it  is  radical,  liberal,  or  Marxist- 
is  a  theoretical  position.  Marx  is  re- 
ported to  have  said:  "Reality  does  not 
stalk  about  with  a  label."  I  take  this  to 
mean  that  the  "facts"  of  women's  op- 
pression may  be  explored  within  a 
number  of  competing  theories.  This 
makes  it  essential  to  set  forth  the 
grounding  for  one's  own  feminist 
theory.  Those  who  believe  they  are  on- 
ly laying  out  the  "facts"  will  be  less 
capable  of  defending  their  positions  to 


%l Quest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


others  who  may  have  clarified  all  the 
interrelated  elements  within  their  own 
perspectives. 

Proposed  solutions  to  sex  inequality 
run  the  gamut  from  what  R.D.  Laing 
has  termed  the  individual  pirouette  of 
change  and  repentence  to  total  and 
immediate  social  revolution.  I  will  ex- 
plore these  disparate  approaches  as  well 
as  some  which  lie  between. 

Abstract  Individualism 

I  begin  with  those  theorists  who 
would  consign  the  "problem  of  wom- 
en" in  modern  industrial  society  ulti- 
mately to  woman  herself  (or  "nature"). 
This  assumption  is  that  there  are  cer- 
tain simple  ways  to  change  the  world: 
one  "transforms"  individuals  and  they 
in  turn  restructure  the  societies  in 
which  they  live  and  work.  This  is,  at 
first  glance,  an  appealing  notion.  But 
let's  look  at  it  more  closely. 

The  basic  premise  in  this  first  view 
is  that  society  serves  instrumental  pur- 
poses and  is  no  more  than  the  sum  of 
its  individual  parts.  It  follows  that  if 
the  individuals  which  comprise  the 
social  aggregate  are  altered,  a  new 
society,  by  definition,  is  ushered  into 
being.  The  theoretical  grounding  of 
these  suppositions  is  a  feminist  variant 
on  the  abstract,  atomistic  individual, 
who  has  dominated  Western  political 
thought  (and  life)  from  the  time  of 
Hobbes  and  Locke.  I  term  this  ap- 
proach the  individualist  fallacy.  The 
mode  of  analysis  deployed  by  those 
who  have  adopted  this  perspective  is 
best  described  as  abstract  individualism. 


Criticism  of  the  individualist  ap- 
proach does  not  mean  that  one  is 
committed  to  the  view  that  individual 
change,  even  repentance ,  is  either  im- 
possible or  undesirable.  But  it  does 
mean  that  one  doubts  that  mass  indi- 
vidual change,  a  sudden  and  rapid  al- 
teration in  the  way  the  vast  majority 
of  persons  of  either  sex  view  them- 
selves and  their  world  is  probable 
(even  if  desirable).  Locating  the  "pro- 
blem" in  individuals  or  in  intimate  re- 
lations between  the  sexes  encourages 
a  through-going  collapse  of  the  "per- 
sonal" into  an  all-encompassing  diffuse 
category  labeled  the  'political'.  Im- 
portant distinctions  and  contradictions 
are  obscured  and  a  viable  collective 
strategy  is  undermined.  Abstract  indi- 
vidualists either  ignore  or  forget  a  funda- 
mental point  in  dialectical  and  phenom- 
enological  analysis:  that  a  part  is  a  part 
only  in  relation  to  a  whole.  1  Neither 
individuals  nor  dyads  can  be  abstracted 
out  of  their  particular  socio-historical 
reality. 

The  point  is  this:  a  political  move- 
ment, in  creating  a  viable  strategy,  can- 
not rest  its  hopes  on  the  possibilities 
for  sudden,  large  scale,  individual 
change.  Dramatic  changes  in  conscious- 
ness do  occur  but  an  effort  which  is  a 
political  effort  must  focus  on  a  social 
or  collective  strategy.  This  strategy 
may  very  well  include  consciousness- 
raising:  indeed,  I  assume  that  individ- 
uals are  changed  during  the  course  of  a 
political  struggle.  Thought  and  action, 
theory  and  practice,  coexist  in  a  dia- 
lectical relationship.  Small  group  con- 
sciousness-raising can  be  a  constitutent 


Alternatives  to  Individualism/9 


element  in  social  transformation  if  it  is 
not  viewed  as  an  end  in  itself,  but  is 
seen  as  a  means  to  encourage  and  to 
support  critical  awareness,  including 
knowledge  of  the  structural  nature  of 
sex,  race,  and  class  inequality. 

Individualist  strategies  have  no  long- 
term  strategic  vision.  Instead  isolated 
women  are  urged  to  "do"  certain  things 
on  their  own  in  order  to  destroy  the 
"roots"  of  women's  oppression.  Femi- 
nist analysts  have  argued  that  there 
"cannot  be  a  real  restructuring  of  this 
society  until  relationships  between  the 
sexes  are  restructured. "2  How  is  this 
restructuring  to  come  about?  Women 
are  urged  to  stop  buying  cosmetics, 
cease  following  fashion,  reclaim  their 
maiden  names,  break  out  of  "neurotic 
syndromes",  and  stop  reading  women's 
magazines. 3  Somehow  the  totality  of 
these  efforts  will  transform  the  rela- 
tionships between  men  and  women, 
which  will,  in  turn,  lead  to  the  recon- 
struction of  society. 

The  attraction  of  individualist  strat- 
egies is  that  they  are  straight-forward. 

The  argument  is  not  unlike  the  many 
individualist  "solutions"  to  the  ecology 
crisis:  people  are  urged  to  stop  bearing 
children,  to  re-use  paper  bags,  to  squash 
and  recycle  tin  cans,  and  so  on.  These 
efforts  are  fine  in  themselves  but  avid  eco- 
logical individualists  delude  themselves  and 
others  if  they  believe  that  we  can  turn  the 
corner  in  the  environmental  crisis  if  only 
enough  people  squashed  cans  and  recycled 
paper.  The  solution  doesn't  begin  to  touch 
the  chief  source  of  America's  pollution 
problems-our  wasteful,  giant  corporate  con- 
glomerates who  have  the  power  to  quash, 
delay,  and  refuse  to  implement  pollution 
control  measures. 


They  can  be  implemented  by  individ- 
uals acting  alone  or  in  small  groups, 
and  they  mesh  nicely  with  our  pre- 
dominant liberal  view  of  human  nature 
as  atomistic  rather  than  social.  They 
buttress  an  image  of  human  beings  as 
compartmentalizable  social  units  whose 
highest  aim  lies  in  the  quest  for  some 
abstract  "freedom."  But  individualist 
analyses  and  their  strategies  disallow  a 
feminist  perspective  that  focuses  on 
the  impoverishment  of  social  relations, 
political  inefficacy,  the  problems  of 
alienated  work  life,  the  erosion  of  the 
concepts  of  citizenship  and  commun- 
ity, and  the  structural  relationship 
between  capitalism  and  patriarchy. 


Abstract  Structures 

What  then  are  the  alternatives  to 
abstract  individualism?  Several  femi- 
nist theorists  have  attempted  a  middle 
way  by  exploring  the  range  of  institu- 


10/ Quest 


tions  or  processes  which  mediate  be- 
tween persons  and  the  society  as  a 
whole.  The  family,  of  course,  is  the 
'institution'  most  often  implicated  by 
feminists  as  both  a  source  of  women's 
oppression  and  therefore  an  arena  for 
reform.  Indeed,  if  the  family  is  both 
the  most  fundamental  form  of  social 
organization  and,  as  well,  is  implicated 
in  women's  oppression  it  would  seem, 
at  first  glance  to  make  sense  to  alter, 
reform,  or  eliminate  the  family.  But 
analyses  and  strategies  centered  on  the 
family  run  into  serious  theoretical, 
strategic,  and  moral  problems.  Ger- 
maine  Greer,  for  example,  indicts  the 
family  in  confiscating,  ironic  prose, 
but  when  discussing  strategies  for 
change  focused  on  the  family,  she 
simply  beats  a  hasty  retreat  to  individ- 
ualism. Women's  liberation,  Greer 
writes,  "if  it  abolishes  the  patriarchal 
family,  will  abolish  a  necessary  sub- 
structure of  the  authoritarian  state, 
and  once  that  withers  away  Marx  will 


Greer's  individualist  bias  is  so  strong 
that  she  cautions  women  against  fighting  for 
political  reform  or  joining  in  political  rebel- 
lion. She  urges  them  to  perpetrate  a  revolu- 
tion which  she  defines  as  the  "festival  of  the 
oppressed."  (Female  Eunuch,  p.  328,  em- 
phasis mine.)  At  this  point  her  analysis  is  no 
longer  merely  foolish;  it  is  cruel  Revolu- 
tions, violent  or  not,  are  not  Woodstock  writ 
large.  The  walls  of  Jericho  do  not  crumble 
at  the  sound  of  rock  bands.  Greer's  effron- 
tery in  suggesting  that  what  women  must 
do  to  be  "free"  is  to  hold  out  for  ecstasy 
(as  opposed  to  common,  everyday  orgasm) 
can  lead  only  to  a  sense  of  despair  and  lor 
incredulity.  In  whose  behalf  is  her  feminist 
dream  being  dreamt?  In  the  final  analysis 
Greer  is  simply  irrelevant. 


have  come  true  willy-nilly,  so  let's  get 
on  with  it."4  Get  on  with  what?  The 
individual  woman,  once  again,  is  to 
"get  on"  with  something  that  has  to  do 
with  destroying  the  family  in  the  as- 
surance that  the  'authoritarian  state' 
will  shortly  crumple.  Greer  assures  us, 
with  neither  historical  nor  theoretical 
grounding,  that  women's  liberation 
will  (she  doesn't  say  how)  abolish  the 
patriarchal  family  (maybe)  and  this,  in 
turn,  will  result  in  the  automatic  down- 
fall of  the  state  and  its  subsequent 
'withering.' 

Another  popular  'solution'  to  the 
oppression  of  domestic  life  is  the 
"marriage  contract."  A  marriage  con- 
tract divides  jobs  and  work  schedules 
in  an  equitable  fashion  so  that  the 
male/husband  is  as  involved  in  the  care 
of  children,  housework,  cooking,  shop- 
ping, cleaning,  and  so  on,  as  the 
female/wife.  It  is  viewed  as  a  means  to 
create  a  structured  sharing  of  respon- 
sibility within  a  family  milieu.  But  the 
marriage  contract  is  simply  another 
individual  solution  to  a  problem  which 
partakes  of  a  structural  dimension.  So- 
cial institutions  are  implicated  in  the 
inner  dynamics  of  family  life.  The  mar- 
riage contract  takes  no  systematic 
cognizance  of  structural  features.  There 
is  an  inherent  upper-middle  class  bias 
to  the  whole  business.  The  allotment 
of  jobs  and  responsibilities  is  feasible 
only  for  couples  in  urban  centers  who 
have  relatively  flexible  schedules  and 
above-average  incomes;  moreover,  the 
assumptions  built  into  the  marriage 
contract  are  wedded  (no  pun  intended!) 
to  the  notion  of  the  atomistic  individ- 


Alter natives  to  Individualism/ 11 


ual  and  to  relations  of  exchange  on  the 
most  intimate  level. 

One  final  proposal  for  undermining 
the  family  and  freeing  women  from 
the  heavy  burden  of  daily  child  care 
which  has  gained  widespread  support 
is  some  form  of  institutionalized  child 
care.  Dunbar,  for  example,  calls  for 
day-care  as  a  way  to  eliminate  "the 
private  family  ownership  of  children.''^ 
Feminists  theorists  and  strategists  who 
favor  such  moves  must  think  through 
quite  clearly  and  carefully  both  the 
moral  and  political  implications  of 
plans  which  urge  "full-time  day  care  in 
the  public  schools."  They  must  con- 
sider the  possible  repercussions  of  the 
notion  that  specialized  agencies  staffed 
by  "benevolent"  bureaucrats  especially 
"trained"  in  child-rearing  should  raise 
children  at  public  expense. 

Those  of  us  concerned  with  what 
persons  are  or  ought  to  be  (Marx's 
notion  of  species-life),  those  with  a 
social  view  of  human  nature,  must 
recognize  the  importance  of  childhood 
and  reject  as  purely  instrumentalist, 
and  therefore  morally  degenerate,  all 
"solutions"  to  marriage  and  the  family 
which  push  us  even  further  down  the 
road  towards  a  totalistic,  sterile  tech- 
nocracy with  children  as  the  "raw 
products"  for  the  system. 

My  argument  here  should  in  no  way 
be  construed  as  placing  me  in  opposition  to 
parent  controlled,  cooperative  child-care 
arrangements.  But  lam  unalterably  opposed, 
for  the  reasons  set  forth  above  and  on  the 
following  pages,  to  bureaucratized,  institu- 
tionalized child-care-particularly  if  it  is 
placed  in  the  hands  of  profit-makers  or  the 
state. 


If  we  are  agreed  that  the  family,  in 
some  way,  is  part  of  the  problem  for 
women,  how  can  we  integrate  concerns 
about  the  family  into  a  feminist  strate- 
gy for  change?  The  answer  lies  in  a 
structural  analysis. 

Feminists  must  exist,  as  both 
Mitchell  and  Rowbotham  have  argued, 
in  an  ambivalent  relationship  to  the 
family.  The  family  doesn't  just  "repro- 
duce the  labor  force"  as  certain  reduc- 
tionists would  have  it.  The  family  is 
also  an  arena  within  which,  however 
fitfully  and  inadequately,  the  onslaught 
of  modern  technocratic  totalism  can 
sometimes  be  withstood.  Eli  Zaretsky 
argues  that  the  family  serves  as  a  re- 
minder of  the  hope  that  "human  beings 
can  pass  beyond  a  life  dominated  by 
relations  of  production. "°  The  family 
does  represent  a  divergent  mode  of  re- 
lating to  human  beings-one  in  contra- 
distinction to  that  which  predominates 
in  the  marketplace.  Rowbotham,  per- 
haps, summarizes  it  best  when  she 
calls  the  family  a 

place  of  sanctuary  for  all  the  hunted, 
jaded,  exhausted  sentiments  out  of 
place  in  commodity  production.  .  .  . 
The  family  is  thus  in  one  sense  the 
dummy  ideal,  the  repository  of  ghost- 
ly substitutes,  emotional  fictions.  .  .  . 
But  this  distortion  of  human  relations 
still  represents  the  only  possibility  of 
personal  life.  The  family  is  the  only 
place  where  human  beings  find  what- 
ever continuing  love,  security  and  com- 
fort they  know.  7 

What  are  we  left  with,  then,  as  the 
focus  for  strategy  and  the  basis  for 
theory?    Given    the    overdetermined, 


12/Quest 


dialectical  interrelationship  of  the  pub- 
lic and  private,  the  political  and  the 
personal,  which  percolates  in  and 
through  the  social  system,  any  theory 
and  long-term  strategy  frozen  at  a  level 
of  complexity  beneath  the  systemic  is 
inadequate  to  the  tasks  at  hand.  Con- 
tributory elements  in  women's  oppres- 
sion can  be  isolated  at  a  level  beneath 
that  of  total  social  and  economic  or- 
ganization. But  individuals,  families, 
schools,  and  work-life  do  not  exist  a- 
part  from  the  whole. 8  Attempts  to 
slice  into  this  network  by  reformation 
of  either  individuals  or  micro-institu- 
tions alone  without  consideration  of 
their  necessary  internal  relations  to 
production  and  politics  are  doomed  to 
ultimate  failure  and  frustration. 


Respect  for  Persons 

What,  then,  is  to  be  done?  What  are 
the  implications  for  strategy  if  wom- 
en's oppression  is  an  ineluctable,  sys- 
tematic outgrowth  of  the  internal  rela- 
tions of  a  particular  mode  of  produc- 


tion, a  set  of  political  processes,  and 
the  legal,  political,  and  structural  com- 
ponents of  patriarchy?  The  overarching 
goal,  it  seems  to  me,  must  be  equality 
of  respect  and  treatment  grounded  in 
respect  for  persons.  This  is  not  equality 
under  the  law,  or  equal  rights,  or  equal- 
ity of  opportunity— all  of  which  are  not 
only  compatible  with,  but  at  present, 
serve  to  buttress  and  to  gloss  over  the 
systematic  nature  of  our  inegalitarian 
system.  Equality  of  respect  as  the  goal 
of  the  feminist  movement  does  not  im- 
ply some  Utopian  fantasy  of  total 
elimination  of  all  social,  political,  e- 
conomic,  and  sexual  distinctions,  but 
it  does  involve  a  set  of  social  and 
economic  arrangements  in  which  the 
range  between  those  at  the  bottom  and 
the  top,  between  black  and  white, 
between  male  and  female  is  narrowed 
dramatically;  it  does  involve  a  society 
in  which  all,  on  the  basis  of  need,  not 
putative  "merit,"  have  access  to  a  wide 
range  of  publicly  funded  social  ser- 
vices. 9 

As  I  have  pointed  out  elsewhere,  10 
it  is  only  within  the  framework  of  a 
socialist  feminist  perspective  that  one 
finds  a  coherent  recognition  that  indi- 
vidualist theories  of  feminism  and 
"equality  of  opportunity"  goals  (with 
corresponding  strategies)  are  readily 
assimilable  into  the  ongoing  system 
and  may,  ultimately,  only  widen  the 
gap  between  those  few  women  who 
"succeed"  and  the  many  more  who  do 
not.  A  feminist  theory  and  strategy 
aimed  at  equality  of  respect  opens 
possibilities  for  change  that  go  beyond 
the  market  system  and  that  may  there- 


Alternatives  to  Individualism/ 13 


by  serve,  in  the  words  of  Andre  Gorz, 
"to  bring  to  life  latent  needs  which 
society  has  repressed,  valid  for  every 
aspect  of  the  relation  of  the  individual 
to  his  work,  to  social  production,  and 
to  society  as  a  complex  environment 
of  natural  and  cultural  relationships."  1 1 
Given  the  enormity  of  the  changes 
sought,  those  feminists  with  a  struc- 
tural analysis  must  have  a  long-range 
strategy  for  change  which  is  wedded 
neither  to  traditional  pluralist  group- 
interest  politics  nor  to  hopes  for  a 
rapid,  cataclysmic  overturn  of  the 
present  system. 

The  inadequacies  of  pluralist  strate- 
gy are  readily  apparent.  Given  the 
politics  of  alienation,  one  must  not 
presume  that  by  simply  adding  to  the 
total  number  of  female  office-holders 
we  will  somehow  complete  the  femi- 
nist revolution  and  achieve  social  jus- 
tice. Women  should  certainly  run  for 
office.  But  those  who  do  should  be 
supported,  not  as  women,  but  as  per- 
sons who  may  work  for  a  just  society. 
(Many  a  monster  can  parade  as  a  femi- 
nist.) "Good  people"  in  positions  of 
power  will  not  usher  in  a  reconstructed 
society— collective  efforts  are  necessary 
to  that  end-but  such  persons  can  ease 
a  few  burdens  for  those  pressed  most 
severely    under    the    current    system. 

Feminists  who  espouse  total  rapid 
change  on  the  other  hand,  have  a 
structural  analysis,  but  have  rejected 
the  notion  of  a  long-term  strategy; 
instead  they  tend  to  seek  the  new  so- 
ciety through  a  "sudden  change  in  the 
societal  location  of  political  power."!  2 
Although  revolutionists  cast  their  gaze 


on  the  level  of  the  over-all  system,  the 
analysis  is  weak  in  at  least  one  crucial 
respect:  the  "system"  is  seen  as  an  un- 
differentiated, diffuse,  whole  which 
cannot  be  attacked  in  discriminate 
ways.  Long  term  strategies  for  social 
reconstruction  must  focus  on  the  in- 
ternal relations  of  each  element  in  the 
complex  tapestry  of  systematic  in- 
equality. The  concepts  with  which  we 
grasp  this  totality  are  critical.  If  we  see 
an  unmitigated  horror,  a  ubiquitous 
and  unalloyed  evil,  we  will  urge  that 
this  "thing"  be  destroyed  utterly  and 
at  once.  This  view  of  socio-political 
reality  is  highly  abstracted;  it  is  not 
grounded  in  the  politics  of  our  every- 
day lives  in  which  we  do  interact  with 
and  confront  specific  institutions,  pro- 
cesses, and  situations.  We  can  under- 
stand this  whole  by  deploying,  at  dif- 
ferent times  and  to  different  purposes, 
a  number  of  angles  of  vision.  13  In 
developing  a  long-term  strategy  which 
must  include  short-term  tactics  we 
can  urge  that,  at  this  time  and  in  this 
place,  a.  particular  set  of  social  relations 
is  most  important. 

The  fight  for  these  immediate  alter- 
ations is  one  aspect  of  a  long-range 
strategy  for  social  change.  To  quote 
Gorz  once  again:  "Those  who  reject  all 
lesser  reforms  on  the  grounds  that  they 
are  merely  reformist  are  in  fact  reject- 
ing the  whole  possibility  of  a  transi- 
tional strategy  and  of  a  process  of  tran- 
sition to  socialism.  "1"+  Individuals 
should  not  be  sacrificed  in  the  name  of 
historic  necessity.  "Group  politics" 
(women,  Blacks,  working-class)  can 
transcend  its  own  particularity  if  there 


14/ Quest 


is  an  organic  link  between  various  re- 
forms as  well  as  a  commitment,  in  part 
through  such  reforms,  to  intensify  and 
deepen  the  contradictions  within  capi- 
talist society.  An  integral  feature  of 
such  a  long-term  strategy  would  be 
the  ongoing  reconceptualization  at  dif- 
ferent levels  given  a  dialectic  between 
changed  and  changing  conditions  and 
critical  consciousness.  Only  in  this  way 
can  we— all  women— overcome  the  para- 
lyzing effects  of  what  Doris  Lessing 
has  called  "the  disease  of  women  in  our 
time,"  the  resentment  and  anger  she 
recognizes  as  an  "impersonal  poison.  *> 
We  must,  with  Albert  Camus'  Dr.  Roux, 
fight  the  plague.  We  best  be  certain  it 
is  not  with  the  plague's  own  weapons 
or  we  shall  simply  carry  the  disease  of 
the  present  into  the  future  where  it 
may  take  on  even  more  horrible, 
dehumanizing  forms  than  those  we 
currently  confront. 


Footnotes 


!See  Thomas  S.  Kuhn,  The  Structure  of 
Scientific  Revolutions  2nd.  ed.  (Chicago: 
University  of  Chicago  Press,  1973);  Stephen 
Toulmin,  Foresight  and  Understanding  (New 
York:  Harper  Torchbook,  1963);  Bertell 
Oilman,  Alienation:  Marx's  Conception  of 
Man  in  Capitalist  Society  (Cambridge:  Uni- 
versity Press,  1973);  Bruce  Brown,  Marx, 
Freud,  and  the  Critique  of  Everyday  Life 
(New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press,  1973); 
Michael  Polanyi,  Personal  Knowledge;  To- 
ward a  Post-Critical  Philosophy  (New  York: 
Harper  Torchbook,  1963)  and  Arthur  Koes- 
tler  and  R.  J.  Smythies,  eds.  Beyond  Reduc- 
tionism  (Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1971),  for  a 
number  of  developments  of  the  themes  of 
holism  and  internal  relations. 

^Beverly  Jones  and  Judith  Brown,  To- 
ward a  Female  Liberation  Movement,  (Bos- 
ton: New  England  Free  Press,  1968),  pp.  16- 
17. 

^Roxanne  Dunbar,  "What  Do  Women 
Want?"  No  More  Fun  and  Games  2  (1969), 
10-11. 

^Germaine  Greer,  The  Female  Eunuch 
(New  York:  McGraw  Hill,  1970),  p.  326. 

SRoxanne  Dunbar,  "Female  Liberation 
as  the  Basis  for  Social  Revolution,"  Notes 
from  the  Second  Year:  Women's  Liberation 
(New  York:  New  York,  1970),  pp.  53-54. 

"Sheila  Rowbotham,  Woman's  Conscious- 
ness Man's  World  (Baltimore,  Penguin  Books, 
1973),  p.  68. 

7lbid.,  p.  59. 

^See  Eli  Zaretsky,  "Capitalism,  the  Fam- 
ily, and  Personal  Life:  Part  I,"  Socialist 
Revolution  13-14  (Jan.-April  1973),  and  his 
"Society,  Politics  and  the  Family,"  in  So- 
cialist Revolution  19  (Jan.-march,  1974). 
See  also  Oilman,  Alienation,  p.  15. 

^See  Frank  Parkin,  Class  Inequality  and 
Political  Order  (New  York:  Praeger,  1971); 
Michael  Harrington,  Socialism  (New  York: 
Bantam  Books,  1970);  Anthony  Giddens, 
The  Class  Structures  of  Advanced  Societies 
(New  York:  Harper  and  Row,  1973);  Karl 


Alternatives  to  Individualism/ 15 


Marx,  Critique  of  the  Gotha  Programme 
(New  York:  International  Publishers,  1970) 
pp.  10-11  in  which  Marx  argues  against 
Lasalle  and  the  German  workers'  party  that 
it  is  "in  general  incorrect  to  make  a  fuss 
about  the  so-called  'distribution'  and  put 
the  principle  stress  on  it."  Distribution,  as 
Marx  points  out,  is  a.  feature  of  production. 

lOJean  Bethke  Elshtain,  "The  Feminist 
Movement  and  the  Question  of  Equality," 
Polity  VII,  4  (Summer,  1974),  452-477. 

11  Andre  Gorz,  Socialism  and  Revolution 
tr.  Norman  Denny  (Garden  City,  New  York: 
Doubleday  Anchor  Books,  1973),  p.  173. 

l^Eugene  Kamenka,  "The  Concept  of  a 
Political  Revolution,"  in  Revolution  ed.  Carl 
J.  Friedrich,  Nomos  VIII  (New  York:  Ather- 
ton,  1966),  p.  124. 

13cf.  Oilman,  Alienation,  passim.,  and 
Rowbotham,  Woman's  Consciousness,  passim. 

l^Gorz,  Socialism  and  Revolution,  p.  137. 

l$Ibid.,  p.  141. 

Jean  Elshtain  is  an  Assistant  Profes- 
sor of  Political  Theory  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  '  Massachusetts-Amherst,  and 
teaches    courses    on   feminist    theory. 


read 

off  our  backs 

the  feminist  news  journal 
published  monthly 


with  coverage  and  analysis 
of  an  emerging  womens1  culture 

12  issues-  $6     Canada-  $7 
institutions-  $15  sample  copy  45<t 

off  our  backs,  1724  20th  St.  N.W. 
Washington  D.C.  20009 


12  W.  25th  St. 

Baltimore,  Maryland  21218 

The  Furies  collective,  which  pub- 
lished a  lesbian/ feminist  newspaper 
from  January  1972  to  June  1973, 
has  compiled  these  anthologies.  Al- 
though two  or  more  years  have 
elapsed  since  the  articles  were  writ- 
ten, they  read  like  new. 

— Booklegger 


WOMEN  REMEMBERED 


$2.25   each  plus    15%  postage  and 
handling. 


16/ Quest 


Taking 
Our  Future 
Seriously 

by   Joan   RothSChild  photographs  by  Marilyn  LangfeU 


Women  have  always  dreamed,  fanta- 
sized, had  visions.  But  although  we 
have  had  our  Sapphos,  our  Sojourner 
Truths,  our  Emma  Goldmans-who 
have  dared  to  dream  aloud,  and  to  be- 
lieve in  and  articulate  their  visions— for 
the  most  part,  women  have  kept  our 
fantasies  and  visions  inside,  deep  in  a 
personal  realm.  In  the  traditional,  pri- 
vate sphere  of  home  and  family,  we 
have  had  neither  time  nor  space  to 
bring  our  dreams  into  light,  to  touch 
and  explore  them.  Men  were  the  vision- 
aries, the  idealists;  we  were  the  practi- 
cal keepers  of  and  ministers  to  our 
men,  our  children.  Nor  were  women's 
fantasies  and  visions  to  be  taken  ser- 
iously, neither  by  ourselves,  nor  by  the 
patriarchal  world  we  inhabited.  Wom- 
en, not  believing  in  our  own  worth, 
did  not  articulate  our  dreams,  or,  if  we 
were  so  bold,  we  met  with  laughter, 
derision,  defeat. 

But  the  world  is  changing,  if  slow- 
ly-partly  forced  by  women's  need  to 


create  a  world  in  which  we  can  be  full 
human  beings.  Now,  more  women  fan- 
tasize and  express  our  visions.  More  of 
us  are  daring  to  think  about  a  future 
for  ourselves-a  future  of  our  own 
creation.  And  women,  the  world  is 
starting  to  listen. 

But  what  is  the  future  feminists 
want?  This  is  the  question  "Future 
Visions  and  Fantasies"  (Vol.  II,  No. 
1),  addresses.  That  the  issue  is  some- 
times tentative  and  incomplete  partly 
reflects  how  new  we  are  at  articulating 
our  visions,  at  planning  and  creating  on 
our  own.  In  the  following  comments,  I 
will  point  to  some  of  the  problems  I  see 
in  our  present  attempts  at  envisioning 
our  future,  and  show  some  of  the  ways 
we  are  already  acting  to  create  it. 

In  the  issue's  opening  article,  Jane 
Dolkart  and  Nancy  Hartsock  try  to  set 
the  tone  for  what  follows.  Their  clos- 
ing paragraphs,  especially,  raise  crucial 
questions  about  the  world  feminists 
want:  questions  about  power  and  domi- 


©  Joan  Rothschild  1975 


Taking  Our  Future  Seriously/ 17 


nance,  about  reorganizing  our  econom- 
ic and  social  systems,  about  the  human- 
ist vision  of  feminism  and  its  relation- 
ship to  technology  and  science.  On 
power,  for  example,  they  ask: 
What  are  the  political  implications  of 
a  world  in  which  women  have  power?  . 
.  .  What  kind  of  organizations  must  we 
develop  to  support  a  different  kind  of 
decision-making? .  .  .  Is  it  possible  to 
envision  a  society  in  which  there  is  no 
power,  where  there  are  no  leaders? 
Are  women  ready  to  work  collectively? 
With  men?  [p.  6]  * 

On  economic  and  social  systems, 
they  raise  these  issues: 
Can  the  work  place  revolve  around  de- 
centralized industrial  units?  Can  small 
autonomous  communities  provide  the 
basic  support  systems  for  growing  and 
distributing  food,  health  care,  educa- 
tion, and  entertainment?  Can  we  create 
a  society  in  which  women  are  free  to 
engage  in  a  variety  of  living  arrange- 
ments and  in  which  there  is  group  re- 
sponsibility for  child  care?  [p.  6] 
And  finally,  Dolkart  and  Hartsock 
"recognize  the  importance  and  useful- 
ness of  technology  and  science,  while 
retaining  a  humanistic  approach  to  the 
future,"  [p.  6]  thus  raising  the  question 
of  how  humanism  and  technology  can 
be  reconciled. 

Reading  these  questions,  my  hopes 
were  raised.  Yet  as  I  went  through  the 
issue  seeking  answers,  I  found  myself 


References  to  Quest,  Vol  II,  no.  1,  will 
cite  page  numbers  only.  References  to  other 
sources  are  footnoted  at  the  end  of  the 
article. 


often  disappointed.  Where  was  the  dis- 
cussion speaking  to  these  important 
issues?  Regarding  power,  for  example, 
only  "Matriarchy  and  Power"-one  of 
the  best  articles  in  the  issue-was  de- 
voted fully  to  the  relationship  of  wom- 
en and  power.  Janice  Raymond,  in  her 
article  on  androgyny,  also  dealt  with 
power,  but  in  confining  herself  to  the 
personal  level— power  over  self-in  stop- 
ping short  of  power  in  relation  to 
others,  she  fails  to  deal  with  the  poli- 
tical implications  of  her  concept  of 
"gynergy."  Moreover,  there  were  fright- 
ening, authoritarian-indeed,  totalitar- 
ian-power implications  in  "Prime  Time: 
Art  and  Politics";  Alexa  Freeman  and 
Jackie  MacMillan  here  advocate  using 
art  as  a  political  tool,  but  who  makes 
the  rules  as  to  what  art  should  be? 
What  sort  of  "feminist  political  organi- 
zations" (p.  35  their  italics)  decree 
what  is  positive  (good)  and  what  is 
negative  (bad)  art-in  effect,  decree 
what  is  "true  feminist"  art?  To  substi- 
tute political  orthodoxy  for  the  mar- 
ketplace as  the  criterion  for  acceptable 
art  is  hardly  a  power  change  I  hope 
feminists  would  endorse.** 

What  about  a  feminist  vision  of  so- 
cial structures  for  living  and  working? 
Phyllis  Birkby  and  Leslie  Weisman  ad- 


In  the  article  which  follows,  Joanna 
Russ  provides  an  effective  counter  to  Free- 
man and  MacMillan  when  she  says,  "I  do  not 
believe  that  any  artist  (as  opposed  to  hack) 
chooses  a  form;  the  form  chooses  the  artist, 
if  anything.  I  did  not  'choose'  s[cience] 
f[iction]  because  I  saw  it  as  having  'political, 
social  or  moral  implications  for  contem- 
porary  life.'  "  [p.    41] 


lS/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


Taking  Our  Future  Seriously/ 19 


dress  themselves  imaginatively  to  fe- 
male spaces  in  "A  Woman  Built  En- 
vironment," showing  the  need  for  wom- 
en to  fantasize  in  a  female  mode  so  as 
to  break  out  of  the  male  mode  domi- 
nant in  architectural  and  environmental 
thinking.  But  how  do  we  concretize 
these  fantasies?  I  wish  the  authors  had 
said  more  here,  because  we  so  desper- 
ately require  real  models  for  alterna- 
tive structures.  Cynthia  Washington's 
article  makes  explicit  the  need  for 
cooperative,  communal  living  arrange- 
ments in  order  to  solve  the  specific 
problem  of  childrearing  and  childcare 
so  many  women  face;  but  how  do  we 
link  this  specific  need  with  the  Birkby 
and  Weisman  fantasies?  I  was  also  dis- 
appointed to  find  no  treatment  in  the 
issue  of  future  economic  arrangements 
or  of  women  and  the  workplace.  And 
except  for  brief  discussions  by  Dolkart 
and  Hartsock  and  by  Freeman  and 
MacMillan  of  the  importance  that  wom- 
en understand  and  master  science  and 
technology,  a  feminist  approach  to 
technology  did  not  emerge.  1 

A  Problem  of  Perspective 

There  was  a  gap,  then,  between 
promise  and  fulfillment.  Why?  Review- 
ing my  criticisms,  I  find  that  I  am 
disappointed  because  often  the  articles 
did  not  speak  to  concrete  issues.  Is 
this  a  fair  criticism,  in  that  the  subject 
was  "visions  and  fantasies"?  The  ques- 
tions raised  by  Dolkart  and  Hartsock 
were  concrete,  after  all,  and  demanded 
specific  projections.  This  suggests  that 
there   should  have  been  two  types  of 


questions:  those  looking  for  fantasies, 
and  those  seeking  clear  visions.  We 
must  be  able  to  soar,  to  transcend  the 
present  and  dream  the  impossible,  but 
we  also  must  have  practical  visions 
that  can  be  translated  into  reality.  We 
want  Birkby  and  Weisman  to  fantasize, 
but  we  want  blueprints  for  living  for 
Cynthia  Washington. 

Why  do  the  projections  that  were 
asked  for  in  the  opening  article  of  the 
issue  appear  to  be  limited?  Why  don't 
they  go  further?  I  think  there  are  three 
reasons,  all  related  to  perspective. 

First,  the  opening  article  projected 
a  limited  concept  of  power.  Dolkart 
and  Hartsock's  well-formulated  ques- 
tions seemingly  indicate  a  range  of  con- 
texts and  possible  visions  about  women 
and  power.  Yet  at  the  beginning  of  the 
article  they  write,  "Definitions  of  the 
kind  of  change  feminists  seek.  .  .must 
be  placed.  .  .within  the  context  of  a 
world  where  women  have  power." 
[p.  2]  To  have  power,  one  must  get 
power.  Doesn't  this  perspective  limit 
us  to  a  competitive,  win-lose  power 
model  requiring  a  continued  system  of 
dominance  once  women  win?  How  is 
it  possible,  then,  "to  envision  a  society 
in  which  there  is  no  power"  (the 
anarchist  vision)?  Whether  a  world 
without  power  (which  means  "domi- 
nance," to  anarchists)  is  possible,  or 
even  desirable,  anarchism's  views  about 
power  and  the  whole  question  of  hu- 
man dominance  have  clear  affinities 
with  feminism.  Yet  the  anarchist  vi- 
sion is  not  discussed  in  the  issue.  Is 
there,  then,  a  feminist  vision  of  power 
which  does  not  rule  out  power  relation- 


20/Quest 


ships  entirely,  but  does  not  follow  the 
win-lose  model? 

Second,  the  diagnosis  of  the  condi- 
tion of  industrial  and  post-industrial 
society  is  incomplete.  Dolkart  and 
Hartsock  write  that  it  is  easy  to  know 
what  we  are  against:  we  want  "an  end 
to  oppression,  class  distinctions,  capi- 
talism, racism,  heterosexism,  and  sex- 
ism." [p.  2]  But  is  this  all  we  want  to 
end?  This  perspective  excludes  our 
consideration  of  the  form  and  struc- 
ture of  our  institutions  of  power.  Cen- 
tralization (and  its  enormous  power 
concentrations)  characterizes  institu- 
tions in  all  industrial  and  post-indus- 
trial nations,  regardless  of  their  politi- 
cal economies.  Are  we  not,  for  exam- 
ple, also  against  the  kind  of  state 
socialism  that  concentrates  control  in 
a  small,  unaccountable  elite,  that  is 
also  sexist,  just  like  state  capitalism? 
Even  though  Dolkart  and  Hartsock 
mention  the  technocratic,  bureaucratic, 
manipulative  nature  of  modern  society, 
they  do  not  adequately  stress  the  criti- 
cal role  institutional  and  organizational 
structures  play  in  supporting  an  op- 
pressive system,  despite  the  fact  that 
the  creation  of  non-oppressive  organi- 
zational forms  is  central  to  the  feminist 
vision.  Again,  there  is  no  room  for  the 
anarchist,  who  sees  organizational  forms 
as  both  a  current  societal  disease  and  a 
prescribed  remedy. 

Third,  the  opening  article  does  not 
talk  about  what  feminism  is-or  raise 
questions  about  its  meaning.  Yet  isn't 
understanding  what  we  mean  by  "fem- 
inism" and  by  "feminist  goals"  the 
starting-point  for  the  practical  feminist 


visionary?  In  previous  issues,  notably 
in  the  first  (Summer,  1974),  discus- 
sions of  feminism  and  feminist  goals 
have  taken  place.  But  some  sort  of 
restatement  seems  necessary  in  an  issue 
devoted  to  future  "visions  and  fan- 
tasies." 

If  the  lead  article  is  viewed  as  a 
reflection  of  a  recommended  formative 
approach  of  envisioning  the  future, 
these  three  problems  seem  to  me  to 
emerge,  and  to  demonstrate  the  way  in 
which  approach  can  limit  possible  re- 
sults. Beginning  with  the  third  point— 
the  meaning  of  "feminism"-I  want 
to  explore  these  points  and  attempt 
to  show  where  further  discussion  might 
lead. 

Who  Are  We?  What  Do  We  Want? 

"We"  are  feminists.  Feminists  agree 
that  we  oppose  sexism,  a  system  of  in- 
stitutionalized beliefs  and  practices 
which  decree  that  "male"  is  superior 
and  "female"  is  inferior.  But  how,  in 
fact,  does  opposition  to  sexism  shape 
feminist  goals?  At  this  point,  feminism 
is  more  difficult  to  describe,  because 
feminists  don't  necessarily  concur  a- 
bout  the  relationship  of  sexism  to 
other  societal  beliefs  and  conditions; 
there  are  a  number  of  positions  along 
the  radical-reform  continuum.  2  .Yet 
perhaps  feminists  can  agree  that  a  sex- 
ist society,  in  perpetuating  the  belief 
that  we  are  inferior  creatures  and  in 
keeping  us  powerless,  denies  to  us  our 
full  humanity  and  control  over  our 
lives.  Therefore,  a  sexist  society  has 
built  into  it— whatever  other  origins  or 


Taking  Our  Future  Seriously/ 21 


reinforcers  exist— exploitation,  domi- 
nance, and  anti-humanism.  In  order  to 
free  women  to  be  able  to  control  our 
own  lives  and  to  realize  ourselves  as 
human  beings,  a  feminist  position 
necessarily  requires  ending  the  exploi- 
tation, dominance,  and  anti-humanism 
endemic  in  a  sexist  world. 

One  could  argue,  therefore,  that 
feminism  seeks  to  institute  "female" 
values  because  a  sexist  society  suffers 
from  a  surfeit  of  "male"  values.  Re- 
gardless of  excellent,  pioneering  re- 
search^  and  "I  can  be  anything  I  want 
to  be"  talk,  the  reality  is  that  tradi- 
tional sex-linked  characteristics  still 
have  a  tremendous  hold  on  thinking 
and  conduct.  So-called  "male"  quali- 
ties are  valued  over  so-called  "female" 
ones  and  on  such  valuing  rides  power. 
"Male"  values  rule  in  our  society. 


For  our  technology,  "male"  rule 
means  following  the  "value- free"  tech- 
nological ideal  of  "rational  efficiency  "4 
Under  a  political  economy  geared  to 
"progress,"  our  technology  exploits 
whatever  it  touches:  human  beings, 
nature,  the  universe  ;5  it  rapes,  it  con- 
quers, it  destroys.  The  rule  of  "male" 
values  means  the  concepts  of  conquest 
and  dominance  permeate  not  only  our 
science  and  technology,  but  our  poli- 
tics, our  economy,  our  art,  our  forms 
of  social  organization.  Thus,  under  the 
rule  of  "male"  values,  all  who  are  not 
part  of  the  male  ruling  elite  are  power- 
less. We  are  all  candidates  for  de- 
struction. 

"Female"  values,  on  the  other  hand, 
are  popularly  associated  with  life-sup- 
port, closeness  to  nature,  feeling,  co- 
operation-qualities our  society  could 


22/Quest 


well  use.  For  women  to  control  our 
own  lives  and  to  find  self-realization 
requires  that  feminism  break  through 
the  male-defined  stereotypes  so  that 
women  can  define  our  "femaleness" 
ourselves.  But  at  the  same  time,  wom- 
en can  use  such  stereotypes  in  a  posi- 
tive way.  "Female"  values  can  become 
the  basis  for  a  positive  vision  of  a  hu- 
mane, non-sexist  society.  Can  we  not 
strive  to  make  nurturance,  life-support, 
sensitivity,  empathy,  intuition,  into 
qualities  that  are  valued?  Can't  femi- 
nism strive  to  assert  so-called  "female" 
values  as  the  principles  underlying  our 
vision  of  a  non-exploitative,  liberated, 
humanistic  society? 

Where,  then,  do  traditional  male 
values  fit  in  a  feminist  vision?  There  is 
the  vision  of  "androgyny,"  or  "gynan- 
dry."  But  as  Raymond  warns,  if  fe- 
male and  male  principles  are  fused 
according  to  current  value  premises, 
the  result  is  absorption  and  cooptation, 
and  thus  a  continuing  male  supremacy, 
[pp.  57-66]  Yet  a  female  supremacist 
or  separatist  position  seems  to  me  to 
negate  feminist  values.  If  there  are  such 
things  as  a  "female"  and  a  "male" 
principle,  and  if  both  are  needed  as 
creative  forces,  perhaps  we  should 
view  their  fusion  as  a  dialectical  rela- 
tionship. "Female"  and  "male"  would 
be  opposites  in  a  continuing,  creative 
process  of  reconciliation.  Passive  and 
active,  intuitive  and  analytical,  inter- 
personal and  objective  would  interact 
in  never-ending  cycles  of  synthesis 
and  resynthesis.  However,  a  dialectical 
relationship  can  work  only  between 
equal  forces,  and  if  sexual  equality  is 


impossible,  as  some  feminists  insist, 
then  this  is  an  impossible  vision.  The 
feminist  vision  may  then  be  that  of 
Joanna  Russ:  a  one-sex  society  in 
which  female  has  absorbed  the  male, 
[p.  45] 

However,  the  unequal  power  rela- 
tionship of  male  dominating  female  is 
today's  reality.  And  any  feminist  vi- 
sion of  the  future  must  determine 
the  role  of  power  in  a  non-sexist 
future. 

Feminism  and  Power 

Women  as  a  group  traditionally  have 
been  powerless.  While  some  women, 
at  times,  have  been  able  to  overcome 
resistance  and  gain  what  they  want, 
such  instances  of  women  exercising 
power  are  isolated  and  individual.  This 
is  power  for  women  in  a  very  limited 
-and  insignificant— sense.  Lacking  col- 
lective power,  having  no  support  for 
her  position  in  custom,  practice,  or 
law,  the  woman  struggling  for  what  she 
wants  is  unable  to  assure  that  any  gain 
she  achieves  will  stick.  For  we  lack 
political  power,  the  ability  to  alter 
power  relationships  in  the  public  sec- 
tor which  embody  and  support  sexism. 

In  the  second  wave  of  feminism, 
women  are  coming  to  understand  that 
the  personal  is  political:  domination 
by  men  on  an  individual  level  reflects 
an  entire  system  of  sexual  domination. 
Thus  some  feminists  argue  that  the 
present  system  of  power  relationships 
must  change,  that  women  must  "get 
power"-and  get  it  collectively.  Wom- 
en, it  is  argued,  must  change  the  sexual 


Taking  Our  Future  Seriously/23 


power  imbalance  permeating  society  if 
we  are  to  be  able  to  control  our  own 
lives  and  fulfill  ourselves  as  human 
beings. 

But  what  does  it  mean  that  women 
must  "get  power"?  According  to  New- 
ton and  Webster,  for  some  advocates  of 
a  matriarchal  society  it  means  domi- 
nation by  women.  But, 
//  women  are  to  be  supreme,  won't 
men  necessarily  be  subordinate?  If 
women  are  to  rule,  won't  men  be  the 
subjects?.  .  .How  could  this  society  be 
better  than  we  have  now?   [p.  72] 

Here,  clearly,  is  the  central  issue: 
how  could  a  society  in  which  women 
rule  and  men  are  subjects  "be  better 
than  what  we  have  now?"  If  women 
intend  merely  to  turn  the  tables,  re- 
versing the  relative  power  positions  of 
women  and  men,  wouldn't  we  merely 
be  replicating  the  present  oppressive 
forms  of  power,  and  only  changing  the 
labels?  Where  is  the  guarantee  that 
women  would  be  better  rulers  than 
men,  if  similar  power  hierarchies  re- 
main? Would  we  rely  on  retaining  our 
"nurturance,"  our  "gentleness,"  our 
"understanding,"  to  make  us  benevo- 
lent and  kindly  rulers?"1"  Or  would 
women  admit  that  "frankly  we  would 
rather  be  the  rulers  than  the  ruled?" 
As  Newton  and  Webster  note,  we 
must    "spell   out   the    relationship   of 

+Perhaps  this  is  not  completely  fat- 
fetched  if,  as  social  biologists  are  claiming, 
natural  selection  of  adaptive  traits  applies 
also  to  social  behavior.  See,  for  example, 
the  discussion  of  altruism  by  C.  H.  Wadding- 
ton  in  The  New  York  Review,  (August  7, 
1975),  pp.  30-32. 


power  to  women's  freedom."  [p.  72] 
Can  women  be  free  if  domination  and 
hierarchy  still  exist,  if  others  are  un- 
free?  In  other  words,  what  concept  of 
power  can  be  compatible  with  a  femi- 
nist concept  of  freedom? 

Feminism  seeks  both  "freedom 
from"  and  "freedom  to":  freedom  from 
domination  and  oppression,  and  free- 
dom to  control  our  lives  and  realize 
ourselves  as  human  beings.  "Freedom 
from"  is  often  taken  to  mean  laissez 
faire.  The  libertarians  at  one  pole  and 
those  in  the  early  stages  of  the  com- 
munal and  women's  movements  at  the 
other,  mistakenly  thought  that  laissez 
faire  would  allow  "freedom  to"  to  be 
realized.  But  as  classic  liberalism  shows, 
laissez  faire  inevitably  leads  to  a  fierce, 
unregulated,  competitive  power  strug- 
gle, and  finally  to  domination  by  the 
few  of  the  many.  Joreen,  in  her  well- 
known  "Tyranny  of  Structurelessness" 
has  described  this  process  in  political 
terms  in  the  women's  movement. °  The 
problem  with  laissez-faire  freedom  is 
that  it  is  atomized  and  totally  individ- 
ualistic. It  can  only  lead  to  conflicts 
and  power  struggles,  even  if  scarcity 
conditions  are  eliminated. 

By  contrast,  the  feminist  concept 
of  freedom,  although  based  on  individ- 
ual self-realization,  must  be  seen  in 
societal  terms.  7  It  is  an  interdependent 
concept,  and  springs  from  the  core  of 
feminism  itself:  the  feminist  seeks 
identity,  control  of  her  life,  self-ful- 
fillment, but  she  is  also  supportive, 
committed  to  helping  other  women 
reach  these  personal  goals.  Liberty  is 
neither  achieved  in  a  vacuum,  nor  at 


24/Quest 


the  expense  of  others.  The  very  con- 
dition of  her  own  freedom  is  free- 
dom for  others. 

Translating  laissez  faire  and  inter- 
dependency  into  power  terms,  we  get 
a  competitive—and  modified  "compro- 
mise"-model  in  the  former  case,  and  a 
cooperative  model  in  the  latter.  The 
competitive,  laissez  faire  power  model 
is  a  win-lose,  zero-sum  game,  in  which 
freedom  is  won  at  the  expense  of 
others.  It  requires  that  a  system  of 
dominance  be  established  in  order  to 
maintain  newly-won  positions  of  pow- 
er. It  is  thus  decidedly  "male"  in  its 
emphasis  on  conquest  and  dominance. 
In  the  compromise,  the  "democratic" 
modification  of  the  competitive  model, 
no  one  wins  or  loses  completely;  each 
wins  and  loses  a  little.  But  the  real 
power  struggle  is  masked;  the  arena  in 
which  the  compromise  takes  place  is 
among  the  oligarchies  who  have  power 
and  who  are  on  the  winning  side,  as 
against  the  mass  who  do  not. 

An  interdependent  concept  of  free- 
dom, however,  means  a  cooperative 
societal  model  of  power  relationships 
-even  though  this  seems  a  contradic- 
tion in  terms.  If  achieving  one's  per- 
sonal freedom  is  fundamentally  linked 
to  the  ability  of  others  to  achieve  their 
freedom,  then  the  power  system  which 
is  sought  must  foster  this  linkage.  In  a 
cooperative,  interdependent  power  mo- 
del, conflict  between  individuals,  with- 
in groups,  and  between  groups  is  seen 
as  a  group  concern.  In  short,  the  co- 
operative, interdependent  power  model 
is  constructive,  and  its  process  is  dia- 
lectical. The  conflicting  needs  of  indi- 


viduals in  relation  to  each  other  and  to 
the  group  as  a  whole  are  reconciled 
through  an  ongoing  learning  process. 
The  conflict  itself  creates  new  levels 
of  understanding  and  insights  about 
achieving  one's  own  freedom  in  rela- 
tion to  the  freedom  of  others.  And 
the  consensual  mode  of  decision-mak- 
ing is  the  nearest  approximation  to  an 
interdependent,  cooperative  model  of 
power. 

Important  as  it  is  not  to  ignore  the 
material  bases  of  power  relationships, 
I  think  it  is  necessary  to  focus  on  their 
psycho-social  aspects  as  well,  because 
this  focus  is  often  ignored  in  radical 
analyses.  Anarchist  analysis  does  not 
ignore  it.  Anarchists  make  clear  that 
dominance  of  human  beings  over  each 
other  (the  anarchist  definition  of  pow- 
er) has  both  psycho-social  and  material 
bases.  Taking  exception  to  the  Marx- 
ists who  link  the  origin  of  patriarchy 
with  the  origin  of  private  property, 
anarchist  Murray  Bookchin  maintains 
that  other  forms  of  domination  pre- 
dated economic  hierarchy:  the  old 
dominated  the  young,  men  dominated 
women  in  the  patriarchal  family.  There- 
fore, anarchism  seeks  an  end  to  rela- 
tionships based  on  power  and  an  end 
to  all  hierarchical  systems. 

The  anarchist  goal  becomes  a  socie- 
ty without  power.  Anarchists  believe 
that  it  is  possible  to  create  a  society 
in  which  intra-group  and  inter-group 
relationships  so  function  as  to  make  a 
political  system-control  and  alloca- 
tion of  power-unnecessary.  Yet  one 
wonders  if  the  federated  structure 
they  propose  would  not  be  a  political 


Taking  Our  Future  Seriously/25 


system  of  a  sort,  drawing  on  a  societal, 
cooperative  power  model.  And  I  won- 
der what  role  the  creative  aspect  of 
conflict  might  have  in  the  harmonious 
society  anarchists  propose.  Utopian 
visions  of  perfect  harmony  are  uniform- 
ly dull,  and  do  not  insure  the  diversity 
and  individuality  that  anarchists— and 
feminists-champion. 

Perhaps  ultimately  the  most  diffi- 
cult problem  for  feminists  in  recon- 
ciling women's  freedom  with  power  is 
that  the  prevailing  power  model— the 
one  women  must  contend  with  every 
day-is  the  competitive,  zero-sum  game. 
A  feminist  interdependent  concept  of 
freedom  is  incompatible  with  the  com- 
petitive, dominance  power  model,  and 
more  in  tune  with  a  cooperative,  socie- 
tal model  of  power.  How,  then,  would 
feminists  change  the  prevailing  power 
system  to  institute  our  own?  How  do 
feminists  transform  the  very  values  on 
which  the  dominant  system  is  based 
without  adopting  the  tactics-and  even 
the  values— of  the  enemy? 

I  think  one  way  out  of  the  dilemma 
lies  in  the  unique  understanding  in 
feminism  of  the  relationship  between 
the  personal  and  the  political.  Al- 
though women  cannot  help  but  be  in- 
fluenced by  the  competitive  power 
model,  women  try  in  the  groups  we 
establish  to  create  different  forms. 
Women,  in  groups,  seek  to  build  the 
trust  necessary  to  support  each  other, 
to  cooperate,  and  to  work  together  to 
reach  both  individual  and  group  goals. 
In  personal  interactions,  at  both  infor- 
mal and  formal  group  levels,  women 
grope    toward   a  cooperative,   societal 


kind  of  power  relationship.  There  is  at 
least  as  much  attention  to  process  as 
to  final  goals,  to  devising  ways  to  work 
through  conflicts  at  the  small  group 
level. 8  If  such  groups  become  models 
for  power  interactions  in  the  larger 
society,  the  personal  can  be  trans- 
formed into  the  political. 

Societal  Structures 
and  the  Feminist  Vision 

Industrial  and  post-industrial  soci- 
ety today  is  shaped  in  the  dominance 
model  of  power,  no  matter  what  politi- 
cal myth  binds  a  particular  nation  to- 
gether. In  neither  the  Western  "demo- 
cracies" nor  the  "people's  republics" 
can  anyone  seriously  claim  that  the 
"people"  rule.  Each  nation  has  some 
form  of  elite  rule.  The  elites  are  white 
and  male"*-*  and  possess  or  have  access 
to  vast  resources  of  power  to  enable 
them  to  maintain  control:  wealth, 
position  in  the  hierarchy,  forces  of 
coercion,  expertise. 

The  dominance  of  elites  in  indus- 
trial and  post-industrial  nations  also 
depends  on  something  else:  huge,  high- 
ly centralized  institutions  whose  organ- 
izational form  is  bureaucracy.  Politi- 
cal, economic,  and  military  institu- 
tions, the  science  and  technology  es- 
tablishments, institutions  of  education 
and  religion,  institutionalized  work 
and  professions  are  powered  by  vast 
bureaucratic   structures   which   are  in 


^With  the  exception  of  a  few  individual 
leaders.  (China  is  not  included  as  an  indus- 
trial or  post-industrial  nation.) 


26lQuest 


! 

i$ii^/iil 

r 

5- 

» -    -;  *  * 
Ik 

jA 

f      v      ■ 

)  W    iIlM 

r«lfc 

: 

t                  *tk               1 
** 

if 

l&i 

i 

... 

p^ 

.       *   f*    - 

'■•- .-   V.      .  .< 

..... .i 

*m     .; 

S>8ss*WdW.rf*  t.£N^Bfe.s>- 

" 

themselves  hierarchies  built  on  a  dom- 
inance power  model.  In  their  very 
form,  bureaucracies  support  and  help 
perpetuate  an  entire  system  of  domi- 
nance. It  is  not  enough,  therefore, 
to  be  against  class  distinctions,  capital- 
ism, racism,  technological  elitism.  We 
must  also  look  to  underlying  structural 
forms  which  serve  as  instruments  of 
oppression,  for  there  is  no  assurance 
that  the  end  of  class  struggle,  for 
example,  would  necessarily  end  sex- 
ism. 

Central  to  every  bureaucracy  is  a 
hierarchic  structure,  a  chain  of  com- 
mand. There  is  job  specialization,  a 
division  of  labor.  There  is  specialized 
knowledge  and  training  for  each  task, 


a  "rational"  system  of  expertise.  Each 
operation  has  its  own  routine  set 
procedures,  and  even  human  relation- 
ships and  communications  networks 
are  formalized  and  impersonal. 

Bureaucracy  has  succeeded  in  insti- 
tutionalizing the  hierarchic  system  by 
producing  the  organizational  technol- 
ogy to  perpetuate  it.  It  serves  as  a 
vehicle  to  perpetuate  other  hierarchies 
-those  based  on  wealth,  status,  educa- 
tion, sex,  race.  A  symbiotic  relation- 
ship develops  by  which  one  form  of 
domination  supports  and  justifies  the 
other  (as  in  the  case  of  the  excuse, 
"We  can't  hire  an  'unqualified'  person 
for  the  job"— meaning  woman,  black, 
etc.). 


Taking  Our  Future  Seriously/ 27 


Particularly  disturbing  is  bureau- 
cracy's effect  on  the  way  human  beings 
relate  to  each  other,  privately  and  pub- 
licly. Formal,  impersonal  and  ritual- 
ized behavior  is  encouraged-especially 
between  hierarchic  inferiors  and  super- 
iors— 9 and  with  encouragement  it  be- 
comes the  new  behavioral  norm,  lead- 
ing to  atomization  and  alienation.  The 
bureaucratized  person  is  not  just  a 
powerless  cog  in  the  machine,  alienated 
from  production  in  the  classic  Marxist 
sense;  the  person  is  also  profoundly 
alienated  from  other  human  beings. 
Atomized  and  alienated,  bureaucratiz- 
ed individuals  become  candidates  for 
manipulation  into  an  Orwellian  mass 
society. 

Bureaucracy  also  breeds  the  manip- 
ulators, and  does  so  at  every  level  in 
the  hierarchy.  An  associate,  when  pro- 
moted, suddenly  stops  having  coffee 
with  former  colleagues,  often  demand- 
ing that  coffee  be  brought  to  him-or 
her.  (That  women,  when  raised  in  sta- 
tus, can  so  behave-despite  condition- 
ing to  be  subservient  and  non-demand- 
ing-indicates  the  power  of  bureau- 
cratic conditioning.)  The  large  organ- 
ization encourages  the  drive  for  power, 
resulting  in 

manipulative,  power-ridden  people  .  .  . 
the  administrator  derives  satisfaction 
from  the  control  of  people  within  the 
organizational  apparatus  .  .  .he  is  a 
politician,  but  an  authoritarian  oneA® 

Thus  bureaucracy  is  a  key  determi- 
nant in  shaping  and  perpetuating  the 
nature  of  personal  and  power  relation- 
ships-and  the  power  structure  of  the 
entire  society.  The  bureaucratic  form 


is  both  microcosm  and  blueprint  for 
the  way  in  which  modern  industrial 
and  post-industrial  nations  function. 
Because  it  perpetuates  systems  of  dom- 
inance, creates  and  depends  on  elitism, 
and  fosters-indeed  glorifies-aUenation, 
obedience,  and  authoritarianism,  bur- 
eaucracy must  no  longer  serve  as  our 
organizational  model.  What  feminists 
learn  from  examining  the  bureaucratic 
structure  is  that  form  cannot  be  di- 
vorced from  content,  and  that  what  we 
call  form  must  be  as  important  to  our 
future  society  goals  as  the  content  of 
our  program. 

This  relationship  of  form  and  con- 
tent, between  means  and  ends,  is  per- 
haps best  expressed  in  anarchist 
thought.  Bookchin  has  severely  criti- 
cized the  Marxist-Leninist  emphasis  on 
centralization  and  on  the  elite  van- 
guard party  as  necessary  to  make 
revolution.  He  believes  that  such  or- 
ganizational concepts  led  inevitably 
to  Stalinism  and  the  top-down,  repres- 
sive nature  of  the  Soviet  regime;!  1 
hierarchy  can  only  lead  to  more  hier- 
archy and  to  more  human  domination. 
A  free  society  can  emerge,  he  argues, 
only  through  "liberatory"  non-hier- 
archical social  forms  in  which  human 
beings  are  not  objects  or  commodities 
for  exchange  but  in  which  human  rela- 
tionships are  unmediated,  direct,  face- 
to-face  :  1 2 

There  can  be  no  separation  of  the 
revolutionary  process  from  the  revolu- 
tionary goal  A  society  based  on  self- 
administration  must  be  achieved  by 
means  of  self-administration.  This  im- 
plies the  forging  of  self  (yes,  literally 


2S/Quest 


a  forging  in  the  revolutionary  process) 
and  a  mode  of  administration  which 
the  self  can  possess  A  3 
A  similar  point  is  made  by  two  advo- 
cates of  participatory  democracy  and 
workers'  control,  Benello  and  Rousso- 
poulos: 

[The]  attack  on  the  exploitation  and 
elitism  of  the  present  system  will  be 
firmly  based  only  when  it  can  point  to 
working  examples  of  how  the  key 
functions  of  society-work,  education, 
and  community  life— can  be  successfully 
carried  out  by  non-elitist  and  non- 
exploitative  forms  of  social  organiza- 
tion. 1 4 

We  must  confront  "the  basic  institu- 
tional structures  of  the  present  society" 
with  an  "alternative  vision"  expressed 
in  "counter-institutions"  which  are 
both  "paradigms  and  experiments  em- 
bodying a  new  social  vision."  15 

Feminists  are  in  many  ways  going  in 
this  direction,  even  when  not  fully 
aware  of  their  course.  In  exploring 
the  connection  between  anarchism  and 
feminism,  Peggy  Kornegger  points  to 
the  "striking  resemblance"  of  the  struc- 
ture of  women's  groups  to  the  anar- 
chist affinity  groups,  16  the  basic  units 
of  anarchist  organization.  The  affinity 
group  is  the  revolutionary  unit  itself, 
the  form  out  of  which  workers'  coun- 
cils, assemblies,  and  communities  de- 
velop, and  out  of  which  the  liberatory, 
non-hierarchic  future  society  will  grow. 

When  women's  groups  strive  to  be 
participatory,  cooperative,  and  non- 
hierarchic,  they  are  a  microcosm  of  a 
feminist  vision  of  relationships  in  a 
non-sexist    society.    In    work   groups, 


political  organizations— whatever  asso- 
ciations women  form-women  must 
continue  to  pay  attention  to  the  way 
to  organize,  the  way  to  relate  to  each 
other,  the  way  to  allocate  tasks  and 
share  knowledge-and  thus  power— the 
way  to  make  decisions.  In  other  words, 
feminists  must  focus  steadily  on  the 
ends  in  the  means. 

At  the  psycho-social  level,  women's 
groups  can  begin  to  bring  the  human 
and  personal  back  into  social  relation- 
ships. They  can  seek  to  reduce  compe- 
titive power  trips,  to  foster  coopera- 
tion and  participation.  If  women's 
groups  are  to  operate  at  the  political 
level,  if  they  are  to  be  models  em- 
bodying and  working  toward  a  vision 
of  society  in  which  values  and  power 
relationships  shall  be  transformed  a- 
long  feminist  lines,  then  women's 
structures  must  have  a  conscious  poli- 
tical vision.  They  must  see  clearly  the 
connection  between  the  personal  ex- 
perience and  the  political,  between  ac- 
tion and  experience  in  the  here  and 
now  and  the  society  they  want  in  the 
future.  If  the  groups  do  not  politically 
challenge  current  societal  institutions, 
they  will  remain  marginal  and  irrele- 
vant. In  order  to  point  the  way  toward 
how  political  and  economic  power 
shall  be  transformed,  women's  groups 
must  be  counter-institutions  which  act 
"as  sustaining  bases  for  continuing 
resistance  and  confrontation."  17 

Feminism  and  the  Future 

Feminist  values  cannot  be  realized 
unless  we  have  a  humanistic  liberated, 


Taking  Our  Future  Seriously/ 29 


non-exploitative  society,  free  from  all 
systems  of  dominance.  Because  the 
values  upon  which  women's  groups  rest 
are  liberatory  and  humanistic,  the  rest 
of  society  could  do  worse  than  follow 
the  feminist  lead.  At  the  very  least, 
collective  women's  structures  will  help 
to  create  for  women  the  time  and  space 
we  need-and  have  so  long  been  denied 
-to  dream  and  plan  about  the  future. 
This  is  the  practical  level  that  Cynthia 
Washington's  article  speaks  to:  a  wom- 
an cannot  dream  or  create-much  less 
earn  a  living-if  she  must  bear  the  bur- 
dens of  childrearing  and  household 
alone.  Further,  our  women's  structures 
can  build  the  kind  of  supports  and 
community  that  will  encourage  us  to 
believe  in  our  dreams  of  the  future  and 
to  articulate  them.  For  instead  of  seek- 
ing acceptance  for  our  dreams  from  a 
hostile  world,  we  must  seek  to  trans- 
form that  world  so  that  feminist  visions 
become  the  reality. 

Footnotes 

ISee  Joan  A.  Rothschild,  "A  Feminist 
Perspective  on  Technology  and  the  Future 
of  Human  Society."  (Paper  prepared  for  de- 
livery at  Second  General  Assembly  of  the 
World  Future  Society,  June  2-5,  1975, 
Washington,    D.C.) 

2 See  Rosiska  Darcy  de  Oliveira  and 
Mireille  Calame,  "Liberation  of  Women  to 
Change  the  World  and  Re-Invent  Life," 
Quest,  VoL  I,  No.  1  (Summer,  1974), 
65-76;  and  Charlotte  Bunch,  "The  Reform 
Tool  Kit,"  Quest,  VoL  I,  No.  1  (Summer, 
1974),  37-51. 

^See,  for  example,  Julia  Sherman,  On 
the  Psychology  of  Women:  A  Survey  of 
Empirical  Studies  (Springfield,  I1L:  Charles 
C.  Thomas  Publisher,  1971). 


^Jacques  Ellul,  The  Technological  Socie- 
ty, trans.  John  Wilkinson  (New  York:  Alfred 
A.  Knopf,  1964),  p.  xxv. 

^ Victor  Ferkiss,  The  Future  of  Techno- 
logical Civilization  (New  York:  George  Bra- 
ziller,  1974). 

"First  published  in  The  Second  Wave, 
Vol.  II,  No.   1,  20-25,  42. 

'See  Dorothy  Lee.  Freedom  and  Cul- 
ture (Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall, 
1959);  and  Joan  A.  Rothschild,  "The  Search 
for  a  Humanistic  Political  Theory  in  America: 
Toward  a  Theory  of  Social  Structures  and 
Political  Community,"  Logos,  Vol.  1,  No.  6 
(Oct-Nov  1974),  1-20. 

^See  Pamela  Allen,  Free  Space:  A  Per- 
spective on  the  Small  Group  in  Women's 
Liberation  (New  York:  Times  Change  Press, 
1970). 

9 For  a  devastating  account  of  bureauc- 
racy in  action,  see  Elinor  Langer,  "Inside  the 
New  York  Telephone  Company,"  Women  at 
Work,  ed.  William  L.  O'Neill  (New  York: 
Quadrangle /The  New  York  Times  Book  Co., 
1972),  pp.  305-360. 

10C.  George  Benello,  "Wasteland  Cul- 
ture," Our  Generation,  Vol.  5,  No.  2  (Sep- 
tember, 1967),  24. 

11  Murray  Bookchin,  Post-Scarcity  Anar- 
chism (San  Francisco:  Ramparts  Press,  1971), 
pp.  171-220. 

12Ibid.,  p.  143. 

^~>Ibid.,  p.  167  (italics  in  original). 

14c.  George  Benello  and  Dimitrios  Rous- 
sopoulos,  eds.,  The  Case  for  Participatory 
Democracy  (New  York:  The  Viking  Press, 
1971),  p.  8. 

iSfoid.,  pp.  8-9. 

Peggy  Kornegger,  "Anarchism:  The 
Feminist  Connection,"  The  Second  Wave, 
VoL  4,  No.  1  (Spring,  1972),  32. 

l^Benello  an<i  Roussopoulos,  p.  9. 


Joan  Rothschild,  a  feminist  and  a 
political  theorist,  is  assistant  professor 
of  politics  at  the  University  of  Lowell, 
Lowell,  Massachusetts. 


30/Quest 


Reassessing 
Basics 


by  Karen  Browne 

For  the  past  three  years  I've  been 
active  as  a  lesbian  separatist.  Having 
experienced  a  major  change  in  my  ideas 
over  the  past  year  I  would  like  to  share 
what  "I  used  to  think"  along  with  my 
present  attitudes. 

As  a  separatist,  my  goals  centered 
on  (at  most)  forming  a  separatist  wom- 
en's nation,  or  (at  least)  having  a  wom- 
en's revolution  which  would  automat- 
ically affect  everyone  for  the  better. 
We  never  thoroughly  planned  what 
would  happen  to  men  in  a  separatist 
state.  We  did  know  that  masculine 
characteristics  were  to  be  purged.  One 
of  the  key  manifestations  of  the  male/ 
female  split-the  produce/  process  dif- 
ferentiation-meant that  men  strove  to 
attain  goals  by  any  means,  whereas 
women  concentrated  on  how  to  achieve 
goals,  obviously  a  superior  approach. 

Transforming  the  male-assigned  neg- 


graphics  by  Catherine  Leonardo 

ative  valuation  of  women  to  positive 
women's  self-image  assumed  vital  im- 
portance. In  fact,  that  transformation 
and  the  related  creation  of  alternative 
structures  and  forms  emerged  as  our 
priorities.  Work  on  legislative  reform, 
electoral  politics,  establishing  a  busi- 
ness, or  institutional  alterations,  re- 
ceived little  attention,  since  these 
changes  would  obviously  not  make  a 
a  total— or  instantaneous-revolution. 
Gaining  power  was  considered  a  male 
conception  of  revolution;  we  didn't 
want  a  piece  of  the  pie,  we  wanted  to 
eliminate  the  pie. 

Although  we  seldom  spoke  in  terms 
of  purity,  it  functioned  as  an  under- 
lying value.  We  justified  the  fact  that 
most  of  the  women  coming  to  our 
meetings  shared  the  same  downwardly- 
mobile  lifestyle  with  the  belief  that 
our    politics  just   hadn't    had  enough 


Reassessing  Basics/31 


chance  to  spread.  Mostly  we  concerned 
ourselves  with  doing  everything  cor- 
rectly and  according  to  our  women- 
ideals,  without  any  patriarchal  influ- 
ence. 

I  understand  the  importance  these 
politics  had  for  me.  Responding  to 
women's  assigned  inferior  role,  I  need- 
ed to  see  myself  as  valuable.  After 
twenty-odd  years  of  men's  treatment, 
my  hatred  of  them  could  no  longer  be 
contained.  Associating  only  with  wom- 
en gave  me  strength  and  allowed  tem- 
porary escape  from  the  harsh  reality 
of  a  (hetero)  sexist  world.  My  work  to 
build  alternatives  seemed  more  con- 
structive than  expending  energy  to 
make  small  changes  in  overwhelming 
institutions,  especially  since  I  had  con- 
siderable difficulty  believing  that  there 
ever  would  really  be  a  revolution.  .  .the 
enemy  appeared  too  powerful. 

More  recently  I  have  come  to  under- 
stand other  assumptions  behind  my 
politics  which  have  caused  me  to  re- 
evaluate them.  The  first  of  these  is 
class  and  skin  privilege.  As  a  white 
woman  of  middle  class  background,  I 
usually  could  ignore  the  difficult  (e.g., 
men)  and  the  mundane  (e.g.,  jobs). 
Although  I  was  living  on  very  little 
money,  I  still  had  educational  privilege 
behind  me  so  that  I  could  re-enter  the 
work  force  at  a  comfortable  level 
whenever  I  chose. 

Having  process  rather  than  task 
completion  as  a  priority  also  reflects 
class  privilege.  If  our  needs  were  press- 
ing, our  immediate  concern  would  be 
to  finish  the  work  competently,  es- 
pecially since  so  much  begs  to  be  done. 


Too  mucn  process  orientation  con- 
tains debilitating  side  effects:  so  little 
work  reaches  successful  completion, 
the  wheel-spinning  sensation  drains 
energy,  resulting  in  a  high  turnover  and 
dropout  rate. 

Although  it  is  important  to  view 
positively  "feminine"  characteristics 
which  had  been  previously  devalued, 
holding  them  as  an  ideal  meant  that 
we  turned  inward,  essentially  passive 
and  powerless.  We  were  promoting 
the  traits  that  kept  us  weak;  we  had 
fallen  into  the  female  trap  in  a  more 
subtle,  but  no  less  insidious  manner. 
Why  should  we  help  perpetuate  our 
own  victimization  and  lesser  political, 
economic,  social  and  cultural  power? 
Much  more  important  would  be  to 
build  our  strength  and  increase  our 
capabilities.  We  have  been  well  trained 
in  the  ways  of  loving  and  being  hu- 
mane. Rather  than  staying  limited  to 
that  sphere,  we  can  expand  to  learning 
how  to  deal  with  power,  to  get  what 
we  need,  to  be  strong. 

Viewing  separatism  as  a  strength- 
building  process  still  seems  valid.  How- 
ever, I  now  see  the  necessity  of  not 
getting  stuck  there,  but  of  keeping  a 
long-term  perspective.  I  still  prefer  to 
work  with  women,  especially  lesbians; 
but  that  preference  becomes  self-indul- 
gence if  I  don't  also  think  in  terms  of 
how  and  when  to  work  with  men  and 
straight  women  in  order  to  win  & 
revolution. 

Perhaps  the  turning  point  in  my 
thinking  came  from  trying  to  under- 
stand why  almost  all  the  women  who 
attended    our    meetings    were    white, 


32/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  4,  winter,  1976 


©    Catherine  Leonardo  1975 


Reassessing  Basics/33 


middle  class,  and  frequently,  down- 
wardly-mobile. After  many  rationaliza- 
tions, I  realized  that,  basically,  we  had 
nothing  to  offer  other  women.  The 
question  was  not  whether  they  chose 
to  come  but  whether  we  spoke  to  their 
needs.  The  reforms  we  shunned  often 
affected  women's  immediate  lives;  our 
purism  was  a  luxury  arising  from  privi- 
lege; focusing  on  process  drove  away 
task-  and  goal-oriented  women. 

As  defined  thus  far,  a  women's  revo- 
lution also  contains  limitations.  Al- 
though sex  remains  the  oldest  division 
among  people,  we  cannot  ignore  race, 
class,  age,  and  sexuality.  In  order  to  be 
revolutionary  lesbian-feminists,  we 
must  understand  the  lives  of  all  wom- 
en and  then  act  to  find  common  areas 
of  oppression  and  potential  avenues 
for  alliances.  An  eventual  union  of  all 
dispossessed  people  against  the  current 
power-holders  will  make  the  strongest 
revolution. 

We  need  a  more  constructive  per- 
spective on  the  overall  process  of  revo- 
lution. Each  day  we  must  build,  until 
we  shift  the  balance  of  power.  We 
won't  make  a  sudden  and  total  revolu- 
tion, nor  can  we  expect  to  create 
viable  post-revolutionary  structures 
within  this  society.  Instead,  our  vic- 
tory will  require  many  reforms,  altera- 
tions, and  compromises  to  be  able  to 
move  to  the  point  where  real  alterna- 
tives can  exist. 

We  can  use  already  existing  institu- 
tions, structures,  and  forms  as  effective 
steps  toward  total  change.  These  ap- 
proaches allow  a  more  productive  use 
of  time  and  energy,  especially  in  light 


of  four  considerations  about  alterna- 
tive institutions:  First,  the  established 
system  can  totally  ignore  alternatives 
if  they  so  choose  unless  back-up  power 
forces  recognition.  Second,  if  an  alter- 
native or  system  of  alternatives  began 
to  pose  a  threat,  the  current  govern- 
ment could  crush  us  in  a  minute  unless 
we  have  protection-they  still  have  the 
guns  and  the  money.  The  fact  that  al- 
ternatives tend  to  serve  only  a  few, 
usually  those  with  privilege,  poses  a 
third  difficulty:  before  alternatives 
will  be  effective  their  support  base 
must  expand  to  include  previously 
unreached  people.  Too  often  the  ha- 
vens they  provide  serve  as  a  means  for 
seclusion  from  the  daily  struggles  peo- 
ple face,  instead  of  as  a  means  to  crea- 
tively join  these  struggles.  Finally,  put- 
ting extensive  energy  into  alternatives 
usually  means  we  continue  operating 
from  a  service-providing  model  rather 
than  learning  how  to  gain  control  over 
our  lives. 

Which  leads  to  power.  Lesbian- 
feminists  have  centered  little  realistic 
thought  on  the  concept  of  power.  We 
have  considered  it  evil,  corrupting,  and 
male;  we  have  not  realized  the  neces- 
sity of  exercising  it.  Currently,  a  few 
rich  white  heterosexual  men  wield 
power  in  this  society.  This  means  they 
make  economic,  political,  social,  and 
cultural  decisions  about  our  lives- 
decisions  we  should  be  making.  But  in 
order  to  do  that  we  have  to  gain  power. 
If  we  shirk  this  fact,  we  concede  our 
lives  either  to  the  control  of  the  cur- 
rent power-holders,  or  to  the  future 
control  of  other  revolutionaries.  Thus, 


34IQuest 


©    Catherine  Leonardo  1976 


Reassessing  Basics/35 


to  end  our  victimization  and  begin  the 
steps  to  self-determination,  we  must 
strategize,  theorize,  and  act  in  power 
terms. 

With  the  goal  in  mind  of  forming  a 
new  society,  we  can  choose  when  to 
create  alternatives  and  when  to  work 
toward  changing  existing  structures,  by- 
asking  which  will  function  as  a  more 
effective  strategy  at  which  time.  The 
following  questions  have  been  designed 
to  aid  in  that  determination. 

Established  Institutions 

Why  does  the  institution  exist? 

What  useful  or  worthwhile  services 
does  this  institution  provide?  What  are 
the  negative  effects?  How  difficult 
would  it  be  to  provide  such  services  in 
other  ways?   Can  the  negative  effects 


HISI  KIKriORS  ol  MM  II  MINIS!  AND  LESBIAN  FILMS  AND  SLIDF 
SHOWS  SIN(  I  l>n  ////  WOMI  N  \  HIM  (001-  PART  OF  H(Mf/,v  s 
IMA(,I  IAMOVIH  INC  IS  A  NON  PROFIT.  EDUCATIONAL  DISTRIB- 
I  IOK  (  OMMII  I  I  I)  IO  pi;i  UNO  THF  IMAGF  MAKING  PRO(  FSS  INK) 
WOMI  N  S  HANDS  WRIIF  FOR  FILM  LIST.  OR  SFND  11.50  FOR  CAT 
AIO(,  OF  WOMEN S  FILM  RFVIFWS  DIS I  KlHi:  IORS.  ARTICLES  ON 
FIIM.  VIDFO.  POLI I ICS  AND  PROCESS. 


HI. Ml  OH/'    Ji«i  M„„.  Si, 


01060 


be  cancelled  with  other  services,  ac- 
tions, laws?  How  difficult  would  this 
be?  Does  this  institution  meet  the 
needs  of  a  limited  population  (by  sex, 
race,  age,  class)?  Do  those  not  served 
need  it?  Can  it  be  made  to  expand  and 
still  be  useful?  Will  expansion  eliminate 
its  detriments  or  are  they  of  a  different 
nature?  In  other  words,  is  this  institu- 
tion worth  going  after?  For  reform? 
For  destruction? 

What  history  do  radicals  and  liberals 
have  with  this  institution? 

What  attempts  already  have  been 
made  to  change  this  institution?  By 
whom?  In  what  way?  Were  they  effec- 
tive? How  were  those  attempts  and/or 
changes  similar  to,  or  different  from, 
what  we  want?  Will  those  differences 
make  it  easier  or  more  difficult  for  us? 
If  similar,  how  did  they  succeed?  Is 
this  applicable  to  us?  Or,  what  were 
their  reasons  for  failure?  Can  we  avoid 
these? 

How  can  this  institution  best  be  attack- 
ed or  approached? 

Who  owns  and  controls  the  institution? 
Who  has  the  real  power  and/ or  figure- 
head power?  Are  there  other  self- 
interests  besides  profit-making?  What 
are  the  politics  of  those  with  power? 
Are  they  open  to  making  some  con- 
cessions or  totally  immobile?  If  it's  a 
group,  what  is  their  make-up?  Who  is 
firmly  entrenched?  Are  they  elected  or 
appointed,  and  could  the  balance  of 
power  be  shifted  with  a  few  individual 
changes?  What  are  their  weak  spots? 
Can  we  utilize  these? 


36/Quest 


Alternatives 

Why  create  an  alternative? 

To  whom  would  the  alternative  ap- 
peal? What  positive  and  negative  ef- 
fects would  it  have  on  which  people? 
What  effects  would  it  have  on  estab- 
lished institutions?  Is  the  alternative 
building  a  power  base?  What  alterna- 
tive leadership,  models,  structures,  and 
decision-making  processes  would  be 
developed?  How  could  the  alternative 
be  used  as  a  vision  for  the  future? 
What  would  the  alternative  provide? 
Could  this  be  best  obtained  by  expand- 
ing or  pressuring  existing  institutions? 
Is  the  alternative  being  built  simply  be- 
cause it  seems  too  hard  to  affect  the 
established  institutions? 

What   is   the   history  of  this  type  of 
alternative? 

What  similar  alternatives  already 
have  been  formed?  What  was  then- 
success  or  failure?  What  components 
worked  or  didn't  work?  How  do  those 
efforts  differ  from  ours? 

What  would  be  the  survival  situation 
for  the  alternative? 

Can  the  alternative  be  self-sufficient? 
If  not,  who  would  fund  it?  What  strings 
would  be  attached?  What  is  the  real 
amount  of  time,  money  and  energy 
necessary  to  build  and  maintain  an 
alternative?  Would  that  money,  time 
and  energy  be  more  effectively  used 
against  the  established  institution?  How 
will  the  alternative  be  affected  as 
social,  political  and  economic  situations 
change?   Is  the   alternative   tied  to  an 


existing  institution  to  the  extent  that 
overall  system  failure  would  destroy  it 
too?  Does  building  the  alternative 
leave  the  established  system  unguarded? 
After  an  examination  of  our  plans 
and  our  community  based  on  these 
questions,  we  can  determine  where  our 
efforts  will  be  most  effective. 

Karen  Browne,  the  founder  of  the 
Lesbian  Resource  Center  in  Minneapo- 
lis, is  presently  doing  a  study  of  Les- 
bian-Feminist Politics  through  Union 
Graduate  School 


Errata 

In  Vol  II,  No.  1,  the  article  "A  Woman 
Built  Environment:  Constructive  Fantasies" 
should  be  marked  ©  Copyrigh  t  Noel  Phyllis 
Birkby  and  Leslie  Kanes  Weisman  1975. 


UNION  W.A.G.E. 

ftW/9  Iv^a*?; f^itttpm  to  Qattj  'gouafity 


Write  for  free  brochure  about  our 
program,   goals  and  activities, 

PUBLICATIONS 

Labor  Heroines  -  10  women  Who  Led 
the  Struggle       $1 

Working  Women  &  Their  Organiza- 
tions    $1 .  25 

ORGANIZE  I     A  Working  Women's  Hand- 
book.    How  to  build  a  union, 
write  a  contract,  get  out  a 
newsletter.       Parliamentary  pro- 
cedure, negotiating  women's 
issues,  health  &  safety  on  the 
job,  building  a  rank  and  file 
caucus.      $2.75 

Bi-monthly  newspaper  about  working 
women  and  their  fight  to  organize. 

*7&  MCM8£*.SHIP  Su8SC«,0T/O*    *3*jL 

P.O.    Box  46  2     Berkeley,  Ca.,  947Q\ 


Reassessing  Basics/37 


Report  to  Our  Readers  1. 


With  "Organizations  and  Strategies," 
Quest  has  published  seven  issues.  We, 
the  Quest  staff,  want  to  share  how  this 
was  done,  both  in  terms  of  organiza- 
tional process  and  financial  develop- 
ment. In  this  issue,  we  discuss  primarily 
financial  development.  We  will  report 
more  on  our  editorial  and  administra- 
tive process  in  the  next  issue. 

As  we  are  about  making  changes  in 
society,  so  we  are  about  making  changes 
in  Quest.  Some,  like  price  increases, 
are  out  of  economic  necessity;  others, 
like  new  forms  of  distribution,  are  to 
get  Quest  to  more  women  more  effi- 
ciently. To  explain  the  changes,  how- 
ever, we  must  first  describe  how  we 
have  functioned  for  the  past  two  years. 

We  began  in  the  fall  of  1973,  with 
just  over  $1,500  in  donations,  pri- 
marily from  two  supporters,  and  an 
office  at  the  Institute  for  Policy  Stud- 
ies provided  through  the  job  of  one  of 
our  staff  members.  With  that  money, 
we  began  plans  for  the  magazine, 
announced  our  existence  in  ads  and 
through  10,000  brochures,  and  organ- 
ized three  fundraising  parties,  one  in 
New  York  and  two  in  Washington.  We 
raised  $2,250  at  the  parties,  which, 
along  with  advance  subscription  sales, 
paid  for  printing  and  mailing  the  first 
issue.  In  the  fall  of  1974,  the  Washing- 
ton Area  Feminist  Theatre  held  a  joint 
benefit  for  both  Quest  and  WAFT  that 
raised  $250.  Since  then,  we  have  done 


no  fundraising  outside  of  selling  the 
journal,  largely  because  the  work  of 
putting  out  three  more  issues  in  the 
year  took  much  more  time  than  any 
of  us  had  estimated. 

We  set  goals  about  quality,  and  we 
have  largely  stuck  to  those  goals.  We 
wanted  a  woman-produced  journal  that 
was  readable,  graphically  pleasing,  stur- 
dy, and  of  book  quality.  We  are  proud 
of  our  work  and  the  work  of  Diana 
Press,  a  woman-owned  and  operated 
business.  We  wanted  articles  that  were 
carefully  organized,  developed,  and 
edited.  That  took  considerable  time  in 
correspondence,  rewriting,  working 
with  authors,  and  editing.  We  hoped 
to  pay  authors  and  artists  adequate 
fees  for  their  work,  and  we  dreamed, 
eventually,  of  paying  ourselves  salaries 
for  our  work.  We  believe  that  feminist 
projects  should  support  women  at  a 
decent  living  standard. 

As  our  financial  statement  illus- 
trates all  too  clearly,  the  income  from 
selling  Quest  does  not,  by  itself,  make 
these  goals  and  dreams  possible.  Our 
expenses  exceeded  income  in  1975, 
even  after  we  had  modified  some  of 
our  goals,  like  the  amount  paid  to 
authors  and  artists.  We  need  urgently 
to  concentrate  on  promotion  and  fund- 
raising,  but  we  do  not  have  the  time. 

With  the  help  of  friends,  however, 
we  designed,  printed,  folded,  stuffed, 
sealed,  labeled,  and  bundled  mailings 


38/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


of  another  10,000  promotional  packets 
over  a  period  of  eight  months  in  1975. 
The  returns  were  high  according  to 
direct  mail  standards,  but  for  all  the 
work,  we  still  began  our  second  year 
without  the  number  of  subscribers  we 
could  have  reached  through  more  such 
promotion. 

Few  of  our  readers  realize  that  we 
have  had  only  two  staff  women  work- 
ing full-time,  and  they  are  not  even 
paid  by  Quest.  The  other  Quest  staff 
women  work  at  other  jobs,  and  put  in 
10  to  20  hours  a  week,  including  even- 
ings and  weekends. 

We  are  explaining  how  we  work 
because  we  believe  feminists  must 
share  our  processes  as  well  as  our 
products.  Part  of  our  process  is  the 
struggle  for  financial  self-sufficiency- 
an  important  goal  for  any  feminist 
undertaking.  Thus  we  have  spent  much 
energy  in  the  past  6  months  evaluating 
our  situation  and  making  some  difficult 
and  significant  changes. 

Our  first  decision  was  to  start  pay- 
ing a  full-time  salary  to  our  production 
and  design  editor.  Alexa  Freeman  had 


been  struggling  for  over  a  year  on  par- 
tial unemployment  and  $100.00  a 
month  from  Quest  (all  we  were  able  to 
manage),  doing  a  full-time  job  for 
Quest  Unwilling  to  continue  that  situa- 
tion any  longer,  we  made  a  commit- 
ment to  pay  her  a  full-time  salary, 
beginning  November,  1975,  and  to 
raise  the  money  through  renewed  fund- 
raising  efforts. 

Our  second  decision  came  after  our 
patient  bookkeeper  completed  a  care- 
ful analysis  of  what  we  were  spending 
to  produce  and  deliver  Quest.  (See  Cost 
Analysis.)  Although  we  knew  our  prices 
were  too  low  to  enable  us  to  pay 
salaries,  we  had  a  greater  fear  con- 
firmed: our  prices  were  too  low  to 
cover  our  present  production  costs. 
We  had  to  face  price  increases. 

We  checked  the  prices  of  other 
small  publications  of  comparable  qual- 
ity and  found  that  most  independent 
magazines  and  journals  cost  a  lot  more 
than  we  charge.  We  discovered  that  the 
cheaper  ones  often  are  affiliated  with 
another  organization  or  university  that 
funds  them.   Other  types   of  publica- 


COST  ANALYSIS 

Individual 

Bookstore 

Single 

Institution 

Subscription 

Sales 

Issue 

Subscription 

Price  Per  Copy 

$1.75 

$1.20 

$2.00 

$3.00 

Cost 

1.98 

1.94 

2.16 

1.95 

Gain  -  (Loss) 

(.23) 

(.74) 

(.16) 

1.05 

%  of  Total  Sales 

44.8% 

37.9% 

6% 

5.8% 

Report  to  Our  Readers,  Part  1/39 


tions  survive  not  through  subscriptions, 
but  through  high  percentages  of  adver- 
tising. 

These  facts  raised  some  crucial  ques- 
tions. Would  our  readers  and  feminists 
generally  understand  why  we  had  to 
charge  $9  a  year  for  a  subscription 
when  some  feminist  publications  were 
only  charging  $6.  Will  you  pay  more 
for  a  typeset  journal  with  justified 
columns  than  for  typewritten  copy? 
Does  it  matter  to  you  whether  we  have 
graphics  and  photographs,  a  three- 
color  laminated  cover,  and  a  book 
binding?  How  much  do  our  readers 
know  about  publishing?  Do  you  know 
the  cost  differences  between  a  news- 
paper and  a  book? 

We  thought  about  our  feedback  from 
subscribers  and  women  around  the 
country.  Their  comments  usually  in- 
cluded praise  of  the  fine  quality  of 
Quest.  We  reaffirmed  our  belief  that  it 
is  important  to  produce  that  quality 
without  Random  House,  Vintage,  a 
university  press  or  the  Ford  Founda- 
tion: women  can  and  will  do  it  our- 
selves. 

So  we  have  faced  the  inevitable  and 
have  raised  our  prices,  starting  with  the 
next  issue.  We  hope  that  our  readers 
will  understand  these  necessities,  and 
make  a  continued  commitment  to  sup- 
port Qwesf-because  it  is  important, 
essential,  and  unique.  (See  new  prices 
printed  on  flap). 

We  altered  our  pricing  policy  slight- 
ly to  encourage  women  to  subscribe 
annually  rather  than  buy  single  copies. 
With  foolish  generosity,  we  had  mailed 
all    overseas    subscriptions    airmail   at 


our  expense.  Now  they  will  go  surface 
mail  unless  the  subscriber  pays  for  air 
rates.  One-third  of  our  postage  expenses 
went  towards  mailing  out  issues  singly 
to  new  subscribers  who  requested  back 
issues,  rather  than  starting  with  the 
next  issue  published.  We  wanted  to 
provide  as  many  back  issues  as  we 
could  for  our  readers,  but  these  favors 
were  self-defeating.  Now  we  will  charge 
postage  and  handling  for  a  back  issue 
that  has  to  be  mailed  singly. 

We  have  made  other  changes  that  we 
hope  will  mean  better  service  to  our 
readers.  The  agony  of  mail  foulups  the 
first  year  cannot  be  relived.  In  addi- 
tion, processing  renewals  added  an 
expensive  step  to  our  simple,  manual 
mailing  list  maintenance.  We  decided  to 
try  a  computer-coded  system  that  costs 
more  but  saves  time  in  getting  issues 
to  you,  as  well  as  reduces  errors  that 
result  in  lost  copies.  We  have  to  go  to  a 
big  business  mailing  service  for  this, 
and  are  not  happy  about  it.  We  view 
it  as  a  tolerated  necessity  until  women 
can  create  a  feminist  subscription  and 
mailing  service.  We  encourage  and 
would  support  women  interested  in 
developing  this  business  crucial  to  our 
movement. 

As  evidence  that  needs  such  as  these 
can  be  met  by  other  feminist  businesses, 
we  now  have  Women  in  Distribution, 
Inc.  (WinD),  handling  all  our  bookstore 
orders— accounting,  records-keeping, 
filling  and  shipping.  They  are  a  new 
feminist  distribution  company,  and 
they  relieve  us  of  a  job  that  used  to 
take  the  time  of  two  and  a  half 
Quest    staff   women.    Again,    this   in* 


40/Quest 


Receipts 

Subscriptions 

Individuals 

$8,212.50 

Institutions 

1,726.35 

Canada  and  Mexico 

374.83 

Less 

(1.03) 

Overseas 

363.01 

*Agencies 

445.60 

Total  Subscription  Income 

11,121.26 

Sales 

Single  Copy 

1,241.50 

*Bookstores 

4,158.88 

*Groups 

.81.00 

*Bulk 

232.00 

Total  Sales  Income 

5,714.18 

Advertising 

305.00 

*  Contributions 

1,948.00 

Miscellaneous  Income 

5.00 

TOTAL  INCOME 

$19,093.44 

*Agencies-order  subscriptions  for  libraries. 
*Bookstores-get  a  40%  discount  on  the  re- 
tail price. 

*Groups-These  are  standing  bulk  discount 
orders.  Ten  copies  of  an  issue  is  the  mini- 
mum order  for  bulk  discounts. 
*Bulk-These  are  one-issue,  one-time  orders. 
*Contributions-Approximately  85%  of  this 
income  is  from  Quest  staff. 


Expenses 

*Diana  Press  $13,825.50 

*  Mailing  Service  523.26 

*  Membership  &  Copyright       22.14 


*  Miscellaneous 

206.80 

*  Postage 

1,249.72 

Office  Expenses 

Supplies 

156.59 

*Typing 

98.00 

Bookkeeper 

227.50 

Total  Office  Expense 

482.09 

Production  Expense 

Permanent  Supplies  82.34 

Consumable  Supplies  115.04 

*  Design  Editor  1,100.00 

*PhotoWork  118.17 

*Authors  988.00 

*Artists  947.00 

Total  Production  Expense  3,350.55 

*Promotion  Cost  307.21 

Fund  Raising  Cost  -0- 

TOTAL  EXPENSE         $19,967.27 


Deficit 


($      873.83) 


*  Diana  Press-This  covers  payment  for  type- 
setting, camera  work,  paper,  printing,  lami- 
nating, binding,  and  trimming  for  four  issues. 

*  Mailing  Service-includes  list  maintenance, 
addressing,  labeling,  and  bundling.  This  re- 
flects cost  for  three  issues  prior  to  con- 
verting to  a  computer  system. 
*Membership  and  Copyright  Fees-We  belong 
to  the  Committee  of  Small  Magazine  Edi- 
tors  and  Publishers.  This  fee  is  not  paid  until 
December. 

*  Miscellaneous- primarily  travel  to  Diana 
Press. 

*Postage-There  are  seven  categories  of  pos- 
tage expense  but  because  of  space  we  have 
only  listed  the  total. 

*Typing-is  final  type  of  copy  before  type- 
setting. Friends  who  need  extra  cash  do 
this  work  when  we  can't  make  the  deadlines. 

*  Design  Editor-This  item  will  be  replaced 
by  a  full  time  salary  starting  November 
1,    1975. 

** Authors  and  Artists-We  also  offer  con- 
tributors payment  in  copies  of  Quest.  This 
amount  includes  payments  for  five  issues, 
whereas,  in  1974  Quest  paid  $1,415.00  to 
contributors  in  two  issues. 
*Promotion  Cost-This  figure  does  not  fully 
reflect  the  cost  of  mailings  done  this  year 
because  the  paper  and  supplies  were  pur- 
chased in  late  1974.  About  $1,500  was 
spent   then. 


Report  to  Our  Readers,  Part  1/41 


creases  our  cost,  but  it  frees  us  to 
work  more  on  other  aspects  of  the 
journal,  as  well  as  enables  us  to  sup- 
port feminist  economic  independence 
through  supporting  feminist  businesses. 

Again,  our  original  objective  had 
been  to  become  self-sustaining  through 
publishing  Quest.  Our  last  two  years 
have  demonstrated  that  this  is  un- 
realistic. We  must  devote  time  and 
energy  to  extra  fundraising;  within  a 
year  we  may  have  to  pay  three  salaries 
and  rent,  which  we  are  not  now  paying. 
Our  present  arrangement  with  IPS 
covering  two  salaries  and  overhead 
may  not  continue  past  June,  1976. 
We  must  triple  our  income  to  manage 
these  and  additional  objectives. 

If  we  cannot  raise  the  funds,  then 
we  face  tougher  decisions.  It  might 
mean  coming  out  only  twice  a  year, 
printing  fewer  words,  not  paying  auth- 
ors and  artists  at  all,  no  graphics,  no 
bookstore  distribution,  no  typesetting, 
no  binding,  no  color  cover,  no  lami- 
nating, and  less  time  to  edit  and  work 
on  developing  articles.  All  are  grim 
prospects.  Yet  without  more  financial 
support,  they  are  real  considerations. 

There  is  a  real  irony  about  Quest: 
since  we  have  been  able  to  produce  a 
quality  publication  thus  far,  nobody 
quite  believes  that  we  have  real  short- 
ages of  money  and  time,  and  face 
real  crises.  It  is  similar  to  what  the 
rich  say  to  the  poor:  "you've  made  it 
this  long;  you  can  make  it  longer." 
Unfortunately,  this  isn't  true.  Quest 
has  made  it  this  long  because  we  spent 
almost  a  year  before  publishing  our 
first  issue  doing  fundraising.  We  have 


survived  until  now  on  the  income  from 
subscriptions  and  on  what  was  left  over 
from  our  initial  fund  drives.  The  sur- 
plus has  run  out,  and  the  subscriptions 
aren't  paying  the  bills.  We  must  now 
appeal  to  you-our  readers. 

Support  takes  many  forms.  Not  all 
support  means  direct  monetary  con- 
tributions, although  if  you  can  manage, 
please  do.  Subscribing,  ordering,  buy- 
ing and  promoting  Quest  are  the  most 
vital,  on-going  ways  to  insure  our  sur- 
vival. We  are  not  growing  fast  enough, 
and  need  to  reach  more  new  audiences. 
You  can  put  us  in  touch  with  people 
who  haven't  heard  about  Quest.  You 
can  promote  us,  urge  others  to  sub- 
scribe, explain  to  them  why  it  is  im- 
portant to  subscribe,  recommend  it  as 
a  text  in  women's  studies  courses,  and 
order  it  from  us,  rather  than  xeroxing 
it.  We  don't  understand  why  some 
feminists  teaching  courses  put  Random 
House,  Doubleday  and  MacMillan  on 
their  order  lists,  but  write  us  for  per- 
mission to  xerox  from  Quest.  That 
puts  money  into  the  hands  of  the  male 
capitalist  publishing  houses  and  takes 
it  from  feminists-we  suggest  writing 
Random  House  for  permission  to  xe- 
rox, and  ordering  Quest  from  us. 

Other  ways  to  help?  Order  Quest 
for  your  study  and  discussion  groups. 
We  have  bulk  rates  for  group  orders. 
Ask  your  local  and  school  libraries 
and  your  employer  to  subscribe;  give 
your  friends  subscriptions  for  birth- 
days and  holidays,  and  bug  your  local 
(straight  and  movement)  bookstores  to 
order.  Get  your  local  paper  and  maga- 
zines to  review  an  issue,  and  encourage 


42/Quest 


other  women's  publications  and  groups 
to  review  and  mention  feminist  press 
publications  more  than  they  review 
male-published  media,  for  reviews  and 
mentions  are  vital  promotion  and  ad- 
vertising that  reach  new  readers.  With 
10,000  subscribers  Quest  could  pay 
three  full-time  salaries,  rent  office 
space,  and  continue  to  publish  in  the 
same  style.  With  1,500  subscribers,  we 
cannot. 

Last,  but  not  least,  think  about  who 
you  know  with  money  (might  it  be 
yourself?!)  Ask  them,  go  ahead.  There's 
nothing  to  lose  and  everything  to  gain. 
If  you  can't  do  it  yourself,   send  us 


their  names  and  addresses;  we'll  ask. 
We  think  what  we're  doing  is  impor- 
tant and  vital.  We  know  that  in  order 
to  make  it  happen,  we  need  at  least 
$10,000,  immediately.  We  aren't 
ashamed  to  ask  those  who  have  it  to 
support  important  feminist  work. 
There  are  millions  of  women  in  Amer- 
ica; if  even  2Vi%  of  the  400,000  who 
subscribe  to  MS  at  $10  a  year  sent  in 
$1.00  to  Quest,  we  would  have  that 
$10,000.  Think  about  it-the  money  is 
there.  We  need  your  help  so  that 
Quest  can  continue,  grow,  improve, 
and  expand  in  new  directions.  Will  you 
help? 


I  wish  to  support  Quest  in  its  third  year  of  publication  by   making  the 
following  financial  commitment(s): 

□  Becoming  a  sustaining  member  of  Quest  with  a  $25.00  contribution  (one 
free  subscription  included); 


D  Ordering 


.gift    subscriptions    beginning    with    "Leadership"    or 


following  issues.  Specify: 


Q  Ordering. 


.bulk  copies  of  one  or  more  of  the  following  issues 


(Please  circle):  vol.  I,  no.  2,  3,  4  vol.  II,  1,  2,  3,  4. 


NAME 


ADDRESS 


ZIP 


New  prices  are  listed  on  flap.  Please  make  checks  payable  to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly, 
and  mail  to  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003.  Thank  you. 


Report  to  Our  Readers,  Part  1/43 


use 

and 
Misuse 

of 
Coalitions 

by 

Sandra  Flowers 


The  following  discussion  is  based  on 
an  analysis  of  common  problems  en- 
countered in  coalition  politics.  In  many 
cases,  the  problems  are  not  recognized. 
More  often,  however,  the  problems 
simply  are  not  acknowledged  openly, 
though  individual  members  may  be 
aware  of  them.  Whatever  the  situation, 
the  occurrence  of  such  problems  tends 
to  act  upon  the  effectiveness  of  the 
coalition.  This  effectiveness  is  measur- 
ed not  only  by  whether  or  not  the 
coalition  influences  the  outcome  of  an 
issue,  but  also  by  the  development  of 
perspective  and  interaction  among 
coalition  members. 


Kinds  of  Coalitions 

Coalitions  are  of  two  kinds:  1)  those 
which  form  in  response  to  short-term 
issues,  such  as  passage  of  legislation, 
arousing  public  sentiment  against  poli- 
tical persecution,  etc.,  and  2)  those 
which  act  as  a  clearinghouse  or  united 
front  for  ongoing  issues  such  as  rape, 
school  desegregation,  etc.*  While  a 
clearinghouse  coalition  is  usually  tho- 
rough in  defining  its  processes  and 
activities,  short-term  coalitions  may 
deem  such  action  unnecessary,  relying 
upon  the  actual  coming  together  of  or- 
ganizations around  a  particular  issue  to 
be  definition  enough. 


*Where  necessary  for  clarification,  this  ar- 
ticle will  distinguish  between  these  by  the 
terminology  "short-term  coalition"  and 
"clearinghouse  coalition."  Unless  so  desig- 
nated, comments  refer  to  both  types  of 
coalitions. 


44/ Quest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


photograph  by  Charlotte  Bunch 


Recognizing  and  Dealing 
With  Common  Problems 


izations  which  are  in  need  of  image 
enhancement. 


"Open"  coalitions,  those  which 
strive  for  the  broadest  possible  base 
and  actively  recruit  member  organiza- 
tions from  the  general  political  com- 
munity, are  most  susceptible  to  divisive- 
ness  and  internal  conflict.  Some  of 
these  tendencies  can  be  ameliorated  by 
the  establishment  of  coalition  policies 
which  bind  all  members.  Such  policies 
might  include,  but  not  necessarily  be 
limited  to:  establishing  guidelines  for 
agendas,  conduct,  and  procedures  du- 
ring meetings,  such  as  limiting  voting 
representatives  of  any  single  organiza- 
tion to  previously  agreed-upon  num- 
bers, or  asking  each  member  organiza- 
tion to  designate  specific  coalition 
representatives  and  alternates;  requiring 
all  member  groups  to  take  on  some 
task  which  can  relieve  the  coalition's 
workload-even  if  it  is  no  more  than 
circulating  flyers;  having  all  activities 
undertaken  in  the  name  of  the  coali- 
tion approved  by  the  coalition;  stipu- 
lating that  funds  raised  in  the  name  of 
the  coalition  are  for  the  use  of  the 
coalition  and  not,  except  for  previous- 
ly agreed-upon  reimbursement,  for  in- 
come for  member  organizations;  en- 
forcing a  firm  stance  against  internal 
politicking  and/or  "baiting"  tactics, 
which  can  be  difficult  to  pinpoint,  but 
when  the  coalition  senses  power  plays, 
they  should  not  go  unchallenged. 

Further,  because  of  the  nature  of 
their  composition,  many  coalitions 
must  contend  with  clashing  organiza- 
tional styles  and  the  presence  of  organ- 


Organizational  styles 

Most  organizations  which  join  a 
coalition  will  not  conduct  all  their 
issue-related  activities  through  the  co- 
alition. Indeed,  this  continuation  of 
extra-coalition  activities  should  be  en- 
couraged in  the  hope  that  outside 
activity  will  both  short-stop  an  organi- 
zation's tendency  to  impose  its  own 
style  upon  the  coalition  and  broaden 
exposure  for  the  issue.  If  a  coalition 
has  not  made  clear  what  its  collective 
style  and  methods  will  be,  the  different 
preferences  of  individual  organizations 
can  result  in  power  plays,  in-fighting, 
and  issue  co-optation  which  can  render 
the  coalition  politically  impotent. 

This  is  most  clearly  seen  in  the  ex- 
treme of  street  politics  -vs-  suite  poli- 
tics. Those  who  espouse  suite  politics 
may  have  much-needed  resources,  such 
as  money  and  extensive  communication 
networks,  at  their  disposal.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  advocates  of  street 
politics  will  generally  be  the  organiza- 
tions which  can  most  effectively  per- 
sonalize an  issue  to  various  constituen- 
cies. The  ideal  open  coalition  will  con- 
sist of  both  kinds  of  organizations.  But 
too  often  they  become  adversaries 
when  the  coalition  is  both  open  and 
loosely  structured  or  defined. 

Image  enhancement. 

While  all  members  of  a  coalition 
may  have  a  degree  of  commitment  to 
an  issue,  one  must  not  disregard  other 
motives.    This   is    particularly  true  of 


Use  and  Misuse  of  Coalitions/45 


short-term  coalitions,  since  loyalty  to 
such  coalitions  is  minimal  and  must  be 
inspired  quickly.  In  one  coalition,  for 
example,  the  president  of  a  women's 
group  stated  that  their  organization 
had  joined  the  coalition  because  the 
issue  was  a  program  priority  for  the 
organization  that  year.  This  is  among 
the  most  shallow  reasons  for  joining 
a  coalition.  Such  an  organization  often 
advances  its  own  interests  to  the  detri- 
ment of  not  only  the  coalition  but  of 
the  issue.  Organizations  of  this  type 
are  prone  to  make  public  statements  or 
take  action  in  their  name  on  behalf  of 
the  coalition  but  without  the  coalition's 
authorization  and  sometimes  without 
its  knowledge. 

Another  instance  of  image  enhance- 
ment takes  place  when  an  organization 
comes  to  the  coalition  for  the  resources 
and  alliances  it  offers.  For  example,  it 
may  be  that  an  organization  needs  an 
"in"  to  a  minority  community.  If  a 
coalition  has  representatives  from  mi- 
nority organizations,  an  image-enhan- 
cer may  join  for  that  reason,  under  the 
cover  of  the  issue.  Or  the  image  en- 
hancement motivation  may  be  the 
publicity  which  an  uninspiring,  non- 
productive organization  can  derive  from 
coalitions  built  around  media-popu- 
larized issues. 

Do  these  two  considerations-the 
need  for  image  enhancement  and  the 
conflict  of  organizational  style-mean 
that  coalitions  would  do  better  to 
restrict  their  memberships?  To  a  cer- 
tain extent,  yes.  It  is  politically  un- 
sound to  issue  a  general  call  for  a  coali- 
tion. Rather,  the  call  should  be  limited 


to  groups  whose  political  stances  and 
priorities  on  an  issue  have  more  simi- 
larities than  dissimilarities;  who  have 
achieved  the  organizational  security 
which  enables  them  to  work  cooper- 
atively in  a  multi-organizational  setting; 
and  who  do  not  have  a  reputation  for 
disruption  and  co-optation. 

Above  all,  coalitions  must  think 
beyond  the  deceptive  lure  of  strength 
of  numbers.  A  prevalent  attitude  among 
coalition  people  is  that  the  more  com- 
munities represented,  the  better  the 
chance  of  swaying  public  opinion.  This 
attitude  has  some  merit,  but  there  are 
times  when  it  might  be  more  effica- 
cious for  individual  groups  to  promote 
an  issue  independent  of  the  coalition. 
If  this  is  the  case,  but  it  still  seems 
desirable  or  advantageous  for  a  coali- 
tion to  have  input  on  a  particular  com- 
munity's issue-related  activities,  this 
can  be  accomplished  indirectly.  Litera- 
ture, teach-ins,  or  similar  services  can 
be  provided  to  organizations  which 
can  move  freely  within  their  own  com- 
munities, but  for  one  reason  or  another 
cannot  be  integrated  harmoniously  in- 
to the  coalition.  (Such  a  situation 
might  arise  with  an  extremely  radical 
group  and  a  conservative  coalition  or 
vice  versa;  sexually  mixed  organiza- 
tions and  all-female  coalitions,  etc.) 

Issue  Interpretation 

If  a  coalition's  members  understand 
and  respect  the  group's  politics  and 
style,  interpretation  of  the  issue  should 
be  considerably  easier.  Otherwise,  de- 
fining the   issue   can  become  a  trying 


46/Quest 


experience  fought  out  in  three-hour 
meetings  or  a  series  of  agonizing,  hos- 
tile confrontations.  It  is  during  this 
process  that  splinter  groups  and  hid- 
den agendas  are  likely  to  be  formed. 
An  open  coalition  is  particularly  con- 
ducive to  diluting  the  issue,  i.e.,  tacking 
on  so  many  "related"  issues  and  caus- 
ative factors  that  the  issue  is  lost  in  a 
sea  of  everyone's  oppressions. 

In  interpreting  an  issue,  it  is  cer- 
tainly necessary  to  reach  a  consensus 
as  to  why  the  coalition  supports  or 
opposes  an  issue.  Generalities  such  as 
"working  women  need  this"  are  too 
vague.  But  neither  is  it  advisable  for 
the  entire  coalition  to  interpret  the 
issue  for  only  one  audience  to  the  ex- 
clusion of  others-welfare  mothers,  in- 
carcerated or  elderly  women,  etc.-un- 
less  it  is  a  coalition  of  one  particular 
class  or  interest  group. 

Issue  interpretation  is  done  best 
during  the  planning  stages  of  the  coali- 
tion before  any  public  activity  is  begun. 
Doing  an  overview  of  the  impact  of  the 
issue  among  various  populations  at  this 
point  can  not  only  save  time  but  also 
provide  the  rationale  for  determining 
which  groups  are  sought  for  coalition 
membership  and  what  kinds  of  public 
education  and  interpretation  will  be 
needed. 

Unfortunately,  some  individuals  who 
represent  an  organization  are  one  of 
two  or  three  people  in  their  entire  or- 
ganization who  understand  and  actual- 
ly support  the  issue.  In  these  cases, 
their  organizations  often  have  endorsed 
an  issue  or  a  coalition  of  which  they 
have  little  understanding  and  no  poli- 


tical base  for  supporting.  This  may  not 
seem  harmful  to  the  coalition,  but  if 
such  an  organization  makes  a  public 
statement  which  can  be  construed  as 
uninformed  or  anti-issue,  both  the 
coalition  and  the  issue  suffer.  Member 
organizations  should  be  encouraged  to 
provide  their  respective  organizations 
with  education  on  the  issue,  particular- 
ly as  such  education  can  be  designed 
to  personalize  the  issue  to  that  group. 

The  most  unfortunate  thing  a  coali- 
tion can  do  is  to  bring  together  a 
varied  group  of  organizations  and, 
through  a  limited  perspective,  mis- 
represent or  fail  to  represent  some  of 
the  coalition's  constituencies.  Fortu- 
nately, most  organizations  which  join 
a  coalition  have  enough  initiative  to 
bring  about  a  fair  representation  for 
the  people  they  represent.  The  coali- 
tion must,  however,  remain  aware  of  its 
responsibility  to  understand  how  its 
issues  affect  various  different  groups 
of  women.  (Rape,  for  instance,  is  an 
issue  which  feminists  have  not  success- 
fully interpreted  in  the  black  commun- 
ity, primarily  because  the  black  com- 
munity is  predominately  male-identi- 
fied and  feminist  politicization  of  rape 
has  been  anti-male.  There  is  also  the 
racist  legacy  of  black  men  who  have 
been  convicted  and  executed  for  rape 
in  such  disproportionate  numbers,  and 
the  way  in  which  rape  has  been  a  con- 
venient method  of  getting  black  men 
in  jail.) 

Additionally,  the  coalition  must 
avoid  the  pitfall  of  projecting  a  "pro- 
prietary attitude"  toward  issues.  Many 
issues   around  which  women  have  or- 


Use  and  Misuse  of  Coalitions/47 


ganized  do  not  affect  only  women. 
The  conditions  of  welfare  mothers,  for 
example,  affect  whole  families,  neigh- 
borhoods and  communities.  Groups 
which  project  a  "stay  out  of  this,  we 
can  handle  it"  attitude  are  seriously 
limiting  the  advances  which  might 
otherwise  be  made.  Similarly,  a  coali- 
tion which  interprets  an  issue  too  nar- 
rowly can  cut  itself  off  from  valuable 
resources  and  lose  support. 

Racial  Mixes  in  Coalitions 

One  generally  under-rated  benefit 
of  the  coalition  is  the  opportunity  it 
presents  for  a  racially  desegregated 
women's  group.  While  most  movement 
organizations  have,  by  this  time,  ad- 
mitted both  their  mandate  and  their 
inability  to  attract  and  retain  minority 


members,  it  is  also  true  that  many 
women's  groups  have  reached  the  con- 
clusion that  minority  women  will  not 
come  into  their  organizations  and  there- 
fore should  not  be  vigorously  pursued. 
This  is  compounded  and  seemingly 
confirmed  by  the  presence  of  organi- 
zations which  announce  through  their 
name  their  raison  d'etre-the  National 
Black  Feminist  Organization;  the  Na- 
tional Council  of  Negro  Women;  Black 
Women  Organized  for  Political  Action, 
et  al.  (This  is  not  to  suggest  that  such 
organizations  will  not  work  in  conjunc- 
tion with,  or  do  not  share,  some  of  the 
priorities  of  other  movement  organi- 
zations.) 

The  reasons  why  women's  groups 
are  largely  unintegrated  are  too  numer- 
ous, political,  and  emotional  to  discuss 
here.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  coalition 


48/Quest 


photograph  by  Linda  McGonigal 


does  offer  some  alternative,  if  only 
temporary  and  for  a  particular  issue. 
Minority  women  who  come  to  a  coali- 
tion do  at  least  have  the  assurance  of 
knowing  that  they  need  not  alter  or 
deny  the  priorities  of  their  community 
by  fully  committing  themselves  to  an 
organization  which  has  a  history  of 
nonresponsiveness  to  minority  issues. 
They  can  divert  some  of  their  strength 
and  resources  to  the  coalition  without 
sapping  their  own  community  in  the 
process.  When  the  issue  is  resolved  and/ 
or  the  desired  results  achieved,  mi- 
nority women  can  return  to  their  com- 
munities and  the  familiarity  of  then- 
own  organizations  knowing  they  have 
accomplished  something  they  may  not 
have  been  able  to  do  alone. 

Provided  the  coalition's  politics  were 
not  disruptive,  the  minority  women's 
communities,  organizations  and  credi- 
bility will  not  have  suffered  by  their 
participation  in  a  racially  mixed  group. 

Indeed,  the  chances  are  good  that 
both  the  minority  women's  position 
and  the  perspective  and  priorities  of 
the  other  coalition  groups  may  have 
been  enhanced  by  the  interaction  af- 
forded by  the  coalition. 

A  common  occurrence  in  the  racial- 
ly mixed  coalition  may  be  the  emer- 
gence of  a  black  (or  other  minority) 
ad  hoc  committee  or  caucus.  White 
feminists  are  sometimes  resentful  of 
this  blatant  discrimination  and  dis- 
trustful of  its  activities  and  politics. 
"Why  must  we  separate?"  is  the  com- 
mon question.  Some  white  feminists 
have  been  insensitive  enough  (curious, 
it's  called)   to  exert  pressure   or  out- 


right demands  to  be  admitted  to  these 
caucuses. 

While  the  coalition  may  view  the 
minority  caucus  as  threatening  (al- 
though to  their  credit,  some  coalitions 
encourage  it),  it  is  probably  inevitable 
at  some  point.  It  is  necessary  because 
of  the  imbalance  of  power  and  limited 
perspectives  which  minority  people  en- 
counter in  every  political  transaction. 
Such  conditions  frequently  lead  to 
distorted  representations  of  the  issue. 
Once  minority  women  have  seen  the 
direction  in  which  the  coalition  in- 
tends to  move,  they  will  usually  find 
it  necessary  to  caucus  and  examine 
how  their  communities  will  interpret 
or  benefit  by  the  coalition's  action. 
Feminists,  initiators  of  the  concept  of 
a  woman's  right  to  define  experiences 
for  herself,  must  understand  the  doubly 
oppressed  minority  woman's  need  for 
public  privacy,  so  to  speak.  If  this 
basic  freedom  is  grudgingly  given  or 
not  respected  within  the  coalition, 
chances  are  that  coalitions,  like  other 
women's  movement  organizations,  will 
become  more  highly  segregated. 

Survival:  The  Issue-vs-the  Coalition 

When  opponents  have  exhausted 
their  "rational"  arguments  and  the 
coalition  has  effectively  refuted  them, 
the  less  noble  aspects  of  politics  enter 
the  picture.  At  this  stage,  opponents 
attempt  to  whittle  away  at  the  credibi- 
lity and  integrity  of  the  coalition  mem- 
bers. One  of  the  first  attacks,  when 
applicable,  is  against  the  collective 
sexuality  of  the  coalition  because  les- 


Use  and  Misuse  of  Coalitions/49 


bian  feminists  are  members.  Running 
neck  and  neck  with  lesbian-baiting  is 
red-baiting,  the  prophesy  of  a  commu- 
nist or  socialist  take-over  when  repre- 
sentatives of  those  disciplines  are  as- 
sociated with  the  coalition.  Sometimes, 
racist  innuendoes  and  the  threat  of 
miscegenation  are  still  used  against  in- 
tegrated coalitions. 

In  deciding  whether  or  not  to  res- 
pond to  such  tactics,  the  first  priority 
should  be,  "consider  the  source."  Prac- 
tically always,  the  source  will  be  the 
bigots  who  traditionally  espouse  white/ 
protestant/male  supremacy.  The  second 
consideration  should  be  whether  or 
not  the  coalition  should  lend  dignity 
to  the  hysterics  of  such  efforts  by 
responding  to  them,  and  if  so,  what  is 


to  be  gained  issue-wise. 

Generally,  attacks  against  the  people 
who  support  the  issue  are  merely  a 
secondary  attempt  at  casting  aspersions 
on  the  issue  while  "legitimately"  re- 
lieving pent-up  hostilities  toward  classes 
of  people.  If  the  issue  is  a  rather  com- 
plex one  and  subject  to  many  inter- 
pretations (ERA,  for  example),  the 
coalition  must  spend  the  greatest  part 
of  its  time  researching  and  developing 
fresh  interpretations  of  the  issue.  Other 
issues  which  are  ongoing  in  nature,  i.e., 
school  desegregation,  etc.,  require  con- 
stant monitoring  and  publicizing  of 
new  developments.  In  either  circum- 
stance, the  coalition  exists  because  of 
the  issue,  not  vice  versa. 

Given   its   limited   resources,  then, 


50/Quest 


photograph  by  Charlotte  Bunch 


how  much  time  can  a  coalition  justi- 
fiably spend  defending  itself?  This  con- 
sideration is  particularly  important  if 
one  remembers  that  audiences  are  gen- 
erally of  a  like  mind  as  the  performers. 
This  means  that  people  who  are  in- 
fluenced by  the  John  Birch  Society 
will  likely  be  influenced  by  them  re- 
gardless of  whether  or  not  the  coalition 
responds-people  believe  what  they 
want  to  believe.  In  those  cases  where 
there  is  conceivably  more  at  stake  than 
the  Birch  audience,  a  "letter  to  the 
editor"  or  some  other  kind  of  public 
statement  should.be  considered.  But  it 
is  neither  practical  nor  effective  to  en- 
gage in  a  running  commentary  of  res- 
ponses to  detractors'  attacks  on  the 
coalition  per  se. 

Summary 

In  the  final  analysis,  the  coalition's 
effectiveness  depends  not  so  much  on 
who  belongs  to  it  as  to  how  it  handles 
the  above  factors.  The  obvious  strengths 
of  a  coalition— its  diversity  of  members, 
expertise,  and  resources-will  be  mean- 
ingless if  the  internal  politics  of  the 
coalition   are   hazy  or  unmanageable. 

To  summarize: 
1)  The  coalition  must  define  itself  and 
determine  its  style  and  priorities.  In 
addition  to  structure,  this  includes  the 
coalition's  position  on  the  issue— not 
just  "pro"  or  "anti,"  but  for  what  rea- 
sons and  with  what  benefits  or  detri- 
ments to  whom.  As  each  organization 
comes  to  the  coalition,  it  should  be 
a&Jted  to  detail  its  particular  concerns 
and  told  before  commitments  are  made 


whether  or  not  the  coalition  is  in  a 
position  to  respond  to  these  concerns. 

2)  The  coalition  must  be  sensitive  to 
the  nature  of  its  composition.  This 
means  exercising  selectivity  in  mem- 
bership and  understanding  the  varying 
needs  of  its  members  and  their  con- 
stituencies. Organizations  which  can- 
not work  well  within  the  coalition 
framework  should  not  be  included  for 
the  sake  of  appearances  or  status.  Once 
members  have  been  selected,  an  apprai- 
sal of  their  resources  should  be  made 
and  every  organization  should  have 
responsibilities,  no  matter  how  minor. 

3)  The  coalition  should  focus  more  on 
the  issue  than  on  defending  its  right 
to  be  involved  in  the  issue. 

4)  The  coalition  should  strive  to  help 
its  members  by  providing  organization- 
al interaction  and  developing  broader 
perspectives  on  issues  affecting  dif- 
ferent populations. 

When  these  criteria  are  met,  whether 
or  not  the  desired  issue  outcome  is 
achieved,  the  coalition  will  have  made 
a  significant  contribution  toward  more 
responsive  and  effective  use  of  cooper- 
ative effort.  In  any  event,  the  coalition 
experience  will  have  been  an  educa- 
tional one  for  all  who  participated. 


Sandra  Flowers,  co-founder  and  past 
co-chairperson  of  the  Multi-Area  Rape 
Crisis  Council,  was  a  member  of 
Georgians  for  the  Equal  Rights  Amend- 
ment; presently  she  belongs  to  the 
National  Black  Feminist  Organization 
and  is  a  member  of  the  Atlanta  YWCA 
Board  of  Directors. 


Use  and  Misuse  of  Coalitions/51 


by  Vicki  Gabriner 

I  never  considered  myself  an  athlete 
and  never  included  athletic  activities 
as  an  important  part  of  my  life.  That 
is,  until  the  summer  of  1974.  After  32 
non-athletic  years,  the  closet  jock  in 
me  came  out.  I  discovered  that  I  could 
make  the  bat  hit  the  ball,  I  could 
catch,  I  could  run,  I  could  throw. 

In  everyone's  life  there  should  be  a 
summer  of  1974:  women  coming  to- 
gether from  a  variety  of  personal  ex- 
periences to  form  a  Softball  team:  a 
physical^Dolitical-spiritual  entity  known 
as  the  ALFA  Omegas,  sponsored  by 
the  Atlanta  Lesbian/Feminist  Alliance 
and  entered  in  City  League  compe- 
tition. 

It  was  an  expression  of  the  lesbian- 
feminist  community  which  had  been 
growing  in  Atlanta  and  around  the 
country  since  the  late  sixties.  It  was  a 
team  which  grew  out  of  the  com- 
munity and  would  then  feed  back  into 
it.  It  was  part  of  our  process  of  growth, 
change,  and  empowerment. 

It  was  also  an  expression  of  the  de- 
velopment   of  women's   participation 


graphics  by  Cynthia  Gair 

and  leadership  in  sports.  We  were  the 
daughters  and  sisters  of  Billie  Jean 
King,  Joan  Joyce,  Wyomia  Tyus,  Babe 
Didrikson  Zaharias,  and  Title  IX. 

Most  models  of  political  organiza- 
tion with  which  we  are  familiar,  whe- 
ther they  be  left-wing,  right-wing,  or 
middle-wing,  have  never  taken  serious- 
ly the  existence  of  women's  commun- 
ities, and  certainly  not  lesbian  com- 
munities. But  women's  communities 
are  growing,  and  over  the  past  five 
years  we  have  begun  to  develop  a 
politics  of  our  own.  We  have  created 
feminist  and  lesbian-feminist  institu- 
tions-health care  centers,  newspapers, 
rape  crisis  centers,  rap  groups,  theatre 
groups,  and  political  organizations. 

Our  growth  and  our  health  has  come 
from  our  creativity  and  our  willingness 
to  experiment.  It  has  come  from  our 
notion  that  politics  is  not  just  rhetoric 
and  demonstrations,  but  is  a  force 
that  reaches  into  all  the  crevices  of  our 
existence.  Fundamental  change,  accord- 
ing to  lesbian-feminism,  is  necessary 
not   only  in  our  material  conditions, 


52/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


but  also  in  our  psychic,  physical, 
spiritual,    and    emotional    states. 

Our  movement  still  has  many  prob- 
lems. It  has  been  criticized  justly  for 
its  middle  class  and  white  bias.  At 
times  it  lacks  in  other  ways:  times 
when  we  don't  believe  enough  in  our- 
selves. Most  of  us  have  not  been  able 
to  shuck  off  the  poison  of  homo- 
phobic thinking.  Some  of  us,  with  ties 
to  the  New  Left,  are  afraid  that  some 
of  the  things  we  do  are  not  "political" 
enough  as  defined  by  male  Left  organ- 
izations. But,  no  one  "out  there"  can 
tell  us  how  to  organize  ourselves  and 
our  sisters.  We  have  to  continue  to  look 
to  our  communities  and  build  a  move- 
ment which  springs  naturally  out  of 
our  lives. 

To  build  a  lesbian  movement,  to 
fortify  ourselves  for  survival  in  a  hos- 


tile environment,  to  create  massive 
social  change,  to  create  lesbian-feminist 
institutions,  to  build  a  power  base, 
we  need  to  ask  ourselves:  Where  do 
lesbians  hang  out?  What  is  important 
to  them/us?  Who  are  we?  What  skills 
do  we  need  to  learn  to  survive?  We 
are  just  beginning  to  figure  out  the 
answers  to  these  and  other  questions- 
a  difficult  process  because  most  of  us 
are  still  in  the  closet. 

Whatever  the  answers,  we  don't  have 
to  be  afraid.  We  should  welcome  un- 
orthodox forms  of  organization  as  well 
as  continue  to  rely  on  old  forms  which 
have  proven  valuable. 

The  Softball  Strategy 

Athletics  has  long  been  significant 
in  the  lives  of  many  lesbians.  Now, 
sports  is  becoming  a  significant  part  of 
the  lesbian-feminist  community.  Out- 
lesbian  softball  teams,  both  slow  and 
fast  pitch,  have  formed  and  entered 
City  Leagues  in  Washington,  D.C., 
Lexington,  Kentucky,  San  Francisco, 
California,  Columbia,  South  Carolina, 
Athens,  Georgia,  to  mention  a  few. 
Forms  differ:  In  San  Francisco,  there 
is  one  whole  league  sponsored  by 
women's  bars,  and  attendance  at  games 
runs  to  about  100.  In  Chicago,  there 
has  been  more  emphasis  on  organizing 
politically  around  sports  issues  than  on 
having  a  softball  team.  In  Boston, 
although  the  team  is  primarily  lesbian, 
they  do  not  emphasize  this. 

In  Atlanta,  we  are  lesbians,  we  are 
out,  and  we  have  been  outrageous 
about  it.  I  would  like  to  share  with  you 


Come  Out  Slugging!/ 53 


our  experiences  and  what  we  have 
learned. 

ALFA  has  been  into  softball  now 
for  two  seasons.  We  started  in  1974 
with  the  Omegas.  In  1975,  many  of 
our  fans  moved  from  the  stands  to  the 
field,  new  women  appeared  from  At- 
lanta and  other  cities,  and  we  grew  to 
three  teams:  the  Omegas,  the  Amazons, 
and  the  Tower  Hot  Shots.  The  Hot 
Shots  were  sponsored  by  a  local  wom- 
en's bar,  but  all  three  were  considered 
ALFA-sister-out-lesbian  teams. 

Softball  has  been  one  of  the  most 
powerful  and  energizing  activities  of 
the  ALFA  organization.  This  has  been 
true  on  several  levels:  1)  it  has  affirm- 
ed our  lesbianism;  2)  it  has  reinforced 
and  developed  positive  attitudes  about 
our  bodies;  3)  it  has  strengthened  our 
ability  to  function  collectively;  4)  it 
has  allowed  us  to  reach  out  to  women 
who  otherwise  would  not  be  active 
politically,  in  some  instances  meaning 
that  we  were  able  to  cross  class  lines; 
5)  it  has  built  ALFA  as  a  political 
organization;  6)  it  has  strengthened 
the  lesbian-feminist  community  in  sev- 
eral aspects. 

1)  The  outstanding  thing  about  our 
teams  was  not  that  we  were  lesbians, 
but  that  we  were  out-lesbians.  Being  a 
lesbian  isn't  easy,  and  softball  provided 
a  support  system  for  us.  Practice  and 
games  were  a  tremendous  physical  and 
psychic  release  for  us  after  a  day's 
work  in  the  closet.  Softball  was  a  place 
where  we  could  say  we  were  lesbians 
and  feel  good  about  it.  And  we  could 
tell  otljer  people  about  it  in  other  than 
the  usual  forms. 


It  was  interesting  to  see  the  reaction 
of  the  umpires  and  other  teams.  In  one 
instance,  an  umpire  warned  a  team  we 
were  playing  that  we  were  a  bunch  of 
queers.  The  funny  thing  was  that  we 
knew  most  of  the  women  on  the  other 
team  and  they  were  almost  all  lesbians 
also,  although  not  out.  In  other  in- 
stances, team  members  have  been  har- 
assed from  the  stands  about  their  sex- 
uality. 

On  the  other  hand,  teams  have 
picked  up  on  our  good  feelings  about 
each  other  and  our  eagerness  to  play. 
They  have  wanted  to  play  practice 
games  with  us  and  have  been  open  and 
communicative  when  we  played  them 
in  League  competition.  And  we  have 
been  able  to  make  contact  with  closet 
sisters  on  some  of  the  other  teams. 

It  has  always  been  a  funny  moment 
when  someone  asks,  "What  does  ALFA 
stand  for?"  Often  there  is  a  slight  gulp, 
and  then  you  say,  "The  Atlanta  Les- 
bian Feminist  Alliance,"  and  wait  for 
the  response.  "Ohhhhhh " 

We  have  reclaimed  the  language  that 
has  been  hurled  disdainfully  at  women: 
jocks  and  dykes  and  queers,  and  made 
them  into  "queer  cheers."  "2  bits,  4 
bits,  6  bits,  a  dollar.  All  for  the  queers, 
stand  up  and  holleri" 

2)  We  ran  onto  the  field,  most  of 
us  with  our  hairy  legs  and  hairy  arm- 
pits, sweating  in  the  sun,  exercising  our 
muscles.  Some  of  us  never  knew  that 
we  had  muscles  that  amounted  to 
much  of  anything  and  we  learned  that 
our  bodies  were  efficient;  some  of  us 
had  been  jocks  all  of  our  lives  but  had 
not  been  able  to  feel  complete  about 


oilOuesi 


our  bodies  because  we  hid  that  part  of 
us  that  loved  other  women. 

One  woman  who  had  been  into 
competitive  athletics  all  of  her  life  and 
was  straight-identified  when  she  started 
playing  with  us  said  that  the  ALFA 
team  was  important  to  her  because  it 
brought  her  in  contact  with  women 
who  related  physically  to  each  other 
with  comfort.  She  did  not  mean 
physically /erotically;  she  meant  hug- 
ging and  showing  affection.  That  pat 
on  the  behind  that  all  athletes  are  wont 
to  give  each  other  after  a  good  play 
often  falls  short  of  a  meaningful  touch. 
As  out-lesbians,  we  were  able  to  touch 
each  other  with  more  ease.  And  we 
felt  good  because  we  could  communi- 
cate that  to  other  women. 

Softball  made  us  feel  more  power- 
ful because  we  were  learning  to  use  our 
bodies  as  physical  instruments.  Softball 
is  not  as  demanding  as  karate  nor  as 
fast  as  basketball,  but  it  is  a  game  of 
skill,  power,  muscles,  and  brains.  We 
could  feel  ourselves  developing. 

3)  Our  teams  were  made  up  of  wom- 
en with  widely  differing  levels  of  skill. 
Some  women  had  been  in  competitive 
softball  for  years  and  were  accom- 
plished athletes;  others  were  playing 
softball  for  the  first  time;  still  others 
had  played  pre-pubertally,  but  had 
given  the  sport  up  during  the  rites  of 
passage  from  tomboy  to  adolescence. 

We  downplayed  the  hard-line  do-or- 
die  fierce  competition  of  most  teams 
and  sought  to  play  in  an  atmosphere  of 
positive  support,  a  chance  for  all  to 
play,  and  group  decisions.  Our  coaches 
were   our   lesbian   sisters  and  playing 


members  of  the  team.  The  rosters  were 
made  up  before  each  game  by  the 
whole  team.  During  the  first  summer 
we  kept  careful  track  of  how  many 
innings  each  woman  played,  so  that  no 
woman  would  be  a  bench-warmer.  Our 
way  of  functioning  was  very  unusual 
for  the  average  softball  team. 

We  had  differences  which  we  sought, 
not  always  successfully,  to  resolve 
through  group  discussion.  We  talked  a 
lot  about  whether  we  were  a  team 
because  we  wanted  to  play  softball  or 
whether  we  were  primarily  serving  a 
political  purpose.  We  had  conflicts 
over  the  question  of  competitiveness. 
Whereas  it  had  been  almost  totally 
downplayed  during  the  first  summer, 
it  emerged  as  a  need  for  some  players 
the  second  summer.  These  differences 
are  still  with  us;  they  will  have  to  be 
dealt  with  as  we  plan  our  teams  for 
our  third  season. 

Our  collectivity  extended  to  inter- 
team  relations  as  well.  During  the  sec- 
ond summer,  the  Omegas  and  the  Ama- 
zons were  in  the  same  league.  Many 
rules  of  competition  were  broken  the 
night  we  played  each  other.  It  was 
probably  the  first  time  in  City  League 
history  that  two  opposing  teams  warm- 
ed up  together,  sat  on  the  same  bench, 
cheered  each  other's  good  plays,  and 
had  the  same  fans  rooting  for  both. 

4)  After  our  games  the  team  would 
go  to  a  local,  predominantly  working 
class,  woman's  bar.  We  would  drink, 
dance,  and  talk  to  the  owners  about 
our  games.  (Another  women's  bar  in 
Atlanta  caters  to  the  professional, 
middle  class  clientele.) 


Come  Out  Slugging!/55 


Through  softball,  we  were  able  to 
build  a  solid  relationship  with  the 
owners  and  some  of  the  other  women 
at  the  bar  to  the  point  that  during  the 
second  summer,  they  sponsored  one 
of  the  softball  teams.  During  the  Great 
South  East  Lesbian  Conference,  when 
five  lesbians  from  North  Carolina  were 
arrested  in  an  all-night  restaurant  in 
Atlanta,  the  owners  matched  the  mon- 
ey that  was  raised  for  their  bail;  soft- 
ball  was  responsible  for  that  solidarity. 

Our  movement,  as  powerful  as  it 
has  been,  has  been  middle  class  in 
orientation,  and  women  with  verbal 
skills  and  education  have  been  at  an 
advantage.  This  is  not  true  with  sports, 
and  therefore  there  is  the  potential 
for  athletic  activities  to  be  less  class 
biased  than  many  other  activities. 

5)  ALFA's  growth  was  one  of  the 
most  important  spinoffs  of  the  softball 


season.  Our  energy  was  contagious.  We 
built  a  good  relationship  not  only 
among  the  team  members  but  also  with 
our  fans.  After  softball  was  over,  many 
women  joined  ALFA  and  began  parti- 
cipating in  other  of  its  activities  such 
as  the  struggle  to  get  the  Equal  Rights 
Amendment  ratified  in  Georgia  and  the 


56/Quest 


organization  of  the  Great  South  East 
Lesbian  Conference.  ALFA's  member- 
ship grew  from  about  30  to  100  during 
the  course  of  the  following  year. 

Softball  built  ALFA  politically  be- 
cause it  gave  us  a  visibility  that  no 
other  project  was  able  to.  We  are  still 
working  on  better  ways  to  utilize  that 
energy  in  other  political  activities. 

6)  We  began  to  build  lesbian  count- 
er-institutions which  we  could  control 
(as  much  as  we  can  control  anything 
living  in  the  middle  of  this  society). 
One  example  was  the  First  Annual 
ALFA  Invitational  All  Women's  Soft- 
ball Tournament. 

We  invited  only  teams  that  had 
women  coaches.  We  offered  to  let 
other  teams  play  if  they  left  their  male 
coaches  at  home  for  the  day.  Women 
umpires  called  the  games.  Our  tourna- 
ment was  sanctioned  by  the  Amateur 
Softball  Association;  we  wanted  them 
to  sponsor  a  tournament  sponsored  by 
a  lesbian  organization.  At  the  begin- 
ning of  the  day's  activities,  we  asked 
everyone  to  stand  so  we  could  play  our 
national  anthem.  Then  we  played  Meg 
Christian's  "Ode  to  a  Gym  Teacher" 
over  the  loudspeakers.  Only  three 
ALFA  teams  played,  but  it  was  a  step 
in  the  direction  of  women's  sports 
being  controlled  by  women  in  Atlanta. 

We  were  able  to  incorporate  the 
talents  of  other  individuals  and  groups, 
such  as  a  lesbian  astrologer  who  did 
charts  for  our  games,  and  Red  Dyke 
Theatre,  a  lesbian-feminist  theatre 
group,  which  gave  a  benefit  perfor- 
mance to  raise  the  money  necessary 
for  our  teams  to  enter  the  City  League. 


We  provided  a  context,  through 
Softball,  in  which  women  who  were 
not  lesbians,  could  come  out.  Coming 
to  terms  with  one's  lesbianism  is  hard 
to  do,  and  one  of  our  responsibilities 
to  our  coming-out  sisters  is  to  facilitate 
that  process.  Playing  softball  together, 
particularly  with  an  emphasis  on  non- 
competitiveness  and  sisterly  support, 
made  for  a  positive  high-energy  envir- 
onment. One  straight-identified  wom- 
an came  out  before  we  had  played  any 
of  our  games  and  before  she  had  a 
sexual  relationship  with  a  woman.  She 
fell  in  love  with  the  whole  team,  with 
women,  with  the  team's  energy,  and 
eventually,  she  fell  in  love  with  one 
particular  woman. 

The  women  in  Atlanta  who  have 
played  softball  and  attended  games 
have  had  many  good  times  doing  so, 
but  as  this  article  demonstrates,  the 
impact  of  playing  softball  has  not  end- 
ed there.  It  has  had  short  and  long 
term  political  implications  to  lesbian- 
feminism.  Women,  whether  lesbian  or 
straight  identified,  should  recognize 
the  potential  of  this  type  of  non-tradi- 
tional organizing  and  utilize  such  tech- 
niques in  a  manner  designed  to  maxi- 
mize their  political  benefits.  We've 
learned  in  Atlanta  that  softball  can  be 
powerful  politics. 


Vicki  Gabriner  played  second  base 
and  sPiortfield  on  the  ALFA  Omegas 
and  hopes  someday  that  she  will  hit  a 
home  run. 


Come  Out  Slugging!/ 57 


Designs 

for  Income  Sharing 

by  Caroline  Sparks,   Bat-Ami  /Bar-On 
and  Cherlyn  B.  Paul  graphic*  by  PegA**® 


Author's  Note:  This  is  our  first 
attempt  at  systemizing  our  ideas  on 
this  subject.  We  would  like  to  hear 
from  people  who  are  interested  in 
working  out  systems  of  their  own,  or 
people  who  have  participated  in  in- 
come or  expense  sharing,  and  would 
welcome  examples  of  your  plans  and 
criticisms.  We  are  especially  interested 
in  contacting  a  tax  lawyer.  Please  ad- 
dress correspondence  to:  135  E.  Wood- 
ruff Ave.,  Columbus,  OH  43201. 

The  feminist  movement  has  general- 
ly directed  its  interest  in  economic  al- 
ternatives toward  creating  businesses 
or  struggling  to  make  movement  organ- 
izations self  sustaining.  In  this  article, 
we  suggest  an  alternative  that  moves 
into  the  area  of  personal  earnings  and 
the  sharing  of  personal  income.  This 
requires  that  we  examine  our  own  rela- 
tionships to  money  and  our  patterns  of 
using  it  for  ourselves  and  other  people. 

Feminists  have  not  yet  directed  at- 
tention toward  income  sharing,  in  part 
because  those  groups  most  likely  to 
consider  such  an  alternative  have  often 
lived   on   subsistence   wages,   with   so 


little  extra  money  that  worrying  about 
sharing  "surplus"  seemed  unnecessary. 
We  are  so  used  to  thinking  of  ourselves 
as  poor  that  it  is  an  eye-opener  to  dis- 
cover the  salary  differentials  that  do 
exist.  In  one  of  our  work  groups,  the 
salary  range  is  between  $8000  and 
$17,000;  in  another,  between  $3000 
and  $17,000.  All  workers  involved  hold 
full-time  jobs. 

Another  reason  little  has  been  done 
about  income  sharing  is  that  money 
has  remained  an  area  of  individual  pri- 
vacy. Particularly  relevant  are  Beverly 
Fisher's  points  in  "Put  Your  Money 
Where  Your  Movement  Is"  (Quest, 
I:  2),  concerning  the  difficulty  of  dis- 
cussing money  in  the  movement,  and 
the  fact  that  feminists  have  not  i  been 
committed  financially  to  the  move- 
ment. It  is  ludicrous  that  women  who 
are  trying  to  change  the  economic  sys- 
tem should  still  find  it  a  delicate  mat- 
ter to  ask  about  or  to  volunteer  infor- 
mation about  salaries.  Not  only  is  it 
hard  to  gather  information,  but  it  has 
been  unheard  of  in  most  groups  to  sug- 
gest that  someone  give  up  "her"  mon- 
ey. We  are  not  searching  for  new  ways 


SyQuest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


©    Caroline  Sparks,  Bat-Ami  Bar-On,  and 
Cherlyn  B.  Paul  1975 


to  attack  each  other  politically;  how- 
ever, we  must  stop  sliding  by  this  issue 
on  grounds  of  privacy. 

As  feminists,  we  cannot  logically 
both  demand  an  end  to  the  unequal 
distribution  of  resources  between  the 
sexes  and  condone  unequal  distribu- 
tion among  women.  We  must  go  be- 
yond the  demand,  "equal  pay  for  equal 
work"  to  address  the  issues  of  how 
economic  and  financial  resources  are 
distributed.  "Equal  pay  for  equal 
work"  does  not  touch  the  basic  dis- 
tribution system  of  wages  nor  does  it 
challenge  any  traditional  assumptions 
regarding  who  should  be  rewarded, 
and  in  which  ways,  for  work  done.  It 
only  equalizes  the  status  of  women 
with  the  status  of  men  and  intensifies 
inequality  among  women.  As  women 
move  into  better  paying  positions,  the 
gap  between  professional  and  business 
women,  and  women  in  low  paying 
jobs  or  at  home,  widens.  We  must  de- 
sign alternative  mechanisms  of  dis- 
tribution or  we  will  remain  strung  out 
along  the  same  income  and  status  hier- 
archies that  men  have  created-with 
the  same  inequalities  perpetuated.  We 
need  structures  that  change  the  rela- 
tionships between  people  and  resources. 
Income  sharing  is  one  way  to  begin. 

Income  sharing  can  provide  a  way 
to  create  communities  in  which  wom- 
en have  financial  as  well  as  other  com- 
mitments to  each  other.  It  can  help  us 
build  economic  support  systems  to 
supplement  economic  efforts  such  as 
feminist  banks,  credit  unions,  develop- 
ment funds,  co-operative  businesses 
and    other    financial    alternatives.    In- 


come sharing  broadens  the  economic 
base  women  can  depend  on  in  case  of 
trouble  and  can  allow  us  some  security 
while  we  try  alternative  living  and 
working  arrangements. 

While  income  sharing  is  not  a  sub- 
stitute for  large-scale  institutional 
changes,  we  believe  we  should  be 
taking  action  now  on  an  individual 
and  a  collective  level.  Theories  about 
new,  just,  and  desirable  economic  re- 
lations are  not  enough.  We  need  prac- 
tical action  plans  grounded  in  our 
theories  and  we  have  as  yet  seen  no 
adequate  model.  Each  of  us  must  begin 
tp  alter  the  pattern  of  her  own  thinking 
about  money,  for  if  we  do  not  learn  to 
think  about  money  differently,  insti- 
tutional change  will  be  worthless.  We 
also  need  to  design  alternatives  that 
work  and  demonstrate  them.  Income 
sharing  plans  permit  us  to  equalize 
distribution  among  ourselves  in  some 
reasonable  way  that  is  tied  to  need  and 
cost  of  living.  Right  now,  while  some- 
one else  is  paying  us  differentially,  we 
can  provide  ways  to  redistribute  in- 
come we  earn  in  our  current  employ- 
ment-and  develop  ways  to  distribute 
income  ourselves  when  we  co-operative- 
ly control  money  and  can  set  up  our 
own  wage  systems. 

We  need  mechanisms  that  increase 
the  benefits  of  cooperative  sharing 
rather  than  competitive  hoarding.  Cur- 
rently, there  is  no  societal  mechanism 
to  encourage  people  to  share  their  in- 
comes, except  the  graduated  income 
tax.  It  certainly  neither  increases  our 
sense  of  community  nor  resolves  the 
large    discrepancies    in    resource    dis- 


Designs  for  Income  Sharing/ 59 


tribution.  There  are,  within  our  system, 
many  penalties  for  giving  up  wealth. 
We  are  still  on  our  own  in  providing 
for  our  support;  traditionally  our  re- 
sponsibilities do  not  extend  beyond 
our  blood  families.  Single  women  and 
those  in  transient  living  situations  with 
no  one  to  count  on  over  a  long  period 
of  time  are  in  particularly  difficult  po- 
sitions. There  are  no  promises  of  reci- 
procity and  cushions  for  people  who 
give  up  money  and  then  need  it  later. 
We  have  to  build  our  own  reciprocal 
arrangements.  To  date,  our  experiences 
with  sharing  have  been  generally  limit- 
ed to  living  situations  in  which  people 
contribute  to  household  maintenance 
only  for  the  period  of  time  they  are  in 
a  house.  When  you  move,  your  re- 
sponsibility ends.  These  arrangements 
are  often  characterized  by  attempts  to 
pay  as  little  as  possible.  There  are 
problems  involved  in  trying  to  set  up 
alternatives.  The  chances  of  failure  are 
high,  because  people  know  they  can 
opt  out  of  the  alternative  for  the  re- 
wards and  financial  incentives  that  the 
established  system  offers.  Voluntary 
plans  need  to  build  in  incentives  and 
benefits  so  that  people  acting  for 
themselves  also  simultaneously  act  for 
the  common  benefit.  One  of  us  writing 
this  thinks  there  are  no  incentives  other 
than  a  commitment  to  justice.  Others 
of  us  want  to  search  for  other  en- 
couragements as  well. 

We  want  to  design  plans  that  are  so 
attractive  that  people  will  want  to 
join.  For  this  reason,  we  have  tried  to 
design  some  structures  that  offer  mu- 
tual benefits  and  safeguards  to  protect 


participants.  We  are  not  asking  women 
who  can  least  afford  it  to  give  up  mon- 
ey to  become  martyrs,  or  take  the  road 
to  downward  mobility  for  the  sake  of 
humility  and  good  politics.  Nor  do  we 
want  income  sharing  to  become  a  way 
of  guilt-tripping  women  with  little 
money  by  accusations  of  hoarding. 

We  have  tried  to  avoid  plans  that 
depend  too  heavily  on  intimacy  or 
congeniality.  On  a  large  scale,  this 
would  be  impractical;  on  a  small  scale, 
it  produces  stress  in  a  group.  While 
trust  and  commitment  are  required  for 
decisions  groups  must  make,  the  plans 
minimize  some  issues  that  require 
group  discussion  in  order  to  avoid  con- 
flict and  continual  hassling  over  de- 
tails. We  have  designed  standard  for- 
mulas that  enable  groups  to  depend 
on  more  than  pure  goodwill.  The 
plans  will  accommodate  groups  of  any 
size  and  any  type-living  groups,  work- 
place groups  or  others. 

We  are  presenting  five  income  shar- 
ing plans  and  two  expense  sharing 
plans.  The  plans  are  presented  as  a 
starting  point  for  discussion  and  use 
and  as  a  stimulus  for  people  to  create 
their  own  plans.  The  term  "income 
sharing"  covers  income  distribution 
and  redistribution.  We  define  income 
as  wages  plus  any  other  money  that  an 
individual  receives  on  a  regular  basis 
and  in  our  plans,  we  have  divided  in- 
come into  labor-related  and  non-labor- 
related. 

The    essential    difference    between 


*In    our    examples,    for   simplicity,    we 
define  labor  as  "wage"  labor. 


60/Quest 


income  sharing  and  expense  sharing  is 
that  in  income  sharing,  the  individual 
receives  and  controls  money  as  earn- 
ings, whereas  in  expense  sharing,  the 
individual  contributes  to  a  group  to 
cover  common  expenses.  The  differ- 
ence is  important  for  tax  purposes 
since  money  that  comes  to  an  individ- 
ual as  earnings  is  taxable,  while  money 
an  individual  pays  into  a  group  account 
for  expenses  is  not. 

All  of  the  plans  presented  operate 
through  the  mechanism  of  a  common 
receiving  fund  into  which  participants 
sign  over  their  paychecks  upon  receipt, 


prior  to  cashing  them.  Therefore,  an 
income  sharing  group  needs  a  person 
or  persons  to  do  the  calculations  and 
handle  distribution.  Work  groups  that 
equalize  salaries  at  the  point  of  earn- 
ings can  make  the  calculations  before 
wages  are  ever  paid  and  do  not  need 
the  receiving  fund. 

In  the  section  that  follows,  we  pre- 
sent a  formula  for  deriving  an  adjusted 
income  for  each  participant  in  the 
plan,  an  example,  and  a  critique  of  the 
plan.  An  explanation  of  the  variables 
and  the  numbers  used  in  the  examples 
is  presented  on  page  62. 


©    Peg  Averill  1976 


Designs  for  Income  Sharing/61 


Kay 

2 

160 

750 

Lou 

— 

160 

500 

Meg 

1 

120 

350 

Nan 

2 

80 

300 

Total 

5 

520 

1,900 

Assume  a  group  of  four  members  about  which  we  have  the  following  information: 

member's     number  of       labor  time       labor-related        non-labor  total 

name  dependents     hours/month       income  $      related  incomeS     income  $ 

50  800 

500 

150  500 

300 

200  2,100 

Assume  that  the  group  as  a  whole  has  access  to  $300  in  non-labor-related  money. 
The  total  income  of  the  group  would  then  be  $2,400. 

Income  Sharing  Symbols 

AI  =  sum  of  income  available  for  income  sharing 

AIL  =  sum  of  income  gained  by  labor  and  available  for  income  sharing 

n  =  number  of  participants  in  the  group 

h  =  total  number  of  hours  invested  by  a  group  to  earn  AI  or  AIL 

i  =  total  number  of  hours  invested  by  a  group  member  to  earn  individual  income 

d  =  dependence  allowance  for  1  dependent  (here  $75).  All  figures  here  are  arbitrary. 

m  =  total  number  of  group  members'  dependents 

j  =  number  of  dependents  per  group  member 

s  =  income  necessary  to  provide  for  the  subsistence  of  one  member  (here  $300) 

Expense  Sharing  Symbols 

E  =  sum  of  all  expenses  (here  $500) 
n  =  number  of  participants  (here  4) 

an  individual  income 

sum  of  all  individual  incomes 

(a)  all  plans  assume  a  standardized  time  for  redistribution,  e.g.  once  a  month. 

(b)  None  of  the  plans  is  adjusted  to  answer  any  tax  problems.  Such  problems  are 
inherent  but  for  these  plans  are  assumed. 

62/Quest 


Income  Sharing 

Plan  A :  Simple  Average 


AI        ,.         ,  . 

—  =  adjusted  income  per  participant 


e.g.,   2±2°  =  S600 


Plan  A  has  only  two  variables:  a 
given  amount  of  income  available  for 
sharing  and  a  group  that  wishes  to  share 
it  among  its  members.  The  source  of 
the  income  makes  no  difference;  it 
may  come  to  the  group  from  the  indi- 
vidual members  or  in  any  other  way 
(for  example,  a  grant  to  the  group  as  a 
whole).  Contributing  one's  income  to 
the  group  may  or  may  not  be  a  mem- 
bership requirement.  If  it  is,  provisions 
can  be  made  for  incomeless  members 
and  for  the  distribution  of  income  that 
comes  to  the  group  as  a  whole. 

The  plan,  due  to  its  simplicity,  can 
accommodate  any  group  of  individuals 
who  wish  to  share  their  income.  How- 
ever, its  simplicity  creates  two  limita- 
tions: the  plan  pays  no  attention  to 
individuals'  needs,  nor  does  it  pay 
attention  to  the  individual  investments 
involved  in  producing  an  income. 

Since  no  attention  is  paid  to  needs, 
the  plan,  in  principle,  allows  each 
participant's  share  to  drop  below  sub- 
sistence level.  In  addition,  the  plan 
allows  a  participant's  share  to  drop 
below  a  level  of  income  that  may  be 
necessary  to  provide  for  her  depend- 
ents, even  if  her  own  subsistence  is 
secured. 


Since  the  plan  pays  no  attention  to 
individuals'  investments  in  producing 
income,  it  ignores  the  labor  time  and 
the  kind  of  labor  an  individual  is  en- 
gaged in.  Even  if  an  individual  is  not 
to  be  compensated  for  previous  train- 
ing, or  the  kind  of  labor  she  is  engaged 
in,  she  can  be  compensated  for  the  a- 
mountof  time  invested.  The  more  time 
an  individual  invests,  especially  in  a 
tedious,  boring  job,  the  higher  is  the 
cost  of  that  individual  income,  not 
necessarily  in  money  but  in  her  own 
self-development,  alienation,  mental- 
emotional  exhaustion  and  the  like. 

Plan  A,  then,  is  most  appropriate 
for  a  group  whose  members  have  rela- 
tively the  same  needs,  earn  their  in- 
comes in  relatively  the  same  way  and 
thus  have  relatively  the  same  incomes. 
But,  for  such  a  group,  income  sharing 
is  a  matter  of  principle  and  is  otherwise 
meaningless. 

Plan  B:  Labor  Time  Differential 


AI 


-r-x  i  =  adjusted  income  per 
participant 


e.g.,  Kay's  adjusted  income  = 
2400 


520 


x  160  =  $738.46 


The  same  is  true  for  Lou. 

Meg's  adjusted  income  =  $553.84 

Nan's  adjusted  income  =  $369.24 

flan  B  pays  attention  to  differences 
in  labor  time  investments  but  pays  no 

**A11  calculations  in  the  examples  were 
carried  to  the  fourth  decimal  place. 


Designs  for  Income  Sharing/63 


attention  to  other  investments  nor  to 
needs.  Moreover,  if  a  participant's 
income  in  Plan  B  is  to  be  greater  than 
0,  the  plan  allows  for  no  incomeless 
participants,  nor  for  participation  of 
individuals  who  gain  their  incomes  by 
means  other  than  their  own  labor- e.g., 
by  a  trust  fund. 

Even  if  the  plan  is  to  accommodate 
only  laborers,  income  that  comes  to 
the  group  as  a  whole  or  from  individ- 
uals from  means  other  than  labor,  does 
not  need  to  be  distributed  by  compen- 
sating for  labor  time  investments.  Given 
the  possibility  the  group  may  gain 
income  by  means  other  than  members' 
labor,  the  plan  seems  to  encourage 
laborers  to  invest  as  much  time  as 
they  possibly  can  in  labor  and  in  some 
sense  to  punish  those  who  cannot  do 
so.  We  think  that  non-labor-related 
income  is  better  considered  as  surplus 
to  which  all  members  have  equal  access 
and  suggest  a  modification  of  Plan  B 
as  follows: 


Plan  C:  Dependents  Differential 


AIL        .        AI-  AIL 

—  x   i   +  

h  n 


adjusted  income   per  participant 


e.g.,    Kay's  adjusted  income  = 

122°      160+  2400^1900  =  $70961 

The  same  is  true  for  Lou. 

Meg's  adjusted  income  =  $563.46 

Nan's  adjusted  income  =  $417.32 

The  modification  allows  for  partici- 
pants who  are  incomeless  or  who  gain 
income  by  means  other  than  labor. 


AI  —  d  x  m       .         , 

+  i  x  d  = 

n  J 

adjusted  income  per  participant 


e.g.,    Kay's  adjusted  income  = 

2400 -75x5     +75x  2  =  $656.25 
4 

The  same  is  true  for  Lou  . 

Meg's  adjusted  income  =  $506.25 

Nan's  adjusted  income  =  $581.25 

Plan  C  is  included  here  for  groups 

wishing  to  distribute  their  total  income 

as  symmetrically  as  possible  but  at  the 

same  time,  accept  the  responsibility  of 

supporting  members'  dependents.  Any 

group  interested  in  it  should  remember 

that  otherwise  it  suffers  from  the  same 

limitations  as  Plan  A. 

Plan  D:  Labor  Time  and  Dependents 
Differential 


AIL 

-d   X 
h 

m 

x  i  +   d  x  j  + 

AI 

-AIL 

= 

adjusted  income 

per  participant 

e.g.,  Kay's  adjusted  income 
1900-75x5 


520 
2400-  1900 


x  160  +  75x2  + 
$744.23 


Lou's  adjusted  income  =  $594.23 
Meg's  adjusted  income  =  $551.92 
Nan's  adjusted  income  =  $509.62 

The  plan  combines  features  of  both 
Plan  B  and  Plan  C.  It  distributes  the 


64/Quest 


group's  income  gained  by  labor  accord- 
ing to  differences  in  labor  time  invest- 
ments. Non-labor-related  income  is 
distributed  symmetrically.  Contrary  to 
Plan  C,  however,  the  plan  requires  the 
group  to  agree  that  income  distributed 
to  dependents  should  come  from  wage 
labor  related  income  only,  rather  than 
total  income. 

Plan  E:  Subsistence  Provisions 


s  + 

AIL- 

s  x  n  —  d  x  m 

d 

xj  + 

h          A  *' 

=  adjusted  income 

AI 

-  AIL 

n 

per  participant 

e.g.,  Kay's  adjusted  income  =' 
1900-  300x4-75x5 


300  + 


x  160  +  75x2  + 


520 
2400-1900 


$675 


Lou's  adjusted  income  -  $525 
Meg's  adjusted  income  =  $575 
Nan's  adjusted  income  =  $625 

All  the  previous  plans  suggested 
allow  for  the  possibility  of  members' 
incomes  dropping  below  subsistence. 

Plan  E  does  not  allow  this  to  hap- 
pen. By  allocating  to  each  member  an 
amount  of  money  necessary  for  sub- 
sistence, it  tries  to  answer  members' 
monetary  needs  to  the  extent  that  this 
can  be  done  in  a  unified  manner.  The 
group  has  to  decide  what  constitutes  a 
subsistence  figure.  The  plan  also  in- 
cludes solutions  provided  in  previous 
plans  for  labor  time  differences  and 
dependents.  One  of  its  positive  fea- 
tures is  its  ability  to  allow  for  income- 
less  members   and  participants  whose 


income  is  gained  from  sources  other 
than  labor.  It  can,  however,  be  modi- 
fied for  groups  not  wishing  to  include 
all  the  provisions. 

Expense  Sharing 

Below  are  two  simple  expense  shar- 
ing plans.  The  simplest  way  to  proceed 
is  to  divide  expenses  equally  among  all 
members.  Another  way  is  to  divide  ex- 
penses among  members  in  accordance 
with  a  given  ratio.  According  to  this 
plan,  people  contribute  proportionate- 
ly to  their  level  of  income. 


Plan  I:  Equal  Expense  Sharing 


— =  a  participant's  share  of  the 
expenses 


500     „„„,.  r 
e.g.,  — — =  $125  tor  each  participant 

Plan  II:  Ratio  Plan  of  Expense  Sharing 


E  x  r  =  a  participant's  share  of  the 
expenses 


e.g.,    Kay's  share  of  the  expenses  = 

500xS=S190-48 

Lou's  share  of  expenses  =  $119.05 

The  same  is  true  for  Meg. 

Nan's  share  of  expenses  =  $71.42 


***Modifications  may  be  obtained  from 
the  authors. 


Designs  for  Income  Sharing/65 


Taxes 

Two  major  tax  problems  in  imple- 
menting an  income  sharing  plan  are, 
first,  the  problem  of  double  taxation, 
and  second,  the  problem  of  compensa- 
ting high  earners  for  taxes  they  pay  on 
income  they  subsequently  give  away. 
Double  taxation  means  that  if  wages 
originally  paid  to  one  earner  are  re- 
distributed to  someone  else,  the  recip- 
ient must  declare  the  money  as  addi- 
tional income  and  pay  taxes  on  it.  The 
income     is,    therefore,    taxed    twice: 


once  through  withholding  from  the 
original  earner's  pay  check  and  again 
through  the  second  earner's  declara- 
tion of  it  at  tax  time. 

The  only  existing  alternative  to 
double  taxation  that  we  can  find  in 
the  tax  code  is  the  gift  tax.  Under 
gift  provisions,  persons  are  allowed  to 
give  away  an  amount  per  year  and 
there  is  a  ceiling  on  the  total  amount 
given  away  during  a  lifetime.  Within 
these  limits,  the  giver  may  declare  a 
deduction  and  the  receiver  does  not 
declare  the  gift  as  part  of  gross  income. 


66/Quest 


©Peg  Averill  1975 


This  mechanism  would  only  work  as  a 
temporary  measure  because  of  the 
maximum  allowances.  The  more  in- 
come to  be  redistributed,  the  faster  a 
group  would  use  up  the  allowances. 
Also,  we  don't  like  thinking  of  income 
redistribution  as  a  "gift." 

We  investigated  the  possibilities  of 
incorporation  (profit  and  non-profit), 
partnerships,  and  filing  joint  tax  re- 
turns, but  none  were  feasible*  We  will 
have  to  design  a  tax  plan  that  recog- 
nizes alternative  groupings  of  people 
and  present  it  for  a  tax  ruling.  If  you 
don't  work  out  a  gift  tax  arrangement, 
you  are  going  to  be  stuck  with  double 
taxation  for  the  time  being.  Once  you 
go  ahead  with  income  sharing,  adjust- 
ments need  to  be  made  for  the  high 
taxes  of  high  wage  earners  and  for  the 
taxes  paid  on  additional  income  by  the 
low  wage  earners.  We  are  currently 
working  on  these  adjustments.  If  you 
want  to  do  it  yourself,  pick  up  copies 
of  the  tax  tables  and  the  federal  with- 
holding tables. 

As  you  discuss  money  in  groups 
and  begin  to  experiment  with  income 
sharing,  you  will  become  aware  of 
attitudes  toward  money  and  other  peo- 
ple you  never  knew  you  had.  We  sug- 
gest that  you  not  push  too  quickly  for 
a  scheme  very  different  from  what  you 
have  been  used  to.  Any  income  shar- 
ing is  a  risk,  and  pushing  too  hard  may 
provoke  extreme  reactions  and  panic. 
Be  nice  to  yourselves.  Design  a  plan 
your  group  is  comfortable  with,  give 
support  to  get  through  psychological 
traumas,  and  adjust  your  plan  as  peo- 
ple become  more  daring. 


We  thank  Bob  Baker,  President  of 
Venture  Resources  International,  for 
consultation  on  taxes.  While  all  three 
of  us  worked  out  the  models  of  the 
plans  and  decided  which  features  we 
thought  were  important,  the  final  for- 
mulas were  designed  by  Bat-Ami  Bar-On. 

Caroline  Sparks  is  a  member  of  the 
Women's  Action  Collective  of  Colum- 
bus, Ohio,  is  a  staff  member  in  the 
Office  of  Women's  Studies  and  has 
taught  women's  studies  courses  at  the 
Ohio  State  University. 

Bat-  Ami  Bar-On  is  a  Ph.D  candi- 
date in  philosophy  at  the  Ohio  State 
University. 

Cherlyn  B.  Paul  is  a  graduate  of  the 
Ohio  State  University,  a  former  staff 
member  of  the  Office  of  Women's 
Studies,  and  a  member  of  the  Rape 
Crisis  Center  staff.  She  is  currently 
teaching  at  the  Metropolitan  School  of 
Columbus. 


SuVscri^.  Now! 
a  Quarterly  journal 

"TO . 

P.O&gx   UHC  ° 

Wi^r.  mAividkal 

*4.50  oter  rtaco 
(surface  W>0 


Designs  for  Income  Sharing/67 


Organizing  for  Impact 


by  Liz  0 'Sullivan 


graphics  by  Bethia  Stone 


(^1  Quest,  vol.  II  no.  3,  winter,  1976 


During  the  past  few  years,  women 
have  found  that  collectivity  while  fine 
for  CR  groups,  can  be  unworkable  for 
action  projects.  1  When  and  how  should 
the  ideal  of  collectivity  be  replaced, 
and  what  are  the  consequences  of  the 
arrangements  that  might  be  adopted? 
For  such  a  discussion,  there  are  two 
sources  of  information:  the  experiences 
of  women's  organizations,  and  the  liter- 
ature of  organizational  theory.  Unfor- 
tunately, there  are  relatively  few  stud- 
ies of  the  organizational  strategies  de- 
veloped and  used  by  the  large  numbers 
of  women's  projects  which  were  form- 
ed within  the  past  decade. 2  I  am  pres- 
ently conducting  such  a  study  on  rape 
crisis  centers,  and  by  way  of  a  begin- 
ning, I  offer  here  some  of  the  prelimi- 
nary observations  derived  from  the  ear- 
ly stages  of  that  study. 

Organizational  theory,  on  the  other 
hand,  has  an  extensive  literature.  The 
most  useful  information  has  been  de- 
veloped by  those  who  consider  the 
organization  to  be  flexible,  dynamic, 
and  able  to  respond  to  a  rapidly  chang- 
ing environment.  In  addition  to  my  ob- 
servations on  rape  crisis  centers,  I  want 
to  consider  some  basic  but  very  useful 
theories  of  organizational  development 
to  provide  a  framework  within  which 
to  evaluate  the  consequences  of  organi- 
zational strategies  used  by  feminist 
organizations.  My  prime  concern  is  the 
relationship  between  strategies  and 
organizational  effectiveness;  that  is, 
the  extent  to  which  a  group  achieves 
its  purposes. 

Barnard,  in  his  classic,  The  Func- 
tions of  the  Executive,  explains  how 


organizations  originate  and  what  they 
must  do  if  they  are  to  survive.  "An 
organization  comes  into  being  when 
(1)  there  are  persons  able  to  communi- 
cate with  each  other  (2)  who  are  will- 
ing to  contribute  action  (3)  to  accom- 
plish a  common  purpose. "3  He  also 
points  out  that  the  major  organization- 
al problem  is  to  keep  people  coopera- 
ting. Since  cooperation  involves  sacri- 
fice, an  individual  will  remain  in  an 
organization  only  so  long  as  the  bene- 
fits derived  are  believed  to  offset  the 
costs.  The  function  of  management 
within  an  organization  is  to  provide 
those  benefits  or  incentives  that  will 
encourage  people  to  continue  to  co- 
operate—and of  course  those  benefits 
cannot  exceed  the  organization's  avail- 
able resources. 

Organizations  exist,  then,  when  a 
few  people  meet  together  regularly  to 
plan  action.  Many  organizations  never 
get  further  than  this.  It  can  be  assumed 
that  these  early  deaths  are  brought 
about  when  the  common  purpose  is 
satisfied,  when  this  purpose  is  no  longer 
important  to  the  participants,  or  when 
the  costs  of  cooperating  are  simply  too 
high.  The  women's  movement  has  been 
marked  by  such  organizational  comings 
and  goings.  While  in  some  cases,  par- 
ticularly in  CR  groups,  the  cause  of 
disbanding  may  be  that  common  goals 
have  been  adequately  met,  many  groups 
disband  because  the  benefits  just  aren't 
worth  the  effort. 

Barnard's  observations  about  incen- 
tives have  been  elaborated  by  Clark 
and  Wilson,  who  see  three  kinds  of 
available    incentives:      material    ones, 


Organizing  for  Impact/69 


solidarity  incentives  and  purposive  in- 
incentives.  Material  incentives  are  tan- 
gible rewards,  such  as  salary  and  fringe 
benefits.  Solidarity  incentives  are  of 
two  kinds:  those  status  benefits  which 
accrue  to  an  individual  because  of  her 
organizational  role,  and  tjiose  which 
are  equally  available  to  all  members, 
such  as  friendships  within  the  organiza- 
tion. Purposive  incentives  relate  direct- 
ly to  the  organization's  larger  goals, 
and  the  sense  of  gratification  one  de- 
rives in  working  toward  the  achieve- 
ment of  those  goals.4 

For  a  new  organization,  purposive 
incentives  are  quite  important.  A  new 
organization  uses  its  stated  purpose  to 
attract  members,  and  moreover,  this 
purpose  may  be  used  to  induce  people 
to  participate  when  other  incentives- 
money,  social  prestige,  and  political 
power-are  not  available.  5  And  too,  at 
a  later  stage,  members'  commitment  to 
the  organization's  purpose  will  influ- 
ence their  decisions  as  to  whether  to 
continue  participating,  and  to  what 
extent. 

The  organization's  espoused  purpose 
is  also  critical  to  the  structural  and 
procedural  decisions  which  it  must 
make.  Once  the  activities  to  be  pursued 
by  the  organization  are  determined,  it 
is  possible  to  answer  a  number  of  ques- 
tions: How  many  people  are  to  be  in- 
volved-as  participants,  as  recipients  (if 
a  service  is  being  offered)?  What  is  to 
be  the  organization's  relation  to  the 
community,  and  with  which  commun- 
ity groups  will  it  be  involved?  What 
resources,  both  in  terms  of  human 
skills  and  material  goods  does  the  or- 


ganization need?  Are  these  resources 
readily  available,  and  if  not,  how  can 
they  be  obtained?  Often  these  issues 
are  raised  as  an  organization  defines 
and  clarifies  its  purpose,  and  they  may 
influence  why  certain  activities  are 
stressed  and  others  are  dropped. 

With  thought  and  work,  an  organi- 
zation can  start  with  carefully  delin- 
eated purposes,  and  a  realistic  plan  for 
achieving  them.  To  a  certain  extent 
this  process  is  desirable,  but  fortunate- 
ly most  organizations  start  with  more 
serendipity  than  planning.  This  initial 
"chaos"  allows  for  more  creative  exper- 
imentation than  cautious  planning 
would  allow,  yet  it  must  be  remember- 
ed that  in  the  long-run,  an  organization 
will  be  destroyed  if  chaos  becomes 
dogma. 

New  organizations  are  often  friend- 
ly, egalitarian,  and  hectic.  It  is  a  time 
of  active,  collective  learning,  about 
what  is  expected  of  the  organization 
by  people  outside  it,  and  by  its  mem- 
bers. They  learn  more  about  their  pur- 
pose, as  defined  by  specific  activities, 
both  in  terms  of  the  general  objectives, 
and  in  terms  of  what  each  individual, 
and  the  group  as  a  whole,  can  and 
wants  to  accomplish.  Participants  also 
learn  about  each  other,  and  may 
achieve  a  degree  of  solidarity  impor- 
tant in  keeping  them  involved. 

At  some  point  early  in  its  evolution, 
the  organization  may  start  to  develop 
a  concern  for  its  survival.  Usually  key 
to  survival  are  growth,  institutionaliza- 
tion (not  bureaucratization),  and  the 
achievement  of  recognition  for  its  juris- 
diction and  competence  in  an  area  of 


70/Quest 


public  concern.  6  Given  these  needs, 
the  organization  will  develop  structures 
and  procedures  geared  toward  assuring 
its  continuation.  First,  it  will  find  ways 
to  coordinate  the  variable  behavior 
of  individuals  to  provide  for  stable  and 
uniform  performance.  Later,  it  will 
develop  a  system  for  recruiting  new 
members,  and  will  create  mechanisms 
to  make  sure  that  organizational  rules 
are  known  and  followed.? 

Strategies 

Though  women's  organizations  have 
developed  around  a  multitude  of  issues, 
they  have  adopted  a  limited  number  of 


organizational  strategies.  In  action  or- 
ganizations, as  opposed  to  CR  and 
study  groups,  two  basic  strategies  pre- 
dominate: pressure  group  strategies 
organized  to  get  others  to  make  desired 
changes,  and  service  project  strategies 
designed  to  get  desired  changes  or  to 
provide  alternatives  to  existing  institu- 
tions. Some  groups  use  only  one  of 
these  strategies,  and  others  attempt  to 
combine  the  two;  in  either  case  the 
strategy  adopted  usually  depends  both 
on  the  issue  at  hand  and  the  available 
resources. 

Pressure  Strategies 

Pressure  group  strategies  need  to  be 


Organizing  for  Impact/71 


used  if  an  organization  plans  to  influ- 
ence legal  or  procedural  change.  Typi- 
cal tactics  include:  letter  writing;  lob- 
bying; providing  background  research 
or  testimony,  and  taking  legal  action. 
Success  is  determined  largely  by  the 
organization's  perceived  credibility. 
Credibility  may  be  obtained  by  includ- 
ing influential  people  in  the  organiza- 
tion, or  by  adopting  the  same  tactics 
as  the  institutionalized  opposition  em- 
ploys-that  is,  research,  documentation, 
and  legal  maneuvers. 

Organizations  which  rely  on  pressure 
group  tactics  find  that  they  can  be 
effective  when  they  combine  a  small 
core  group  of  actively  involved  mem- 
bers and  a  larger  support  group.  The 
core  members  provide  direction  for  the 
group  through  planning,  handling  rou- 
tine administrative  tasks,  researching, 
and  establishing  contacts.  They,  in 
turn,  count  on  the  support  members  to 
participate  in  acting  out  the  group's 
chosen  tactics. 

Although  personal  obligations  may 
be  exploited  as  a  means  for  getting 
members  to  act,  typically  a  group  tries 
to  manipulate  members'  participation 
by  the  way  it  defines  its  purpose.  Gen- 
erally, the  purpose  should  be  specific 
enough  to  differentiate  the  group  from 
others,  but  often,  if  the  purpose  is  too 
specific,  it  may  eliminate  potential 
participants,  and  may  lead  to  conflicts 
among  group  members.  Some  anti-rape 
groups,  for  example,  have  run  into  this 
problem  when  they  have  decided  ac- 
tively to  encourage  women  to  report 
rapes  to  the  police.  Women  who  ques- 
tion the  fairness  of  the  American  crim- 


inal justice  system  or  who  feel  a  wom- 
an should  not  be  subjected  to  the  has- 
sles involved  in  prosecuting  a  rape  have 
tended  to  withdraw  from  such   groups. 

The  National  Organization  for  Wom- 
en (NOW),  on  the  other  hand,  is  the 
predominate  women's  movement  or- 
ganization which  has  relied  on  pres- 
sure group  tactics;  and  its  effectiveness 
seems  largely  to  be  due  to  its  ability  to 
attract  large  numbers  of  members  who 
are  sophisticated  in  the  ways  of  the 
nation's  political,  legal  and  media  insti- 
tutions. As  is  true  of  many  groups  ac- 
tive in  pressure  politics,  NOW  has  be- 
come a  multi-issue  organization.  The 
adoption  of  a  multi-issue  platform 
helps  the  organization  in  several  ways. 
It  increases  the  number  of  purposive 
and  solidarity  incentives  available,  the 
organization's  flexibility,  and  the  num- 
ber of  potential  contact  points  with 
other  organizations,  which,  in  turn, 
enhances  its  acceptance  as  a  legitimate 
organization  with  a  recognized  con- 
stituency and  competency. 

Other  organizations  form  around  a 
single  issue-press  for  change-and  then 
disband.  Unfortunately,  though  its 
basic  strategies  are  familiar  to  anyone 
who  ever  suffered  through  a  high- 
school  civics  course,  time  may  be  lost 
as  the  group  learns  how  the  system 
actually  works.  Writing  letters,  and 
signing  petitions  sound  fine,  but  know- 
ing who  to  talk  to  and  what  to  say  is 
more  likely  to  yield  results.  As  the  neo- 
phyte group  develops  experience,  its 
members'  energy  may  dissipate,  or  the 
group  may  dissolve  after  having  ap- 
parently   succeeded   in    its   goals,   and 


72/Quest 


only  later  find  that  its  success  was  a 
paper  victory.  This  realization  usually 
comes  when  it  is  too  late  to  reconsti- 
tute the  organization;  the  original 
communications  network  will  have  dis- 
appeared, and  people  may  question 
whether  their  involvement  is  worth- 
while after  all.  This  phenomenon  ap- 
pears to  have  occurred  in  groups  sup- 
porting changes  in  abortion  laws,  for 
example. 

Inexperienced  groups  have  an  im- 
portant role,  however.  They  are  able 
to  push  for  change  without  having  to 
be  concerned  that  pushing  will  affect 
their  long-range  program.  They  bring 
issues  up  for  public  debate  that  might 
be  ignored  if  established  groups  were 
solely  responsible  for  raising  them,  and 
in  the  process  of  debate,  the  resources 
of  sympathetic,  established  groups  may 
be  enlisted. 

Occasionally  the  established  organi- 
zation-having more  resources  and  more 
clout-may  be  perceived  as  more  effec- 
tive and  may  absorb  new  members 
from  the  smaller  one. 

This  interaction  allows  new  groups 
to  develop  issues,  and  established 
groups  to  employ  their  expertise  to 
get  those  issues  accepted  or  dealt  with 
by  the  appropriate  political  bodies. 
During  this  process,  however,  the  pro- 
posed solutions  may  be  modified.  On 
the  one  hand,  modification  may  allow 
for  some  change  instead  of  no  change 
at  all,  but  on  the  other,  the  changes 
may  be  only  cosmetic  and  may  operate 
to  lessen  the  demand  for  action.  If  the 
newer  group  continues  in  existence,  it 
may  be  able  to  play  an  important  over- 


seer's role;  if  the  established  group  is 
seriously  committed  to  issues,  it  may 
continue  to  press  for  more  extensive 
changes  and  may  guard  against  pro- 
cedures which  coopt  the  program. 

Some  rape  crisis  centers  have  estab- 
lished this  kind  of  interaction  with 
NOW  Rape  Task  Forces.  The  crisis 
centers  are  concerned  with  providing 
victim  services  and  community  educa- 
tion; the  NOW  Rape  Task  Forces,  on 
the  other  hand,  are  developing  strate- 
gies to  achieve  institutional  changes. 
Through  their  active  involvement  with 
victims  and  the  institutions  which  serve 
them,  the  rape  crisis  centers  have 
developed  ideas  about  what  changes 
are  needed,  and  whether  supposed 
changes  are  being  implemented  and  the 
Rape  Task  Forces  lend  their  skills  and 
contacts  actively  to  seek  the  desired 
changes.  In  areas  where  members  of  a 
rape  crisis  center  and  NOW  are  dif- 
ferentiated by  their  attitudes  on  how 
to  achieve  change  and  by  their  own 
participation  in  political  change,  this 
kind  of  division  of  labor  can  be  espe- 
cially functional.  It  reduces  internal 
conflict  over  purposes,  since  a  member 
who  wishes  a  different  emphasis  may 
become  involved  in  the  other  organiza- 
tion. It  also  allows  each  group  to  do 
what  it  does  best,  to  the  benefit  of 
the  whole. 

Service  Strategies 

Groups  which  attempt  to  provide 
services  have  special  organizational 
problems;  they  often  have  as  many 
options  as  groups  which  do  not  provide 
services,  but  they  must  show  more  con- 


Organizing  for  Impact/73 


cern  with  structure  and  procedure,  for 
people  depend  on  them  to  be  reliable. 
The  pregnant  teenager  who  calls  for 
abortion  information,  the  working 
mother  who  relies  on  a  day-care  co- 
operative, the  subscriber  who  pays  for 
a  feminist  publication,  all  expect  these 
services  to  function  dependably. 

Feminist  organizations  have  tended 
to  provide  services  more  than  they 
have  worked  to  get  policy  changes. 
This  has  led  to  criticism  of  the  insta- 
bility of  these  projects,  and  their  fail- 
ure to  effect  public  policy.  8  While  ser- 
vice projects  do  drain  energy,  they  also 
provide  an  exciting  opportunity  for 
learning  and  changing.  Women  who  do 
not  identify  themselves  as  feminists 
are  reached,  both  as  project  participants 
and  as  users  of  the  services;  at  the 
same  time,  project  participants  may 
learn  more  about  the  problem  they 
are  working  on,  and  arrive  at  possible 
solutions,  as  they  work  on  the  project 
from  day  to  day. 

An  important  side  benefit  of  service 
projects  has  been  that  many  of  them 
were  started  by  people  who  were  an- 
tagonistic to  the  traditional  organiza- 
tional structures;  yet  to  keep  their 
projects  going,  these  people  frequently 


had  to  develop  some  structures  and 
prqcedures.  These  experiments  in  al- 
ternative organizational  strategies  now 
need  evaluation. 

Common  Organizational 
Strategies  and  Effects 

The  group  founding  an  organization 
is  typically  quite  small:  over  two-thirds 
of  the  rape  crisis  centers  were  started 
by  fewer  than  fifteen  women.  As  it 
begins  its  activities,  the  group  develops 
an  organization  style  affecting  both  its 
internal  dynamics  and  its  external  rela- 
tions. 

Usually  it  starts  with  a  structure  in 
which  decision-making  responsibilities 
are  shared.  This  approach  is  used  on 
the  theory  that  it  helps  in  developing 
leaders— all,  theoretically,  have  a  chance 
to  lead.  The  sharing  of  organizational 
responsibilities  should  insure  that:  de- 
sirable and  undesirable  jobs  are  dis- 
tributed evenly;  skills  necessary  to  the 
group's  functioning  are  learned  by 
everybody  so  that  dependence  on  any 
one  individual  is  decreased;  and  func- 
tions central  to  the  group's  purpose 
(such  as  staffing  a  crisis  phone)  are 
carried  out.  The  sharing  of  tasks  allows 


74/Quest 


members  to  learn  what  they  and  each 
other  can  do,  and  what  they  do  well. 

When  a  project  is  new,  this  fluid 
collective  model  is  useful  since  it 
allows  the  group  to  examine  quickly 
the  demands  that  are  being  made  on  it, 
and  to  decide  how  to  react.  It  also 
allows  for  extensive  personal  support, 
which   is   especially   important  if  the 


activity  involves  emotional  risk.  Thus 
the  model  provides  for  active  commun- 
ication and  the  development  of  a  high 
degree  of  trust  so  that  any  problems 
can  be  perceived  and  resolved  quickly. 
With  the  increase  and  routinization 
of  demands,  the  organization  may  wish 
to  reconsider  its  decision-making  pro- 
cesses and  individual  responsibilities. 
After  a  relatively  short  time,  project 
members  will  have  a  clear  idea  of  what 
decisions  can  be  handled  by  individuals, 
small  groups  within  the  project,  or  by 
the  project  as  a  whole.  They  will  also 
know  what  types  of  responsibilities 
have  to  be  carried  out  for  the  project 
to  be  successful.  Then  they  can  develop 
guidelines  summarizing  and  clarify- 
ing these  observations,  and  depending 
on  the  nature  and  numbers  of  existing 
demands,    they    may    decide    that    a 


division  of  responsibility  is  more  ef- 
fective. 

As  a  project  grows  larger,  both  in 
terms  of  membership  and  increased 
outside  contacts,  it  may  find  that  the 
adoption  of  a  formal  structure  is 
needed.  The  most  common  method  is 
the  designation  of  project  committees, 
and  may  include  a  steering  committee 


A 

lft-i>J 

ll 

1  \\ 

as  \  well,  usually  made  up  of  heads  of 
the  standing  committees. 

Groups  which  modify  the  collective 
structure  in  this  way  usually  institute 
open  policy-making  meetings  so  that 
decisions  made  by  member  committees 
can  be  reported  at  general  membership 
meetings,  and  re-assessed.  Essentially, 
some  such  modification  in  structure 
allows  responsibility  to  be  located  and 
reduces  the  "demand  overload"  which 
affects  members  of  active  collectives. 

Additionally,  the  adoption  of  a  for- 
mal structure  and  the  allocation  of  in- 
dividual responsibilities,  make  use  of 
participants'  abilities  and  expertise 
both  in  relations  within  the  project, 
and  in  dealings  outside  it.  For  example, 
the  chairperson  of  a  community  educa- 
tion committee  is  assumed  to  have 
expertise    based    on    familiarity    with 


Organizing  for  Impact/ 7  5 


the  problem  and  on  her  skills  (not 
necessarily  on  credentials),  which  car- 
ries weight  within  the  group  and  makes 
her  a  spokeswoman  without.  In  respect 
to  her  outside  relations,  she  is  assumed 
to  speak  for  the  project  in  the  area  of 
her  competence  or  responsibility,  and 
the  organization  thus  avoids  the  repu- 
tation of  constantly  delaying  deci- 
sions, or  of  contradicting  itself  which 
can  occur  without  a  formal  delegation 
of  responsibility.  This  formal  delega- 
tion also  serves  as  a  kind  of  reward  in 
recognition  of  an  individual's  work  and 
expertise-though  it  is  a  rare  case  when 
the  work  involved  does  not  outweigh 
its  prestige! 

However,  one  problem  with  devel- 
oping such  structures  is  that  they  may 
allow  for  an  increase  in  individual 
power.   While  this  is  always  possible, 


need  paid  staff,  and  most  attempt  to 
pay  at  least  one  person  as  soon  as  they 
can  afford  it.  There  are,  however, 
potential  pitfalls  as  well  as  benefits 
here.  For  example,  paid  staff  gain  a 
considerable  amount  of  influence  due 
to  their  constant  attention  to  the  pro- 
ject's business.  Because  of  their  famil- 
iarity, the  issues  brought  before  the 
steering  committee  or  before  the  gen- 
eral membership  are  often  generated  by 
paid  staff.  They  also  tend  to  represent 
the  organization  in  the  eyes  of  the  pub- 
lic, and  of  course  whether  these  roles 
help  or  hinder  the  organization  depends 
on  the  staff  members.  For  the  most 
part,  feminist  organization  staff  mem- 
bers seem  responsive  to  the  intent  of 
the  project,  but  at  least  one  rape  crisis 
project  dumped  its  staff  for  insubor- 
dination. Certainly,  a  project  which  has 


hopefully  the  project  will  have  devel- 
oped in  its  members  the  belief  that 
leaders  are  accountable  for  their  ac- 
tions, and  moreover,  are  to  seek  to 
involve  other  members  actively  and  to 
teach  their  respective  skills  to  others. 

More  important  than  its  formal 
structure  to  an  organization  is  paid 
staff.   Service   organizations   find  they 


allowed  too  much  decision-making  to 
center  in  the  hands  of  a  few—paid  staff 
or  others— can  expect  to  have  prob- 
lems. 9 

Another  important  issue  is  the  ques- 
tion of  new  membership.  After  a  pro- 
ject is  successfully  underway,  it  will 
become  concerned  with  recruiting  new 
members  and  retaining  old  ones.  New 


76/Quest 


members  may  be  needed  to  adequately 
provide  services,  to  expand  the  scope 
of  the  project,  or  to  replace  members 
who  drop  out.  Projects  may  decide 
that  the  best  way  to  involve  potential 
new  members  is  to  have  special  orien- 
tation sessions.  There  are  no  simple 
tricks  for  involving  more  women  in  any 
project.  On  occasion,  for  example,  a 
project  may  have  to  investigate  why 
people  who  are  initially  interested  fail 
to  follow  through.  Sometimes  they 
find  a  relatively  simple  solution  such 
as  improved  training  and  orientation. 
At  other  times  they  find  that  poten- 
tial members  have  completely  different 
expectations  for  the  project's  goals, 
and  that  to  meet  these  expectations, 
the  project  would  have  to  make  rela- 
tively radical  changes. 

It  should  be  pointed  out  that  found- 
ing members  are  particularly  prone  to 
have  unrealistic  expectations  of  others' 
capacity  to  work.  The  establishment 
of  an  organization  requires  a  strong 
belief  in  its  necessity  as  well  as  a  real 
commitment  to  see  that  belief  become 
a  concrete  reality.  Most  of  the  found- 
ing members  feel  a  keen  sense  of  obli- 
gation to  make  sure  it  works.  Thus, 
these   "true  believers"  are   sometimes 


unaware  that  those  who  will  join  later 
are  unlikely  to  have  the  same  level  of 
urgency  and  concern. 

Too,  project  members  need  to  re- 
member that  they  have  virtually  no 
coercive  devices  other  than  the  pres- 
sure of  friendship  with  which  to  retain 
members,  and  that  often  they  are  in 
short  supply  of  incentives  needed  to 
encourage  continued  participation.  Ma- 
terial incentives  are  often  practically 
non-existent;  and  if  the  organization 
becomes  ineffective  through  lack  of 
energy,  even  purposive  incentives  can 
be  lacking. 

When  feminists  whole-heartedly  pro- 
moted collectivity,  we  tended  to  over- 
estimate the  extent  of  commitment 
most  potential  participants  would  be 
willing  to  make;  however,  we  did 
realize  that  organizations  should  pro- 
mote incentives.  At  this  point,  we  need 
to  investigate  the  kinds  of  incentives 
and  then  organizations  can  develop, 
and  work  to  establish  them. 

An  important  aspect  of  feminist 
organizations  is  the  opportunity  for 
personal  develop  me  nt-in  management 
jargon,  the  specialization  of  the  person. 
Basically  this  concept  opposes  reducing 
jobs  to  a  series  of  mindless  tasks.  In- 


A  r 

11 

V 
I 

Organizing  for  Impact/ 7 7 


stead,  it  is  grounded  in  the  belief  that 
each  person  should  be  allowed  to  devel- 
op her  skills.  Skills  development  does 
not  occur  overnight.  Rather,  it  leads 
gradually  to  specialization  as  each  per- 
son achieves  and  links  together  a  num- 
ber of  skills.  Since  individuals  will 
choose  to  specialize  in  different  areas, 
and  since  the  dependence  of  others  on 
each  one's  speciality  increases,  the  net 
effect  of  incentives  toward  skill  devel- 
opment should  be  a  system  of  inter- 
dependence. 10 

A  project  allows  its  participants  to 
specialize  when  it  encourages  them  to 
develop  new  skills.  Once  these  skills 
are  learned,  the  person  can  decide 
whether  she  wishes  to  continue  on  the 
same  tasks,  for  example,  staffing  a 
crisis  phone  or  to  undertake  a  new 
task.  In  other  words,  an  organization 
which  wants  to  keep  its  members  works 
to  establish  them  as  important,  valu- 
able people  within  the  organization 
and  to  provide  them  with  greater  bene- 
fits as  a  result  of  long-term  parti- 
cipation. 

External  Relations 

The  long-term  impact  of  an  organi- 
zation is  affected  not  only  by  its 
internal  dynamics,  but  also  by  how  it 
relates  to  other  groups  in  the  com- 
munity—the organization's  perceived 
legitimacy.  Community  groups  include: 
the  service  users,  groups  which  are 
directly  or  indirectly  involved  with  the 
service,  and  organizations  which  may 
support  a  given  project.  Unfortunately, 
any  set  of  actions  which  may  increase 


the  group's  legitimacy  in  the  eyes  of 
one  segment  of  the  community  may 
decrease  it  in  the  eyes  of  another. 

A  key  concern  of  feminist  projects 
is  the  definition  of  their  targets.  Whom 
do  they  aim  to  reach?  Only  feminists? 
Only  certain  socio-economic,  ethnic, 
or  racial  groups?  What  different  pat- 
terns of  relating  are  associated  with 
groups  which  are  perceived  as  profes- 
sionally credible  in  establishment  terms, 
as  opposed  to  groups  which  play  down 
credentials  and  avoid  affiliations  with 
established  groups?  This  information 
would  help  groups  make  decisions 
about  how  much  legitimacy  is  neces- 
sary to  relate  to  the  women  they  wish 
to  reach.  Since  a  group  which  appears 
legitimate  to  one  group  may  appear 
questionable  to  another,  at  some  point, 
a  project  has  to  decide  which  people  it 
wishes  to  reach,  or  which  people  it  can 
reach  without  sacrificing  more  impor- 
tant values. 


Amazon 


a  feminist  joupha! 


FEATURING:  interviews, 
satire,  reviews, 
poetry,  fiction, 
local  news 


AMAZON  COLLECTIVE 

2  211  E.  Kenwood  Blvd. 

Milwaukee,  WI  53211 


ADDRESS_ 
CITY 


$3/  year   12  issues     35C  sample 
$10   institutions  copy 


78/Quest 


Similar  questions  and  concerns  can 
be  raised  with  respect  to  the  type  of 
women  who  will  become  involved.  It 
may  be  that  groups  which  appear  to  be 
"respectable"  will  attract  more  parti- 
cipants than  "alternative"  groups,  de- 
pending on  the  nature  of  their  service 
or  objective  and  on  the  nature  of  their 
target  population.  A  group  must  also 
evaluate  the  potential  for  raising  the 
political  consciousness  of  such  women. 

In  relations  with  agencies  which  are 
directly  or  indirectly  involved  with  the 
concern  of  the  project,  other  problems 
can  arise.  In  the  case  of  required 
licensing,  for  example,  the  agency  can 
have  ultimate  power  of  "life"  or 
"death"  over  a  group.  More  often, 
these  agencies  will  tend  to  view  a  new 
organization  with  caution  and  possibly 
with  suspicion;  the  new  organization 
may  threaten  the  agency's  reputation, 
or  it  may  take  away  the  opportunity 
for  the  agency's  own  expansion.  When 
agencies  choose  to  ignore  a  new  organ- 
ization, the  project  may  lose  its  chance 
for  impact.  On  the  other  hand,  agencies 
can  cooperate  to  extend  the  group's 
impact.  For  instance,  a  number  of  rape 
crisis  centers  have  been  able  to  parti- 
cipate fully  in  various  police  and  medi- 
cal in-service  training  programs,  largely, 
however,  because  of  their  ability  to 
convince  the  involved  agencies  that 
they  have  valuable  information  to  of- 
fer and  are  competent  to  present  it. 
Thus,  the  perceived  legitimacy  of  an 
organization  may  be  directly  influ- 
enced by  how  it  presents  itself.  Certain 
projects,  for  example,  may  find  that 
more    traditional   ways   of  organizing 


(including  the  use  of  advisory  com- 
mittees, of  centralized  decision-mak- 
ing, and  of  exploiting  credentials)  will 
facilitate  their  access  to  "legitimacy." 
But  in  the  long  run,  the  strategies  chos- 
en will  have  a  lot  to  do  with  the  larger 
community's  power  structure.  In  com- 
munities with  centralized  political  pow- 
er and  a  closed  political  system,  access 
to  legitimacy  will  be  limited  regardless 
of  the  new  group's  competence  and 
"credentials."  In  such  instances,  third- 
party  organizations  may  be  useful  in 
obtaining  access  to  relevant  agencies, 
in  providing  funds  or  in-kind  resources, 
and  in  providing  specialized  skills.  Of 
course,  the  way  the  new  group  is  per- 
ceived will  affect  other  groups'  deci- 
sions to  support  it,  and  will  determine 
strength  of  their  support.  Nevertheless, 
some  support  may  be  offered,  even 
when  there  are  ideological  and  proced- 
ural disagreements  so  long  as  the  new- 
comer is  seen  to  provide  a  necessary 
community  service. 

Whether  an  organization  is  deciding 
what  groups  in  the  community  to  con- 
tact, how  to  contact  them,  or  how  to 
organize  itself,  there  are  a  number  of 
decisions  it  must  make.  Each  decision 
will  have  consequences  on  its  ultimate 
impact.  In  the  end,  if  political  change 
is  to  take  place  and  if  personal  growth 
is  to  occur  and  ideas  are  to  develop,  a 
number  of  organizational  approaches 
are  needed.  The  capacity  to  generate 
ideas,  the  appeals  to  different  consti- 
tuencies, the  ability  to  influence  socie- 
tal attitudes  will  vary  from  group  to 
group.  Organizational  cooperation 
should    enhance    these    variations    so 


Organizing  for  Impact/79 


that  maximum  impact  is  achieved. 
Organizational  conflict  may  also  be 
useful,  if  it  makes  organizational  par- 
ticipants evaluate  their  ideas  and  ac- 
tions. Feminist  organizations  must  also 
change  and  grow,  if  they  wish  to  be 
relevant  in  a  changing  environment. 

This  article  has  pointed  out  some  of 
the  costs  and  benefits  of  various  ap- 
proaches, and  suggested  that  the  organ- 
ization's major  concern  should  be  de- 
fining what  it  wishes  to  accomplish; 
other  decisions  can  then  be  evaluated 
in  terms  of  the  achievement  of  these 
ends. 


The  example  of  staff  insubordination  was 
reported  in  a  letter  from  Pittsburgh  Action 
Against  Rape,  July,  1975. 

lOVictor  A.  Thompson,  Modern  Organ- 
ization (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1961), 
pp.  25-39. 


Liz  O'Sullivan  teaches  public  admin- 
istration at  Arizona  State  University 
and  is  studying  Rape  Crisis  Centers  to 
find  out  Piow  women  can  use  their 
energy  more   effectively. 


Footnotes 


ISee  Jo  Freeman,  The  Politics  of  Wom- 
en's Liberation  (New  York:  David  McKay, 
1975)  pp.  119-129,  for  a  full  discussion. 

2 Freeman,  op.  cit.,  discusses  NOW  and 
other  groups  in  Chapters  3  and  4.  See  also 
Maren  Lockwood  Carden's  The  New  Femi- 
nist Movement  (New  York:  Russell  Sage 
Foundation,  1974). 

^Chester  Barnard,  The  Functions  of  the 
Executive  (Cambridge  :  Harvard  University 
Press,  1938),  pp.  82-86. 

4Peter  B.  Clark  and  James  Q.  Wilson, 
"Incentive  Systems:  A  Theory  of  Organiza- 
tion," Administrative  Science  Quarterly,  6 
(1961),  pp.  129-166. 

5 James  Q.  Wilson,  Political  Organiza- 
tions (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1973),  p.  46. 

"Mathew  Holden,  Jr.,  "  'Imperialism' 
in  Bureaucracy,"  American  Political  Science 
Review,  60  (1966),  pp.  943-951,  provides 
an  excellent  discussion  on  the  hows  and 
whys  of  organizational  growth. 

?David  Katz  and  Robert  L.  Kahn,  The 
Social  Psychology  of  Organization  (New 
York:  John  Wiley,  1966),  pp.  76-77. 

°  Free  man,  op.  cit,  pp.  126-127. 

^Wilson,  op.  cit,  pp.  225-230,  discusses 
the  impact  of  paid  staff  on  an  organization. 


SIBYL-CHILD 

A  WOMEN'S  ARTS 

AND  CULTURE  JOURNAL 

I26I8  BILLINGTON  ROAD 

SILVER  SPRING,  MD.  20904 

PHONE:  (301)  384-4524 

(301)  422-7493 


SUBMIT:  ARTICLES 

INTERVIEWS,  FICTION 

SHORT  PLAYS,  POETRY 

BOOK  AND  MEDIA  REVIEWS 

GRAPHICS  (8x7), CARTOONS 
Include  stamped,  self-addressed 
mailer. 


SUBSCRIPTION  RATES: 

SINGLE  COPY $1.25 

QUARTERLY $4.50 

INSTITUTIONS. ..$5.00 

(single  copy) 
INSTITUTIONS. .$15.00 

(quarterly) 


SO/Quest 


Notes  for  prospective  contributors 


We  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling  material 
for  each  issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off  the 
presses,  a  small  development  committee  prepares  a  list  of  ques- 
tions and  ideas  which  we  hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  This 
list  is  available  to  anyone  who  is  considering  submitting  ideas  for 
the  issue,  outlines  for  potential  articles,  manuscripts,  poetry,  gra- 
phics, etc.  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out  writers  and 
artists  known  to  have  definitive  political  perspectives  on  issues 
related  to  the  theme. 

All  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members.  If  it  is  not 
appropriate  for  Quest  purposes  the  manuscript  or  graphic  will  be 
returned  to  the  author.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered,  it  is 
then  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible  for 
working  with  the  author  through  whatever  processes  of  rewriting 
and  editing  required.  This  process  includes  soliciting  comments  and 
suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and  Advisory  Committee 
members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review 
before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8V2  by  11  paper,  using 
a  black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy). 
Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10  type- 
written pages)  for  reviews,  responses  and  short  articles,  to, 
at  most,  7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where 
appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  collected  and 
typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manu- 
scripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  are  requested.  For  information 
concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspondence 
to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


future  issues 
LEADERSHIP 
Spring,    1976  vol.11  no.  4 

Leadership  is  vital  to  achieving  social  change  but  we  need  to  examine 
the  role  and  function  of  leaders  in  a  feminist  movement.  Areas  for 
articles  include:  concepts,  types  and  problems  of  leadership;  how  to 
achieve  collectivity  and  accountability  without  destroying  initiative  and 
imagination;  problems  of  fame  and  public  recognition;  the  process  of 
training,  sharing  and  developing  skills  that  create  more  and  stronger 
leaders.  Copy  Deadline:  November  15,  1975 

KALEIDOSCOPE  ONE 

Summer,  1976  vol.  Ill  no.l 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  two  years  of  publication  and 
for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics 
and  ideas  that  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous 
articles.  Copy  Deadline:  February  15,  1976 

COMMUNICATION  and  CONTROL 

Fall,  1976  vol.  Ill  no.  2 

The  selection  and  transmission  of  information  is  an  index  to  power 
in  mass  society:  feminists  must  analyze  how  this  power  affects  women 
and  determine  how  we  can  use  it  to  better  political  effect.  Areas  for  ar- 
ticles include:  the  role  and  functions  fo  the  media  in  our  society;  com- 
munication and  art;  communication  and  political  organization;  feminist 
forms  of  communication.  Copy  Deadline:  May  15,  1976 

WORK,  WORK,  WORK 

Winter,  1976-77  vol.  Ill  no.   3 

Work  is  an  essential  part  of  our  lives:  of  our  survival,  our  self-identity, 
and  our  group  identification.  Crucial  to  feminist  vision  are  new  ways  of 
viewing  and  organizing  work.  Areas  for  articles  include:  What  is  defined 
and  rewarded  as  work— for  men  or  women;  how  does  work  affect  our 
self-concept,  especially  in  regard  to  class,  race,  and  sex;  what  are 
feminist  modes  of  organizing  work.  Copy  Deadline:  August  15,  1976 


