QUEST 

a  reminist  cm 


ISSN  0098-955  X 


$2.75 


quarterly 


RACE,  CLASS  &  CULTURE 


Quest  Communique 


The  last  six  months  at  Quest  have  been  spent  in  evaluating  and 
changing  our  content,  our  process  and  our  structure.  The  biggest 
change  for  us  as  a  staff  has  been  relocating  our  offices  and  becoming 
independent  of  the  Institute  for  Policy  Studies.  When  we  started 
Quest,  using  the  Institute  office  available  to  us,  we  knew  that  some- 
day we  wanted  to  have  our  own  offices. 

Though  we  did  not  choose  the  ending  of  that  support  at  this  par- 
ticular moment  (they  forced  us  out),  in  a  political  sense  we  are  happy 
about  it.  However,  in  practical  terms  it  means  we  face  expenses  that 
were  previously  covered  by  the  Institute — rent,  telephones,  copying, 
and  business  postage.  In  addition,  when  we  moved,  we  had  to  obtain 
desks,  filing  cabinets,  drawing  and  light  table,  and  typewriters. 
Though  we  have  been  able  to  borrow  much  of  that  equipment,  or  it 
has  been  donated,  the  most  expensive  item  still  has  to  be  bought:  a 
Selectric  typewriter.  And  not  least,  we  now  have  two  full-time  staff 
salaries  to  pay  with  Quest  income. 

Financially,  this  will  be  the  definitive  test  of  our  capability  to  sur- 
vive. Nevertheless,  our  new  offices  are  larger  and  provide  much  bet- 
ter working  space  than  the  old  one.  It's  been  exciting  and  exhausting, 
but  now  we're  finally  settled  in,  organized  and  happily  functioning 
again. 

More  Quest  to  Come 

Our  second  "first"  was  a  three-day  staff  working  retreat,  held  in 
early  May.  With  a  well-planned  and  full  agenda  we  undertook  a  maj- 
or evaluation  and  analysis  of  our  content  and  process.  The  most  im- 
mediate result  for  our  readers  will  be  an  expanded  journal,  starting 
with  our  next  issue,  Vol.  IV  No.  1,  "Kaleidoscope  Two."  We  will  be- 
gin publishing  96  pages  with  that  issue,  and  will  be  carrying  several 
new  features  which  we  will  describe  in  greater  detail  in  "Kaleido- 
scope Two."  But  for  your  information,  the  added  pages  will  be  de- 
voted to  columns  and  articles  which  deal  with  specific  projects,  stra- 
tegies, and  issues  which  feminists  are  struggling  with  now  in  their 
communities.  More  activist-oriented,  they  will  be  how-to's  as  well  as 
problem-and  success-sharing.  We  are  excited  about  these  changes 
and  hope  that  you  will  be  sure  to  renew  your  subscription  for  this 
fourth  year.  Also  be  sure  to  tell  your  friends  about  the  added  16 
pages  of  Quest  coming  in  the  summer. 

Apologies 

Unfortunately,  due  to  the  moving  and  the  retreat  our  production 
schedule  for  this  issue  was  greatly  disrupted.  We  apologize  for  the 
long  delay  in  completing  this  issue,  and  hope  to  catch  up  with  our 
regular  schedule  over  the  three  coming  issues.  Don't  worry — you 
will  still  receive  four  issues  a  year. 


Vol.  Ill,  No.4 
Spring,  1977 


QUEST 

a  iemHiist  quarterly 
RACE, CLASS  &  CULTURE 

Contents 


RACE  and  CLASS:  Beyond  Personal  Politics 

Bev  Fisher 

VOICES  on  BLACK  FEMINISM 

Brenda  Eichelberger 

NATIVE  AMERICAN  MOTHER 

Judith  Witherow 

CONFRONTATION:  BLACK/WHITE 

An  Interview  with  Ginny  Apuzzo  and  Betty  Powell 

AT  MIAMI,  A  Poem 

]yotsna  Sanzgiri 

CLASS  ATTITUDES  and  PROFESSIONALISM 

Mary  McKenney  48 

LETTERS  60 


7^ 


2Q 


3  4 


4  7 


CLASS  VIGNETTES  by  Ahshe 

graphic  essay  Shari  McCoul 

An  OPEN  LETTER  to  the  ACADEMY 

Michele  Russell 


64 


70 


©Copyright  1977  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights  re- 
served. Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  prohibited. 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in  January, 
April,  July  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  2000  P 
St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20009,  U.S.A.  Second  class  postage 
paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  is  a  tax-ex- 
empt, non-profit  organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003. 
Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 
$10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  surface, 
$14.50/year  overseas  air;  $15.00/year  to  institutions;  $2.75  and 
35  postage  and  handling  for  single  issues;  $3.35/all  back  issues. 
Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request.  Book- 
stores contact  Women  in  Distribution,  Box  8858,  Washington, 
D.C.  20003  for  ordering  information. 


ISSN  0098-955  X 


91 


Quest  Communique 


The  last  six  months  at  Quest  have  been  spent  in  evaluating  and 
changing  our  content,  our  process  and  our  structure.  The  biggest 
change  for  us  as  a  staff  has  been  relocating  our  offices  and  becoming 
independent  of  the  Institute  for  Policy  Studies.  When  we  started 
Quest,  using  the  Institute  office  available  to  us,  we  knew  that  some- 
day we  wanted  to  have  our  own  offices. 

Though  we  did  not  choose  the  ending  of  that  support  at  this  par- 
ticular moment  (they  forced  us  out),  in  a  political  sense  we  are  happy 
about  it.  However,  in  practical  terms  it  means  we  face  expenses  that 
were  previously  covered  by  the  Institute — rent,  telephones,  copying, 
and  business  postage.  In  addition,  when  we  moved,  we  had  to  obtain 
desks,  filing  cabinets,  drawing  and  light  table,  and  typewriters. 
Though  we  have  been  able  to  borrow  much  of  that  equipment,  or  it 
has  been  donated,  the  most  expensive  item  still  has  to  be  bought:  a 
Selectric  typewriter.  And  not  least,  we  now  have  two  full-time  staff 
salaries  to  pay  with  Quest  income. 

Financially,  this  will  be  the  definitive  test  of  our  capability  to  sur- 
vive. Nevertheless,  our  new  offices  are  larger  and  provide  much  bet- 
ter working  space  than  the  old  one.  It's  been  exciting  and  exhausting, 
but  now  we're  finally  settled  in,  organized  and  happily  functioning 
again. 

More  Quest  to  Come 

Our  second  ''first"  was  a  three-day  staff  working  retreat,  held  in 
early  May.  With  a  well-planned  and  full  agenda  we  undertook  a  maj- 
or evaluation  and  analysis  of  our  content  and  process.  The  most  im- 
mediate result  for  our  readers  will  be  an  expanded  journal,  starting 
with  our  next  issue,  Vol.  IV  No.  1,  "Kaleidoscope  Two."  We  will  be- 
gin publishing  96  pages  with  that  issue,  and  will  be  carrying  several 
new  features  which  we  will  describe  in  greater  detail  in  "Kaleido- 
scope Two."  But  for  your  information,  the  added  pages  will  be  de- 
voted to  columns  and  articles  which  deal  with  specific  projects,  stra- 
tegies, and  issues  which  feminists  are  struggling  with  now  in  their 
communities.  More  activist-oriented,  they  will  be  how-to's  as  well  as 
problem-and  success-sharing.  We  are  excited  about  these  changes 
and  hope  that  you  will  be  sure  to  renew  your  subscription  for  this 
fourth  year.  Also  be  sure  to  tell  your  friends  about  the  added  16 
pages  of  Quest  coming  in  the  summer. 

Apologies 

Unfortunately,  due  to  the  moving  and  the  retreat  our  production 
schedule  for  this  issue  was  greatly  disrupted.  We  apologize  for  the 
long  delay  in  completing  this  issue,  and  hope  to  catch  up  with  our 
regular  schedule  over  the  three  coming  issues.  Don't  worry — you 
will  still  receive  four  issues  a  year. 


Vol.  Ill,  No.4 
Spring,  1977 


QUEST 

a  feimuinisf  quarterly 
RACE, CLASS  &  CULTURE 

Contents 


RACE  and  CLASS:  Beyond  Personal  Politics 

Bev  Fisher 

VOICES  on  BLACK  FEMINISM 

Brenda  Eichelberger 

NATIVE  AMERICAN  MOTHER 

Judith  Wilherow 

CONFRONTATION:  BLACK/WHITE 

An  Interview  with  Cinny  Apuzzo  and  Betty  Powell 

AT  MIAMI,  A  Poem 

lyotsna  Sar.zgiri 

CLASS  ATTITUDES  and  PROFESSIONALISM 

Mary  McKenney 

LETTERS 

CLASS  VIGNETTES  by  Ahshe 

graphic  essay  Shari  McCoul 

An  OPEN  LETTER  to  the  ACADEMY 

Michele  Russell 


^Copyright  1977  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.  All  rights  re- 
served. Reproduction  without  permission  is  strictly  prohibited. 
_>!<•>/  a  feminist  quarterly  is  published  four  times  a  year  in  January, 
April,  )uly  and  October  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  Inc.,  2000  P 
St.  N.W.,  Washington,  DC.  20009,  U.S.A.  Second  class  postage 
paid  at  Washington,  DC.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly.  Inc.  is  a  tax-ex- 
empt, non-profit  organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly.  P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  DC.  20003. 
Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals; 
$10.00/year  in  Canada  and  Mexico;  $11.00/year  overseas  surface, 
$14.50/year  overseas  air;  $15.00/year  to  institutions;  $2  75  and 
35  postage  and  handling  for  single  issues;  $3.35/all  back  issues. 
Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request.  Book- 
stores contact  Women  in  Distribution,  Box  8858,  Washington, 
DC.  20003  for  ordering  information. 

ISSN  0098-955  X 


Staff 


Managing  Editor 

Beverly  Fisher 
Dfsign  Editor 

Alexa  Freeman 
Promotion  Editor 

Dorothy  Allison 

Charlotte  Bunch 
Jane  Dolkart 
Nancy  Hartsock 
Mary-Helen  Mautner 
Sidney  Oliver 
Gerri  Traina 


Associates 


Denise  Davis 
Judith  Jones 
Jackie  MacMillan 

als 

r 

ico 
face 

Support 
Workers 

)  for  individu 

ndividuals 

ig  Contribute 

itutions 

ada  and  Mex 

overseas  air 
e  back  issue 

Jackie  St.  Joan 
Margaret  Streitenberger 
Cynthia  Washington 

Theme 

$9.00/year  (4  issues 
$17.00/2  years  for 
$25.00  for  Sustaini 
$15.00/year  for  inst 
$10.00/year  for  Car 
$2.00/year  extra  foi 
$5.50/year  extra  fo 
$3.35  for  each  sing 

Development 

DOODDDDD 

Dorothy  Allison 
Del  Dobbins 
Karen  Kollias 
Cynthia  Washington 
Judith  Witherow 

te  to  sub- 
contribu- 
fl    feminist 
fill  out  the 
snclose     a 
order  to: 

uarterly 

Cover  Design  by  Scarlet  Cheng 


2  ~  v     * 

-  «Q 

r  mak 

Que 

pleas 

and 

r  mon 

•  5  <o  ^ 

I"5 

scribe  o 
tion    to 
quarterly 
coupon 
check  o 

Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  po- 
litical analysis  and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  it- 
self, but  a  process  leading  to  new  directions  for  the  women's  move- 
ment, possibly  including  such  concrete  forms  as  regional  or  national 
conferences,  a  national  organization,  or  a  political  party.  We,  the  edi- 
tors, are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the  movement  several  years 
and  have  reached  a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  ques- 
tions. We  have  been  through  various  ideological  and  activist  meta- 
morphoses and  end  up  feeling  that  our  overall  perspective  is  still  not 
adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle  brought  us?  Closer  to  real  econom- 
ic, political,  and  social  power  for  women?  Closer  to  the  end  of  the  ex- 
ploitation of  and  violence  against  women?  Closer  to  self-determina- 
tion for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  ex- 
pect that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to 
this  process  of  seeking. 


Note:  Change  of  Address 


If  you  have  not  received  a  previous  issue  of  Quest,  it  may  be  because 
you've  moved  and  never  sent  us  a  change  of  address.  The  post  office 
does  not  forward  Quest  because  it  is  handled  as  third  class  mail;  even  if 
you  check  the  P.O.  box  to  forward  your  mail  and  say  you  will  pay  for 
it,  you  will  not  get  Quest.  The  post  office  does  not  return  the  undelivered 
copies  of  Quest.  We,  therefore,  cannot  be  responsible  for  these  lost  is- 
sues. As  neither  of  us  can  afford  the  loss,  please  notify  us  of  a  change 
of  address  immediately.  If  possible,  provide  us  with  the  number 
which  appears  above  your  name  on  your  address  label. 


'japhic  by  Sandy  Ackerman 


Race  and  Class: 

Beyond  Personal  Politics 


By  BEV  FISHER 

Contributing  editor:  Jackie  St.  Joan 

photographs  by  Alice  Quinn 

For  each  issue  of  Quest,  one  person 
reviews  all  the  articles  in  order  to  get  a  per- 
spective on  how  everything  fits  together, 
what  is  missing,  and  what  is  emphasized. 
This  was  my  task. 

In  this  issue,  we  sought  articles  which 
integrated  analysis  of  race,  class  and  cul- 
ture as  they  affect  women.  Some  of  the 
articles  by  themselves  in  fact  do  this. 
Others  focus  on  one  or  two  of  these  factors. 
We  had  also  hoped  that  this  issue  would 
discuss  feminism  as  a  concept  which  encom- 
passes an  analysis  of  race,  class  and  culture. 
The  issue  falls  short  of  achieving  this,  re- 
flecting the  fact  that  the  women's  movement 
is  only  beginning  to  work  on  this  chal- 
lenge. 

Before  we  as  feminists  can  develop  analy- 
sis, we  must  share  our  experience  by  de- 
scribing it.  Many  of  the  articles  in  this 
issue  do  just  that.  When  women  of  different 
races,  classes  and  cultures  describe  and 
share  their  lives,  histories,  and  feelings,  we 
can  begin  to  understand  each  other  and  how 
we  can  change  our  lives  by  working  to- 
gether. 

Quest's  goal  is  to  integrate  analyses  of 
race,  class,  and  culture  in  all  our  issues, 
and  not  just  to  present  a  single  "token" 
issue  on  race  and  class.  It  is  not  our  inten- 
tion that  this  be  the  issue  in  which  Quest 
will  deal  with  race,  class  and  culture.  We 
need  more  writing  by  minority  women,  not 
only  in  this  issue  but  in  every  issue.  These 
articles  are  only  a  starting  point  for  dis- 


cussion. They  are  presented  as  catalysts 
for  further  analysis,  development,  and — 
hopefully — writing. 

This  article  discusses  what  we  as  a  move- 
ment have  been  doing  on  race  and  class  is- 
sues, and  provides  some  suggestions  for 
evaluation  and  change.  I  have  written  it 
primarily  with  white  feminist  activists  in 
mind,  since  they  are  the  majority  of 
Quest's  readers. 

In  this  article  are  segments  from  a 
taped  discussion  among  three  women 
active  in  the  National  Congress  of  Neigh- 
borhood women  in  Brooklyn,  N.Y.  The 
discussion  took  place  in  the  apartment  of 
Marie  Casella,  an  Italian-American  wo- 
man with  three  children.  Marie  works  as 
the  office  manager  with  a  community  or- 
ganization in  Brooklyn,  but  was  then  at 
home,  laid  up  with  a  broken  leg.  Diane 
Jackson  is  a  black  woman  with  two  child- 
ren, who  is  working  primarily  on  creating 
a  shelter  for  battered  women  in  Brooklyn. 
Maria  Fava  is  a  Chicana  with  four  child- 
ren. Each  is  enrolled  in  the  community  col- 
lege program  offered  through  the  Congress. 
Often  their  words  speak  more  directly  and 
clearly  than  any  objective  analysis  of  race 
and  class.  I  wish  to  thank  them  for  allow- 
ing me  to  use  their  experiences  to  illustrate 
my  thoughts. 

Have  you  ever  tried  staring  at  a 
black  dot  with  a  blue  ring  around  it 
and  then  shifting  your  gaze  to  a 
blank,  gray  background?  You  see  a 
greenish  ring  and  sometimes  a  dot 
on  the  supposedly  blank  back- 
ground. Your  eyes  can't  adjust  fast 


HQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  4,  spring,  1977 


enough;  they  carry  over  something 
that  isn't  there,  creating  a  false 
image. 

This  phenomenon,  called  "nega- 
tive afterimage/'  reminds  me  of 
what  happens  with  the  "politics  by 
experience"  on  which  much  of  our 
feminist  analysis  of  race  and  class  is 
based.  We  have  discussed  the  class 
and  race  attitudes,  values,  and  be- 
havior affecting  our  interrelation- 
ships within  the  feminist  move- 
ment. But  when  we  attempt  to  look 
outside  our  movement,  we  carry 
with  us  the  "afterimage"  of  our  per- 
sonal experience.  We  have  difficulty 
seeing  the  different  relationships 
among  people,  groups,  institutions, 
and  systems.  While  our  personal 
experiences  are  valid  and  may  be 
the  best  starting  point  for  analysis, 
we  have  gotten  stuck  in  them. 

Because  of  this  phenomenon,  we 
need  to  review  what  we  as  a  move- 
ment have  been  doing  on  race  and 
class  issues,  how  the  scope  of  our 
vision  of  race  and  class  has  been 
limited  by  our  reliance  on  our  per- 
sonal experience,  and  look  for  some 
ways  for  evaluating  and  changing 
our  direction. 

Tools  to  Approach  Race, 
Class  and  Culture 

Most  of  this  analysis  is  directed 
at  how  feminists  have  been  dealing 
with  the  effects  of  racism  and  class- 
ism,  rather  than  at  the  basic  causal 
factors  of  race  and  class  oppression. 
I  start  with  the  recognition  that 
patriarchy  and  capitalism  are  the 
source  of  these  oppressions.  I  am 
not  building  a  case  that  one  or  the 
other  is  the  primary  contradiction, 


but  acknowledging  both  as  enemies 
which  must  be  destroyed.  "A  class 
society  is,  by  definition,  a  society 
where  people  do  not  have  equal  op- 
portunity, power,  security,  and 
access  to  resources.  Oppression  is 
the  basis  of  a  class  society."  Race 
and  class  attitudes,  values,  and  be- 
havior "are  a  product  of  class  op- 
pression, not  the  cause."1  Our  task 
as  a  movement  is  not  to  attack  peo- 
ple who  show  the  effects  of  a  class 
and  race  system,  but  to  attack  the 
causes  themselves.  In  developing 
theory  and  strategies  for  our  move- 
ment, we  must  always  ask  whether 
we  are  dealing  with  the  causes  or 
the  effects.  Answering  this  ques- 
tion will  help  determine  our  priori- 
ties and  our  futures. 

Any  attempt  to  integrate  analysis 
concerning  race  and  class  faces  the 
danger  of  making  analogies  or 
drawing  comparisons  that  are  not 
always  accurate.  The  class  position 
of  black  and  other  minority  women, 
for  example,  is  sometimes  proble- 
matic. "Black  women  are  keenly 
aware... that  this  society  is  com- 
prised of  haves  and  have-nots."2  In 
other  words,  by  virtue  of  being 
black,  a  woman  is  also  very  prob- 
ably poor  or  working  class.  How- 
ever, we  should  not  overlook  the 
existence  of  the  black  middle  class. 
Black  and  poor  are  not  necessarily 
synonymous  but  are  often  correla- 
tive. While  I  do  not  believe  race  and 
class  are  intrinsically  linked,  in 
the  context  of  this  article,  the  same 
considerations  usually  apply  to 
both  minority  women  and  working 
and  lower-class  women.  However,  I 
try  to  make  the  distinction  between 
them  when  appropriate. 


Race  and  Class:  Beyond  Personal  Politics/3 


Another  dimension  to  treating 
class  and  race  together  is  that 
though  class  is  not  immutable,  race 
is.  It  is  possible  for  women  to 
change  their  class  and/or  their  class 
identification,  but  not  their  race. 
Often  this  difference  between  race 
and  class  can  distort  discussions  of 
them.  We  must  be  careful  to  dis- 
tinguish between  class-identified 
and  race-identified  behavior,  op- 
pression, values,  and  attitudes. 

Culture  is  an  additional  dimen- 
sion in  an  analysis  of  race  and  class. 
Culture  is  the  "belief,  thought, 
speech,  action,  artifacts,  and  mate- 


rial traits  of  a  social  group."3  The 
verb  "to  culture"  means  to  grow  in 
a  prepared  medium.  Thus,  one's 
culture  is  the  medium  in  which  one 
grows.  My  approach  is  to  integrate 
questions  of  race,  class,  and  culture. 
What  is   black  culture?  What  is  a 


ghetto  culture?  Does  ethnicity 
affect  culture  more  than  class?  A 
social  group's  culture  often  is  a  line 
of  defense  against  the  oppressive 
majority  society.  We  have  devel- 
oped subcultures  within  the  Wo- 
men's Movement  to  protect  us  in 
this  way.  But  as  I  point  out  in  the 
next  section,  our  subculture  not 
only  protects  us,  but  also  isolates  us. 
My  analysis  is  based  particularly 
in  economics,  but  also  in  life  styles, 
habits,  social  tastes,  education, 
family  structure,  relationships  and 
types  of  work  as  cultural  aspects  of 
class  and  race.  A  real  strength  of 
feminist  politics  is  that  we  integrate 
experience  rather  than  isolate  it. 
We  view  women  as  whole  selves. 
Our  approach  challenges  patriar- 
chy's divisions  of  mind  and  body, 
heart  and  head.  Neither  race  nor 
class  exists  as  an  isolated  aspect 
of  one's  existence.  Both  affect 
many  aspects  of  our  lives,  and  can- 
not be  separated  from  our  general 
experience. 

The  Nonaligned  Experience 

How  have  the  various  sectors  of 
the  women's  movement  dealt  with 
the  complex  relationships  of  race, 
class,  and  culture?  In  the  non- 
aligned  feminist  sector,4  this  pro- 
cess has  occurred  primarily  around 
class  rather  than  race.  Lower-and 
working-class  women  began  voic- 
ing their  feelings  of  alienation  or 
exploitation  within  the  movement 
after  having  kept  quiet  for  a  long 
time,  unaware  that  their  anger  and 
frustration  had  anything  to  do  with 
an  issue  as  supposedly  "unfeminist" 
as  class.  As  women  began  to  come 


4/  Quest 


out  of  their  class  closets,  they  found 
other  lower-  and  working-class 
women  who  felt  the  same  way. 
They  gained  strength  from  each 
other  and  articulated  more  loudly 
and  clearly  the  differences  be- 
tween their  own  class  experiences 
and  those  of  middle-class  women. 
Throughout  this  process — which  is 
still  continuing — they  often  had  to 
force  the  issue,  and  were  some- 
times outrageous  and  self-right- 
eous in  their  demands  that  femi- 
nists face  this  conflict.  Working- 
class  women  felt  good  in  their 
newly  discovered  class  identities, 
but  middle-class  women  often  were 
hostile  and  arrogant,  and  others 
were  defensive  and  reactionary. 
The  most  common  response  of 
middle-class  women,  however,  was 
guilt,  which  was  usually  immobiliz- 
ing. Some  had  thought  feminist 
process  would  be  different  from 
typical  confrontational  process, 
and  asked,  "Will  the  movement  sur- 
vive? Should  it  survive  if  it  can't  deal 
with  our  differences?" 


Lesbian-Feminist  Subculture 

In  addition  to  facing  newly-rec- 
ognized class  "cultures,"  non- 
aligned  lesbian  feminists  developed 
a  subculture  of  their  own.  Like  any 
oppressed  group  struggling  to  as- 
sert its  power  and  opposition  to  the 
mainstream,  lesbian  feminists  de- 
veloped a  group  identity  and  life- 
style that  reinforced  them  individ- 
ually and  collectively.  This  subcul- 
ture is  essential  for  sustenance,  yet 
it  also  contributes  to  making  radical 
feminist  politics  a  closed  system. 
The  subculture's  mode  of  dress, 
appearance,  way  of  talking,  sticking 
together,  insulation  from  the  main- 
stream, alternative  jobs  or  alterna- 
tive living  arrangements  both  em- 
power us  personally  and  cut  us  off 
from  other  women. 

The  movement  subculture  has 
forged  tools  to  energize,  renew, 
support,  and  protect  its  members. 
These  tools  are  "the  beliefs, 
thoughts,  speech,  action,  artifacts 
and    material    traits,"  which   com- 


"To  be  perfectly  honest,  women's  liberation  was  not  im- 
portant. I  don't  appreciate  some  middle-class  woman  tell- 
ing me  to  get  out  of  the  kitchen  who  didn't  know  if  there 
was  a  kitchen  there,  and  didn't  know  if  the  struggles  of  her 
home  related  to  the  struggles  of  my  home.  I  don't  know 
who  they  are,  they  sound  far-out  and  far-fetched.  I  happen 
to  like  my  kitchen.  I  like  being  a  mother  and  happen  to  like 
being  a  wife.  I  don't  think  you  have  to  give  up  those  things 
to  be  a  liberated  person.  I  think  it's  just  a  matter  of  jug- 
gling books;  of  keeping  everybody  happy;  of  knowing 
there's  a  place  for  your  husband  and  there's  a  place  for  you 

in  the  world I  came  from  a  very  proud  heritage.  I  know 

I'm  Italian.  It  was  drummed  into  me  what  Italian  people 
are:  they  keep  their  home;  they  keep  their  husband;  they 
keep  everything.  It  was  just  a  proud  thing  for  me." 

Marie  Casella 


Beyond  Personal  Politics/5 


prise  the  lesbian-feminist  subcul- 
ture. While  it  protects  individuals 
from  the  outside,  dominant  male 
culture,  in  itself  it  is  not  political  action. 
It  seldom  brings  radicals  into  con- 
tact with  women  as  yet  unreached 
by  feminism.  And  too  often,  the 
subculture  has  not  seriously  chal- 
lenged patriarchal  institutions.  In 
fact,  it  often  provides  a  buffer  or 
escape-hatch  for  feminists. 

The  nonaligned  lesbian  feminist 
subculture  does  not  seriously  legiti- 
mize political  action  to  the  same  ex- 
tent that  it  legitimizes  action  such 
as  music  and  the  arts,  which  nour- 
ish the  subculture  itself.  Political 
action  necessarily  requires  dealing 
with  the  world  outside  the  subcul- 
ture, often  on  its  terms  rather  than 
on  our  own.  As  a  result,  even  the 
political  theorizing  done  in  the  non- 
aligned  movement  often  suffers 
from  a  limited  experiential  basis 
that  is  limited  only  to  the  lesbian 
subculture. 

Choose  Among  Your  Selves 

By  ignoring  the  intricacies  of 
race,   class   and   culture,   the   non- 


aligned  women's  movement  has 
often  pressured  us  into  choosing 
among  our  various  identities.  For 
instance,  some  are  uncomfortable 
with  black  women  who  won't  put 
the  women's  movement  before  the 
black  movement,  or  distrustful  of 
lesbians  who  prefer  to  work  in 
mixed  gay  groups. 

The  feminist  movement  has  been 
particularly  insensitive  to  the  feel- 
ings of  minority  women.  How 
many  times  have  we  heard  white 
women  get  up  at  a  meeting  and 
bemoan  the  fact  that  there  aren't 
any  Third  World  women  there?  It 
may  be  that  when  they  can  choose 
where  and  with  whom  to  spend 
their  free  time,  like  us,  they  may 
prefer  to  be  with  people  of  their 
own  cultural  identity.  After  all, 
most  Third  World  women  have  to 
deal  with  white  people  all  the  time. 

The  feminist  movement  often 
fails  to  acknowledge  the  differences 
between  the  power  relationships  of 
black  and  poor  men  and  those  of 
white,  middle-  or  upper-class  men 
to  the  system.  By  ignoring  this 
power  reality,  feminists  ignore  the 
real  experiences  of  women  in  these 


"I  started  to  think  that  I  had  to  keep  my  family  together.  I 
saw  what  happened  to  my  own  friends  when  they  were 
growing  up,  in  all  the  homes  where  there  were  no  fathers. 
These  were  the  kids  that  were  junkies;  these  were  the  girls 
who  turned  out  to  be  prostitutes.  I  just  thought  that  if  I 
want  an  education  and  any  kind  of  a  future  for  my  chil- 
dren, that  I  had  to  keep  this  man  in  the  home.  How  am  I 
gonna  raise  a  son  without  a  father  image  in  the  house?  I 
just  felt  that  I  had  to  take  a  whole  lot  of  shit,  literally  shit, 
that  was  happening.  I  had  to  take  it  all  in  order  for  my  chil- 
dren to  have  a  family  together." 

Diane  Jackson 


61  Quest 


"When  I  had  my  son,  my  mother  always  kept  him.  She  felt 
that  I  was  young  and  wild,  and  I  was.  I  didn't  have  time  for 
the  kid.  I  used  to  bring  him  home  on  the  weekends  some- 
times. I  used  to  come  over  to  see  him  when  she  wouldn't 
let  me  take  him  home  with  me.  Then,  two  years  ago,  my 
mother  died  and  I  had  to  make  a  decision.  We  were  very 
close  as  a  family,  and  I  had  to  decide  whether  I  was  gonna 
move  in  with  my  two  younger  brothers  or  stay  with  my 
husband.  And  I  decided  to  move  in  with  my  younger 
brothers.  That  was  like  a  whole  big  trip,  and  that  was 
when  the  fighting  started.  All  my  friends  were  telling  me 
I  was  really  crazy.  'How'd  you  give  up  your  husband  for 
your  family?'  But  nobody  understood  like  the  way  we  were 
raised.  My  mother  always  told  us  that  we  gotta  stick  to- 
gether— no  matter  what.  Eventually,  my  husband  moved 
in  with  my  brothers  and  me." 

Diane  Jackson 


same  groups.  They,  however,  know 
the  differences  in  power  that  their 
men  have  compared  with  white 
men  or  middle-class  men.  Thus,  be- 
cause of  our  blindness  to  these  po- 
litical realities,  it  is  difficult  for  all 
women  to  bridge  the  gap  created  by 
race  and  class  divisions.  Most  black 
and  brown  women  will  see  a  femi- 
nist's white  skin  first,  and  then  her 
sex. 

The   enthusiasm  and  defensive- 
ness  of  the  lesbian  subculture  has 


alienated  many  of  the  very  women 
our  movement  needs.  Both  our  ac- 
tions and  our  theories  reflect  their 
absence.  The  time  has  come  to 
move  beyond  our  subculture.  We 
have  to  deal  with  issues  which  we 
have  previously  avoided  because 
they  weren't  "women's  issues"  as 
we  defined  them — issues  which 
concern  the  everyday  lives  of  poor, 
working-class  and  minority  women 
— issues  like  schools,  community 
control    of   child   care,    police   and 


-dl  * 


Beyond  Personal  Politics/7 


courts,  housing,  food  stamps.  Some 
of  us  have  to  leave  the  self-created 
ghettos  of  women's  centers,  coffee 
houses,  and  project  offices  to  meet 
women  in  their  neighborhoods, 
homes  and  jobs.  We  have  to  listen 
more  carefully  to  women  who  talk 
differently,  and  who  don't  have  our 


aligned  feminists,  but  we  share 
some  of  the  same  problems.  (While 
my  personal  knowledge  of  socialist 
feminism  is  limited,  I  am  aware  of 
some  of  its  weaknesses  and  of  some 
of  its  developing  strengths  in  try- 
ing to  integrate  race,  class  and  cul- 
ture.)   The    socialist    approach    to 


"I  went  to  Albany  to  fight  for  day  care  even  though  I  don't 
believe  in  day  care  for  me,  but  for  the  people  who  do  need 
it.  There's  so  many  people  who  do  need  it.  I  think  if  some- 
body needs  it,  they  should  get  it.  I  didn't  believe  in  day  care 
for  myself,  for  my  children.  I  felt  they  should  sleep  late 
until  they  go  to  kindergarten.  They  have  to  get  up  early 
most  of  their  lives,  to  school,  to  work.  I  felt  it's  important 
that  they  have  a  home,  to  play  for  awhile.  I  took  them  to 
parks;  I  took  them  to  my  friends.  I  used  to  have  my  friends' 
kids  over.  I  believe  in  babysitting  for  the  whole  neighbor- 
hood because  I  feel  it's  important  that  they  should  have 
friends.  But  I  also  believe  in  doing  everything  myself." 

Marie  Fava 


"consciousness. "  Those  of  us  who 
have  lost  touch  with  our  personal 
roots  as  a  result  of  education  and 
"becoming  a  feminist,"  have  to  re- 
claim some  of  our  past  and  bridge 
the  gulf  between  our  old  selves  and 
our  new  selves.  We  need  to  remem- 
ber who  we  were  before  we 
changed,  analyze  what  made  us 
change,  and  determine  whether  it  has 
potential  for  spurring  change  in  other 
women.  We  must  find  ways  to  break 
down  the  walls  between  us  and 
those  women  who  can't  understand 
us  by  the  language  we  now  speak. 

The  Socialist-Feminist  Experience 

Socialist-feminists  have  ad- 
dressed class  and  race  with  an  em- 
phasis   different    from    the    non- 


class  is  too  often  abstract  and  theo- 
retical. It  uses  terminology  that 
alienates  many  women  —  terms 
such  as  "masses" — and  defines 
people  in  relation  to  means  of  pro- 
duction. Its  politics  seem  to  come 
from  textbooks  rather  than  from 
experience. 

Socialist  feminists  have  failed  to 
explain  what  dialectical  materialism 
and  Marxist  theory  of  capital  and 
wage  labor  mean  in  our  everyday 
lives  and  struggles.  In  this  way,  so- 
cialism has  been  as  much  a  failure 
as  "politics  by  experience"  in  giving 
people  concrete  ideas  of  what  to  do 
next.  Where  nonaligned  feminists 
have  dwelt  on  a  personal,  experi- 
ential approach,  socialist  feminists 
have  dwelt  on  the  opposite  imper- 
sonal, abstract  approach. 


81  Quest 


On  the  other  hand,  socialist  femi- 
nists have  given  the  women's 
movement  an  appreciation  of  the 
role  of  history  and  of  the  useful- 
ness of  some  parts  of  Marxism  to 
women's  struggles.  In  addition,  so- 
cialist feminists  have  added  impor- 
tant dimensions  to  internal  move- 


reforms  to  long-term  goals.  For  ex- 
ample, in  Karen  DeCrow's  "Wom- 
en's State  of  the  Union  Address"  in 
January,  1977,  she  called  for  Fed- 
eral programs  and  legislation  to  end 
women's  oppression.  Demands  of 
this  kind  are  received  with  skepti- 
cism   by    many    poor,    black,    and 


ment  dialogue  on  such  important 
questions  as  feminist  businesses, 
state  power,  and  reformist  strate- 
gies. 

The  Reformist  Experience 

Ironically,  reformist  groups  often 
focus  on  issues  relating  to  race  and 
class  experiences,  but  stick  almost 
exclusively  to  seeking  reform  legis- 
lation concerning  them.  The  scope 
of  these  reforms  includes  minimum 
wage,  welfare  reform,  child  care, 
and  household  workers'  benefits. 
All  these  are  issues  which  could 
have  direct  results  in  the  lives  of 
lower-  and  working-class  women. 
However,  the  weakness  of  the  re- 
formist approach  has  been  the  lack 
of  an  overall  analysis  relating  these 


brown  women — women  who  have 
already  been  on  the  receiving  end 
of  social  services  and  programs, 
and  have  learned  to  have  no  faith 
that  these  kinds  of  solutions  will 
produce  any  lasting  improvements 
in  their  lives.  Federal  programs  may 
provide  some  relief,  but  they  are 
not  the  cure.  In  addition,  reformist 
feminists  ignore  the  fact  that  the 
direct  dispenser  of  the  services  or 
aid  is  usually  a  professional  women, 
who  (to  the  recipient)  appears  to  be 
the  person  benefitting  most  from 
the  program.  The  client  gets  a 
handout  with  strings  attached,  and 
the  government  worker  gets  a  well- 
paid  job. 

When  reformist  groups  advocate 
"equality  with  men  into  the  main- 
stream" as  their  primary  goal  while 


Beyond  Personal  Politics/9 


also  making  bread  and  butter  de- 
mands, they  undermine  their  po- 
tential support  from  lower-  and 
working-class  and  Third  World 
women.  They  fail  to  recognize  the 
obvious  contradiction  inherent  in 
advocating  both  goals  at  the  same 
time.  It  is  easy  to  see  why  a  woman 
who  is  the  wife  of  a  doctor  or  law- 
yer may  want  into  the  system  on 
terms  equal  with  men.  But  to  a 
working-class  woman,  this  idea 
may  not  be  so  attractive.  A  mid- 
dle-class woman  can  hope  for  the 
same  status,  control,  comfortable 
income,  and  fulfillment  she  sees  the 
middle-class  men  around  her  achiev- 
ing. But  a  working-class  or  minority 
woman  most  likely  can  hope  only  for 
what  she  sees  her  husband  or  broth- 
er doing:  hard,  dirty  work  over 
which  he  has  little  control,  a  job  with 
little  or  no  status,  with  meager 
wages,  and  probably  motivated  only 
by  the  paycheck  rather  than  by  the 
work  itself. 

For  example,  Marie  Casella 
doesn't  want  her  husband's  job:  "I 
don't  want  to  do  the  dirty,  shitty 
job  that  he  does.  I'd  rather  stay 
here  at  home  and  have  to  struggle 
to  make  ends  meet,  take  care  of  the 
kids,  and  take  care  of  the  hassles  in 
the  neighborhood.  I  don't  want  to  do 
what  he's  doing." 

Another  example  of  contradic- 
tory reform  goals  is  the  recent  cam- 
paign for  educational  and  job  train- 
ing programs  for  displaced  home- 
makers,  carried  on  at  the  same  time 
as  demands  for  better  pay  and  job 
benefits  for  household  workers. 
"Displaced  homemakers"  are 
women  "who  have  lost  their  jobs 


through  a  spouse's  death  or  di- 
vorce, and  their  sense  of  self-worth 
and  dignity  after  years  as  home- 
makers,  economically  dependent  on 
their  husbands."5  To  advocate  job 
training  for  one  group  of  women  so 
they  will  be  able  to  hire  household 
workers  is  a  slap  in  the  face  to  a  lot 
of  black  and  brown  women,  who 
have  seldom  been  in  the  position  of 
being  "just  homemakers."  Minority 
women  have  usually  had  to  work  at 
the  same  time  as  keeping  a  home 
and  raising  children.  In  fact,  often 
their  work  (26.9%  of  minority 
women  are  employed  as  household 
workers)6  has  been  cleaning  homes 
for  white  women  who  could  afford 
to  pay  someone  to  clean  for  them 
because  they  had  well-paid  hus- 
bands. 

These  examples  indicate  that 
white  middle-class  women  fighting 
for  reforms  which  would  improve 
the   lives   of   lower   and   working- 


10/  Quest 


class  women  produce  a  one-di- 
mensional approach  to  reforms 
with  complex  race,  class  and  cul- 
tural implications.  A  strictly  re- 
formist ideology  is  not  comprehen- 
sive enough  to  analyze  the  impact 
of  those  reforms  outside  the  domi- 
nant middle-class  culture  from 
which  they  were  developed. 

Last  year's  National  Black  Femi- 
nist Organization-Sagaris  Confer- 
ence on  Racism  and  Sexism  (see 
interview  on  p.  34),  was  one  at- 
tempt at  struggling  in  a  substantive 
way  with  race  divisions  within  the 
women's  movement.  The  concept 
of  a  "mandatory  presence"  of  an 
anti-racist  consciousness  presents 
a  challenge  to  our  movement:  If 
there  aren't  women  willing  and  able 
to  confront  racism  in  our  move- 
ment, then  how  will  an  anti-racist 
consciousness  be  promoted?  Can 
white  feminists  who  have  not  di- 
rectly   experienced    the    effects    of 


changing  our  individual  values, 
attitudes  and  behavior  relate  to 
producing  overall  societal  change? 

Biases  of  Feminist  Ideology 

In  addition  to  dealing  with  race 
and  class  as  "issues,"  feminists  have 
developed  concepts  and  methodologies 
which  also  relate  to  race  and  class. 
These  more  indirect  responses  to 
race  and  class  differences  are 
equally  important,  because  how 
women  perceive  what  we  say  and 
do  will  affect  our  view  of  feminism. 
If  we  perceive  classism  or  racism  in 
an  idea  or  process,  we  will  assume 
it  is  part  of  feminism's  overall  dis- 
position toward  other  subjects.  In 
other  words,  we  must  examine  how 
our  political  actions  and  ideas  re- 
flect bias.  Although  this  is  a  topic 
much  written  about  and  discussed 
at  conferences  and  meetings  where 
black,    working-    and    lower-class 


"A  lot  of  time  I  thought  that  the  women's  movement  was 
just  middle-class,  white  women.  Here  they  are  struggling 
to  have  equal  opportunities  with  men — to  get  the  same  pay 
as  the  man.  I  can't  get  involved  with  that.  I  gotta  struggle 
to  get  a  job,  number  one.  Why  should  I  struggle  to  get 
equal  salary  and  equal  status  as  a  man?  I  can't  identify  with 
a  group  that  is  for  middle-class,  white  women.  What  would 
a  black  woman  look  like  saying,  "I'm  a  women's  libber;  I 
believe  in  equal  pay  for  equal  work,"  when  she  can't  even 
get  a  job?" 

Diane  Jackson 


racism  change  their  racist  attitudes, 
behavior,  and  values?  Will  they  rec- 
ognize them  as  racist,  and  know 
how  black,  brown,  red,  and  yellow 
women  perceive  and  receive  them? 
Even  if  they  can  do  that,  how  does 


women  have  articulated  their  per- 
ception of  the  race  and  class  biases 
of  feminist  politics,  it  is  an  area  in 
need  of  more  thorough  examina- 
tion. I  include  it  here  to  stimulate 
further  analysis  and  development. 


Beyond  Personal  Politics/11 


Consciousness-raising  is  a  valu- 
able cornerstone  of  feminist  theory 
and  practice.  But  as  a  verbal  exer- 
cise in  self-examination  and  group 
sharing,  it  is  also  an  approach  with 
a  class  and  race  bias.  White,  middle- 
class  women  are  comfortable  with  a 
form  which  relies  mainly  on  verbal 
skills.  Women  of  other  races  and 
classes  are  not  as  comfortable  in 
situations  which  stress  group  pro- 
cess. I'm  not  saying  that  Third 
World  women  and  working-  and 
lower-class  women  can't  express 
themselves  verbally.  I'm  saying  that 
the  formality  of  using  CR  as  a  tech- 
nique for  communication  is  stifling 
and  intimidating  to  women  who 
are  accustomed  to  expressing  them- 
selves in  many  less  defined  and  di- 
rected forms.  In  addition,  many 
black  women  see  it  as  typical  for 
white  people  to  make  a  big  deal  out 
of  something  they  do  (talking)  and 
call  it  by  some  fancy  name  (con- 
sciousness-raising). 

How  we  approach  issues  which 
we  see  as  affecting  women  of  all 
races  and  classes  can  also  demon- 
strate a  lack  of  awareness  of  the 
differences  in  our  lives  and  theirs. 
The  struggle  for  abortion  and  con- 
traception was  often  criticized  by 
Third  World  women  for  lacking 
demands  for  maternity  care,  an  end 
of  forced  sterilization,  and  better 
health  care  in  general  for  poor 
women.  Although  the  ideological 
demand  has  been  "control  of  our 
own  bodies/'  the  movement's  focus 
was  on  abortion  primarily  and  birth 
control  secondarily.  Racial  genocide 
and  population  planning  by  the  rul- 
ing class  is  a  reality  in  the  lives  of 
Third    World    and    poor    women. 


Many  of  these  women  could  not 
trust  a  movement  whose  priorities 
appeared  to  feed  into  that  reality. 
Issues  such  as  rape  and  battered 
women  do  cut  across  race  and  class 
lines,  but  as  long  as  our  programs 
and  solutions  rely  on  the  police  and 
the  courts,  we  will  not  have  the 
support  of  women  who  have  suf- 
fered repeatedly  at  the  hands  of 
those  very  institutions. 


The  feminist  analysis  of  sexism 
has  placed  great  emphasis  on  our 
being  passive  and  weak  as  well  as 
exploited  and  regarded  as  sex  ob- 
jects. Often,  this  passive  image  is 
an  inaccurate  description  of  lower- 
and  working-class  women  who 
have  "seldom  been  able  to  depend 
on  someone  else  for  their  decisions 
and  maintenance.  The  process  of 
taking  active  control  over  their 
lives,  and  of  influencing  those  close 
to  them,  has  given  them  a  lifetime  of 
experience  with  decision-making  of 
the    most    basic    nature — survival. 


121  Quest 


This  decision-making  is  part  of 
what  makes  a  strong  self-con- 
cept/'7 It  would  be  self-degrading 
for  a  lower-class  woman  to  relate  to 
a  movement  that  characterizes 
women  as  weak  and  dependent.  In 
addition,  feminists  have  dwelt  on 
how  the  housewife  and  mother 
roles  oppress  women,  but  have 
overlooked  how  those  roles  often 
are     fulfilling    and    important    to 


as  perhaps  the  last  barricade  be- 
tween minority  and  lower-class 
people  and  the  oppression  of  the 
state.  The  family  is  often  the  "soul" 
of  minority  and  lower-class  culture. 
It  provides  a  shelter  for  the  abuses 
of  a  classist,  racist,  sexist  society. 
It  is  a  place  where  one  knows  she 
can  go  when  she's  in  trouble  or 
needs  help;  most  often,  the  mother 
the    backbone   of   that   shelter. 


is 


"I  never  felt  that  I  couldn't  do  anything.  I  did  what  I 
wanted  to.  I  was  raised  with  boys  and  with  girls,  and  my 
father  never  treated  the  girls  as  women.  I  mean  he  never 
treated  us  like  the  little  nanny-pammies  in  nice  little 
white  dresses.  We  carried  bundles;  we  knocked  out  walls; 
we  carried  plaster.  We  were  treated  like  boys,  too.  There 
was  nothing  like,  'You  were  a  girl  and  you  did  that,'  and, 
'You  were  a  boy  and  you  did  this.'  We  were  treated  equally. 
"Now  that  I'm  laid  up  with  my  broken  leg,  my  son  has 
been  making  beds,  vacuuming,  dusting,  preparing  supper. 
My  husband  has  been  pitching  in  to  do  the  cooking,  going 
to  wash  and  hang  up  clothes.  They  try.  They're  men.  I  still 
don't  want  a  man  to  do  my  job.  Just  like  I  don't  want  to  go 
out  and  do  his  job  either.  I  don't  mind.  Maybe  because  we 
came  from  a  family  where  men  and  women  do  the  same 
things.  There  were  no  big,  tremendous  differences." 

Maria  Casella 


many  women.  Raising  children  can 
be  much  more  rewarding  than  do- 
ing a  repetitive,  stultifying  job  for 
low  wages.  Many  writers  have 
often  said  that  child-rearing  is  how 
the  values  and  culture  of  a  society 
are  transferred  and  learned.  Cer- 
tainly this  function  could  be  viewed 
as  an  important  source  of  power  for 
women  to  use  to  affect  the  future 
of  society. 

Feminist  analysis  of  the  family 
has  been  narrow,  with  its  focus  pri- 
marily on  the  middle-class,  nuclear 
family.  It  has  overlooked  the  family 


Feminists  have  examined  in  detail 
the  oppressive  aspects  of  that  role, 
but  have  seldom  analyzed  the  func- 
tion of  home  and  family  as  a  posi- 
tive force.  Minority  and  lower-  and 
working-class  women  are  sensitive 
to  this  feminist  imbalance.  They 
feel  excluded  and  put  down  by  our 
theory  on  the  family. 

Conclusion 

In  this  article,  I  have  tried  to  de- 
fine the  terms  "race,"  "class"  and 
"culture"  in  order  to  present  some 


Beyond  Personal  Politics/ 13 


analysis  of  how  the  feminist  move- 
ment concerns  itself  with  these 
ideas.  I  have  given  some  examples 
and  criticisms  of  race,  class,  and  cul- 
tural effects  in  various  sectors  of 
the  women's  movement  over  the 
past  ten  years.  And  finally,  I  have 
discussed  a  few  of  the  actual  strate- 
gies of  the  women's  movement 
which  reflect  the  barrier  between 
ourselves  as  political  feminists 
and  ourselves  as  products  of  a 
racist,  classist,  sexist  society. 

By  looking  at  the  shortcomings 
and  limitations  of  our  theory  and 
strategies,  perhaps  we  can  see 
where  we  should  go  next.  My  hope 
is  that  this  analysis  will  help  us  get 
there. 


Footnotes 

Editorial,  "Critique-Class  and  Feminism," 
Women's  Press  (Eugene,  Oregon),  January, 
1976,  p.  8. 

2See  Eichelberger,  page  34. 

3 Webster's  New  Collegiate  Dictionary,  1973  edi- 
tion. 

4For  a  definition  and  discussion  of  the 
nonaligned  feminist  movement,  see  Char- 
lette  Bunch,  "Beyond  Either/Or:  Feminist 
Options,"  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  III:  1  (sum- 
mer, 1976). 

5Karen  DeCrow,  "The  First  Women's 
State  of  the  Union  Address,"  (Washington, 
D.C.,  January  13,  1977).  (Mimeographed.) 
Speech  delivered  for  the  National  Organiza- 
tion for  Women,  Inc.,  p.  8. 

f>1975  Handbook  of  Women  Workers,  U.S.  De- 
partment of  Labor,  Employment  Standards 
Administration,  Women's  Bureau,  Bulletin 
297:  Government  Printing  Office,  p.  106. 

7Karen  Kollias,  "Class  Realities:  Create  a 
New  Power  Base,"  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly, 
I:  3  (Winter,  1975),  p.  34. 


"I'm  only  getting  used  to  people  saying  'middle-class/ 
Being  raised  in  the  South,  having  to  work  on  farms,  mov- 
ing to  a  basement  full  of  rats,  I  always  thought  I  was 
gonna  be  poor  the  rest  of  my  life.  That  I  was  destined  to  be 
poor." 

Diane  Jackson 


141  Quest 


A  limited  offer  of 

classics. 


Until  they  are  gone: 

Volumes  I  and  II  of  Quest:  a  feminist  quar- 
terly, in  convenient,  attractive,  durable  box 
binders  for  efficient  research,  easy  refer- 
ence, safe-keeping. 

Volume  I,  1974-75:  Processes  of 
Change;*  Money,  Fame  &  Power;  Self- 
hood of  Women;  Women  &  Spirituality. 

Volume  II,  1 975-76:  Future  Visions  &  Fan- 
tasies; Theories  of  Revolution;*  Organiza- 
tions &  Strategies;  Leadership. 


Qrcle  your  order  and  include  check  to  Quest  « 
P.O.  Box  8843,  Washington,  D.C.  20003. 

Please  send  Vol.  I     Please  send  Vol.11 

$25.00  $25.00 

Please  send  Vol.  I  &  II 

$45.00 

Name 

Address  

Zip 


•These  issues  available  only  in  complete  sets  of 
boxed  volumes. 


15 


Voices  on 
Black  Feminism 


By  BRENDA  EICHELBERGER 

graphics  by  Kay  Lindsey 


It  has  been  unanimously  acknow- 
ledged by  feminists,  blacks,  human 
rights  activists,  sociologists,  psych- 
ologists, and  the  Establishment  it- 
self that  there  are  few  black  women 
in  the  feminist  movement.  This  ar- 
ticle will  attempt  to  examine  why 
this  is  so  and  to  explore  the  feasi- 
bility of  a  black  feminist  movement. 

Since  there  are  few,  if  any,  pub- 
lished works  from  a  collective  per- 
spective of  black  feminist  activists 
explaining  this  phenomenon,  it 
seems  appropriate  to  go  to  active 
black  feminists  for  an  interpreta- 
tion and  an  analysis  of  the  viability 
of  a  black  feminist  movement.  This 
critique  is  based  on  interviews  with 
eight  black  women,  all  of  whom 
have  a  unique  commonality  of  ex- 
perience. This  unique  experience  is 
feminism,  specifically  black  feminism. 
Each  woman  perceives  herself  as  a 
feminist,  and  is — at  least  to  some 
extent — a  public  feminist  based  on 
her  active  membership  in  a  black 
feminist  organization,  the  National 
Alliance  of  Black  Feminists. 

Though  there  are  only  eight  in- 
terviewees, I  hope  their  views  will 
shed  light  on  the  reasons  for  the 
black  woman's  almost  nonexistent 


feminist  involvement,  and  serve  as 
a  guideline  for  black  women  who 
have  thought  of  establishing  a  black 
feminist  structure. 

I.  Why  Are  Few  Black  Women 
in  the  Women's  Movement? 

The  interviewees  cite  five  rea- 
sons why  black  women  have  little 
involvement  in  the  feminist  move- 
ment. They  are  based  on  class  dif- 
ferences, negative  imagery  of  the 
black  woman  and  the  movement, 
naivete  of  the  movement,  white  ra- 
cism, and  fear  of  dividing  the  black 
community. 

Class  Differences 

Socio-economic  status  of  black 
and  white  women  is  a  significant  dif- 
ferentiating factor.  Black  women 
have  little  involvement  in  the 
movement  because  of  their  differ- 
ing priorities  and  work  needs,  their 
lack  of  time  and  power,  and  their 
perception  that  grass  roots  issues 
are  not  addressed  by  the  move- 
ment. 

The  differences  in  priorities  are 
related  to  class.  The  black  woman's 
energy  output  is  more  often  direct- 
ed toward  survival  while  the  white 
woman's  is  more  often  aimed  at  ful- 
fillment. 

"Black  women  find  the  manner  in  which 
the  women's  movement  handles  issues  isn't 


16/ Quest,  vol. Ill,  no.  4,  spring,  1977 


enough  for  them.  For  example,  in  the  case 
of  adequate  day  care  facilities,  white  women 
might  want  them  and  might  need  them  for 
jobs,  but  usually  it's  more  for  freeing  them 
for  time  to  go  shopping,  take  classes,  or  en- 
gage in  recreational  activities  and  not  for 
basic  things.  Whereas  black  women  would 
need  adequate  day  care  so  that  they  can  get  a 
job  and  not  have  to  pay  a  large  portion  of 
their  salary  to  a  babysitter." 

Bonita  Kelly 

The  implication  is  that  day  care 
facilities,  for  instance,  would  be 
more  comprehensive  and  plentiful 
if  potential  funding  sources  were 
given  a  more  fundamental  rationale 
for  their  existence.  Thus  one  might 
assume  that  if  the  thrust  were  to 
get  day  care  for  welfare  mothers  so 
they  might  train  for  jobs,  the  moth- 
ers would  have  more  moral  support 
from  the  taxpayers,  and  the  move- 
ment would  have  more  sympathi- 
zers. 

As  part  of  their  class  differences, 
many  black  women  perceive  their 
motivation  to  work  as  being  differ- 
ent from  that  of  white  women. 
They  often  see  white  women  as  be- 
ing or  aspiring  to  be  part  of  the 
power  structure  that  oppresses 
blacks. 

"Black  women  were  left  out  of  the  women's 
movement  because  it  was  basically  a  white 
upper-class  women's  movement,  the  goal  of 
which  was  to  get  their  'share  of  the  pie. '  For 
example,  when  white  women  were  out  in 
the  labor  market,  they  had  to  have  someone 
care  for  their  kids.  They  did  not  seem  to 
consider  that  their  maids  might  wish  to  ful- 
fill themselves.  Once  on  a  television  pro- 
gram, I  saw  a  C-R  session  comprised  of 
wives  of  corporate  executives.  The  women 
repeatedly  commented  on  feeling  that  wo- 
men were  just  appendages  of  men.  One  wo- 


man said  she  could  afford  to  have  someone 
come  in  and  take  care  of  her  child.  I'm  cer- 
tain that  person  who  took  care  of  her  child 
was  a  black  woman." 

Monica  Stewart 

Also,  because  black  women  must 
concentrate  on  survival,  they  have 
less  time  to  become  involved  in  the 
movement.  Consequently,  even 
black  women  who  have  no  trouble 
understanding  the  feminist  philo- 
sophy often  find  that  they  have  no 
time  to  attend  meetings,  march  in 
protest,  testify  at  hearings,  or  even 
partake  in  consciousness-raising 
sessions. 

"Another  reason  few  black  women  are  in 
the  movement  is  that  they  don't  have  time  to 
get  involved.  They  are  too  busy  being  head 
of  the  household,  being  mother  and  father 
in  most  instances.  Also,  a  lot  of  black  wo- 
men are  going  to  school.  There  are  more 
black  women  going  to  college  now  than  ever 
before. " 

Marion  Fisher 
"The  reason  few  black  women  are  involved 
in  the  women's  movement  is  because  the 
white  women's  movement  does  not  address 
grass  roots  issues  relating  to  black  women. 
The  proportion  of  black  female  heads  of 
households  is  greater  than  that  of  white  fe- 
males. This  means  that  more  black  women 
have  to  work  to  care  for  their  children." 
Marta  White 

The  white  woman  is  less  likely  to 
be  poor  than  the  black  woman  and 
does  not  suffer  from  racism,  as  the 
black  woman  does.  And  since  the 
movement  is  primarily  white  and 
middle  class,  there  are  few  in  the 
movement  with  whom  the  poor 
black  woman  can  effectively  and 
comfortably  relate.  Black  women 
may  have  a  lot  in  common  with  that 
part    of    the    women's    movement 


Voices  on  Black  Feminism/17 


which  is  radical  because  the  radical 
wing  addresses  itself  to  grass-roots 
issues.  Nevertheless,  the  black  wo- 
man's movement  involvement  is 
still  negligible.  The  perception  is 
that  the  movement  has  so  little  re- 
lationship to  them  that  the  equal- 
pay  tenet  is  insufficient  incentive 
for  them  to  join  movement  forces. 

Negative  Imagery 

Society's  negative  image  of  the 
black  woman  and  her  perceived 
negative  image  of  the  women's 
movement  inhibit  involvement  in 
the  movement.  The  differences  be- 
tween the  images  of  the  white  wo- 
man and  of  the  black  woman  is 
based  on  physical  and  social  factors. 
The  physical  difference  is  immut- 
able. The  term  I  have  coined  for  the 
immutable  physical  difference  is 
the  "institutionalized  beauty  stan- 
dard." The  standard  for  beauty  is 
white:  fair  complexion,  straight 
hair,  keen  features.  The  antithesis 
of  the  standard  is  black:  dark  com- 
plexion, kinky  hair,  broad  features. 
In  spite  of  the  bleaching  cremes, 
wigs  and  rhinoplasties,  these  beau- 
ty deviants  will  never  reach  "nor- 
malcy." 

Intertwined  with  these  physical 
differences  are  profound  social  dif- 
ferences. They  relate  to  the  way  so- 
ciety has  viewed  and  treated  white 
and  black  women  differently 
through  the  centuries. 
"Many  black  women  have  deep  enmity  for 
white  women  because  black  women  don't  fit 
the  white  standard  of  beauty  and  because 
white  women  have  always  been  'ladies'  and 
black  women  haven't  been  eligible  for  'lady- 
hood.'" 

Michele  Gautreaux 


The  physical  differences  are  the 
distinction  from  which  a  dichoto- 
mized social  system  is  produced. 
This  social  system  not  only  includes 
a  difference  in  attitude  toward  the 
two,  but  also  produces  a  difference 
in  prescribed  roles. 
"Black  women  have  always  held  the  lower 
position  in  society.  White  women  were 
placed  on  a  pedestal  that  black  women  were 

never  afforded Black  women  were  forced 

to  go  out  and  work  because  they  often  had 
the  only  jobs  open  to  blacks  at  the  time. 
Rather  than  the  black  man  saying,  'Thanks 
for  helping  me  out  during  this  time  of  need,' 
he  felt  that  the  black  woman  was  pushing 
him  and  trying  to  take  over  his  role.... The 
white  man  saw  the  black  woman  as  lower 
than  the  white  woman.  The  black  man 
adopted  the  white  man's  belief.  He  felt  that 
a  real  woman  would  not  be  out  working  but 
would  be  nice  and  feminine,  smelling  sweet 
when  he  came  home.  Black  women  find  that 
they  are  placed  on  the  lower  rungs  of  the 
ladder  in  the  black  society  also,  because 
members  of  the  black  community  are  still 
accepting  white  beauty  standards.  It's  a 
white  man's  ethic  of  what  women  in  general 
should  be  doing — staying  at  home,  taking 
care  of  the  kids.  Their  egos  want  them  to  be 
the  sole  providers  for  the  family." 

Bonita  Kelly 

This  economic  model  is  the  work 
ethic  that  dictates  that  the  white 
woman  rest  on  the  pedestal  and  the 
black  woman  polish  it.  It  dictates 
that  the  white  woman  stay  at  home 
labor-free  while  her  maid  does  her 
drudgery.  For  the  black  woman  has 
a  tradition  of  spending  more  time 
cleaning  white  women's  homes 
than  cleaning  her  own  home.  Yet 
black  women  have  been  faulted — 
by  white  society  at  large  and,  at 
times,  by  their  own  black  men — for 


181  Quest 


a  contradiction  in  roles  which  they  sume  either  posture  is  an  infringe- 

had  no  part  creating.  Their  dream  is  ment  on  their  personhood. 

pedestal  princess,  their  reality  is  pedestal  Many  black  women  perceive  the 

polisher.  For  women  to  have  to  as-  main  feminist  thrust  as  encourag- 


Black  Feminism/19 


ing  women  to  work  outside  the 
home.  Yet,  since  black  women  have 
a  history  of  working  full  time  both 
within  and  without  the  home,  some 
black  women  view  the  movement 
as  having  no  relevance  to  them. 
"As  black  women,  we  were  part  of  the  labor 
force  ever  since  we  came  to  this  country  so 
we  did  not  look  at  working  as  a  means  of 
fulfilling  ourselves,  but  as  a  means  of  sus- 
taining ourselves.  Thus,  in  the  labor  arena, 
there  was  nothing  new  which  the  women's 
movement  had  to  offer  us  to  draw  us  to 
them." 

Monica  Stewart 

Economic  and  social  "indepen- 
dence" was  thrust  upon  them 
whether  they  wanted  it  or  not. 

Many  black  women  internalize 
the  hostility  they  feel  towards  the 
institutionalized  beauty  standard 
and  "pedestal  privilege"  because 
they  believe  the  stereotypes  that 
have  been  heaped  upon  them. 
Therefore,  negative  self-image  is 
another  factor  that  contributes  to 
minimal  involvement  in  movement 
activity.  Participation  would  force 
black  women  to  confront  the 
double  jeopardy — racism  and  sex- 
ism— that  permeates  their  lives, 
knowing  all  too  well  that  an  aggres- 
sive posture  would  only  intensify 
the  "castrating  Sapphire"  image 
that  they  have  tried  so  hard  to  dis- 
prove. 

There  are  black  women  who  dis- 
sociate themselves  from  the  move- 
ment because  it  has  been  given  a 
negative  image  by  the  mass  media. 
Many  black  women  view  the  strate- 
gies of  the  movement  as  ludicrous 
and  cite  bra-burning  as  an  illustra- 
tion. There  are  other  black  women 
who  view  the  implications  of  the 


movement  as  hostile  and  cite  "man- 
hating"  as  an  example.  Still  others 
view  the  tactics  of  the  movement  as 
militant  when  they  see,  for  exam- 
ple, graphics  of  white  women  in 
"masculine  attire"  clenching  their 
fists  above  the  slogan,  "Off  Our 
Backs." 


"A  further  reason  few  black  women  are 
in  the  feminist  movement  is  because  they 
feel  if  it  is  known  that  they  are  associated 
with  it  they  will  have  the  stigma  of  being 

g^y-" 

Marion  Fisher 
Physical  and  social  differentia- 
tion, the  historic  contradiction  of 
the  work  ethic  plus  the  negative 
image  of  the  movement  itself,  di- 
minish the  chances  that  a  black  wo- 
man will  join  movement  forces. 


201  Quest 


Naivete 

A  third  reason  few  black  women 
are  in  the  women's  movement  is  a 
basic  lack  of  knowledge  about  it. 
The  themes  expressed  by  the  inter- 
viewees indicate  that  black  women 
often  do  not  have  a  comprehensive 
understanding  of  feminist  issues 
and  their  value  to  the  black  strug- 
gle. 

"Feminism  as  an  organizing  principle  is 
too  much  of  an  abstraction  to  work  with. 
They  cannot  identify  conceptual  ideas  with 
the  reality  of  their  own  lives.  It  is  difficult 
for  them  to  make  the  connection.  Black  wo- 
men can  identify  with  racial  oppression  be- 
cause it's  self-evident.  But  1  think  when  it 
comes  to  identifying  with  sexual  oppression 
it  is  less  easy  for  them...." 

Michele  Gautreaux 

In  addition  to  knowing  little  a- 
bout  movement  philosophy,  black 
women  often  are  not  aware  of  the 
implementation  of  that  philosophy, 
or  do  not  connect  the  implementa- 
tion with  the  philosophy.  Countless 
numbers  of  times,  various  black 
women  have  conversed  with  femi- 
nists on  issues  about  which  both  a- 
gree,  including  equal  pay  for  equal 
work;  increased  protection  from 
and  prompt  prosecution  of  sexual 
abusers;  laws  to  help  insure  the  ec- 
onomic independence  of  the  dis- 
placed homemaker  and  increased 
rights  of  the  household  worker. 
Yet,  with  the  exception  of  the 
equal-pay  concept,  black  women  do 
not  consider  these  to  be  feminist  is- 
sues. 

Many  black  women  do  not  see 
that  in  order  for  them  to  have  a 
better  quality  of  life,  the  eradica- 
tion of  racist  and  sexist  oppression 
are  interdependent.  There  are  some 


— black  feminists  included — who 
see  the  black  woman  as  the  connec- 
ting link  between  the  black  and 
feminist  movements.  For  whether 
she  acknowledges  it  or  not,  she  has 
a  personal  stake  in  both  struggles. 
As  long  as  racism  and  sexism  exist, 
she  continues  to  be  the  one  most 
exploited.  However,  until  abstrac- 
tions are  broken  down  sufficiently 
and  the  positive  correlation  be- 
tween the  two  struggles  is  recog- 
nized, black  women  will  continue  to 
have  minimal  involvement  in  the 
women's  movement. 

White  Racism 

Half  of  the  interviewees  perceive 
racism  as  being  one  of  the  major 
reasons  few  black  women  are  in- 
volved in  the  feminist  movement.  It 
is  interesting  to  note  that  many 
black  women,  both  within  and 
without  the  feminist  movement, 
perceive  white  feminists  to  be  ra- 
cist. 

"White  women  are  very  standoffish. 
They  don't  invite  me  over  to  their  houses 
or  call  me  up  on  the  phone.  But  they  do  in- 
vite me  to  monthly  meetings.  Basically, 
what  they're  saying  is,  'We  need  your  mon- 
ey, but  we  don't  want  to  be  bothered  with 
you  otherwise.'  Take  the  National  Organi- 
zation for  Women.  From  what  I've  seen  and 
read,  they're  white-oriented.... They  go  in 
and  out  of  those  corporations  and  try  to  get 
jobs  for  women  who  are  white...." 

Rose  Diggs 
It  is  the  perception  of  many  black  wo- 
men that  their  white  counterparts 
still  do  not  welcome  them  to  move- 
ment ranks  with  open  arms.  There- 
fore some  black  women  may  feel 
alienated  when  participating  in 
feminist    gatherings    for    the    first 


Black  Feminism/21 


time.  White  feminists,  if  they  are 
sincere  about  wanting  more  black 
women  in  the  movement,  must 
make  social  as  well  as  "monetary" 
overtures  to  their  black  sisters.  For 
whether  white  feminists  are  cogni- 
zant of  it  or  not,  their  body  lan- 
guage, their  voice  inflection,  their 
overall  demeanor,  may  subtly  com- 
municate that  black  women  have 
only  a  "qualified"  welcome. 

Many  black  women  resent  whites 
who  employ  the  tactics  of  the  civil 
rights  movement  to  increase  their 
social,  political,  and  economic  ad- 
vantage even  further. 
"...the  white  feminists  have  capitalized  very 
much  on  the  civil  rights  movement,  yet  they 
have  deliberately  rejected  any  involvement 
from  the  minority  women  except  on  a  very 
token  level." 

Cozetta  Milton 

Racism  is  so  pervasive  that  it 
would  act  as  a  deterrent  to  the 
black  woman's  involvement  even  if 
none  of  the  white  feminists  were 
racist. 

"By  and  large,  black  women  will  define 
their  struggle  as  part  of  the  black  struggle 
and  not  as  part  of  the  women's  struggle  be- 
cause they  know  that  if  sex  barriers  were  re- 
moved there  would  still  be  race  barriers. 
Therefore,  most  black  feminists  are  in- 
volved in  the  framework  of  a  black  organi- 
zation because  black  women  can  visualize 
superficial  sex  barriers  of  the  larger  society 
going  away  before  race  barriers.  When  we 
are  viewed  by  the  larger  culture,  we  are  not 
looked  on  in  terms  of  our  class  or  sex  first, 
but  in  terms  of  our  black  skin." 

Monica  Stewart 

Fear  of  Dividing  the  Black  Community 

Blacks  are  very  much  concerned 
with  solidifying  the  black  commu- 


nity. In  spite  of  many  efforts,  there 
are  many  blacks  who  still  feel  that 
the  black  community  lacks  cohe- 
sion. Some  blacks  view  white  wo- 
men as  having  the  luxury  to  be 
movement  activists  without  threat- 
ening the  white  community  or 
power  structure.  They  view  the 
black  woman  as  afforded  no  such 
luxury.  To  them,  involvement  in 
feminist    activity,   no   matter   how 


221  Quest 


well-intentioned,  would  alienate 
black  men,  weaken  the  black  family, 
dissipate  the  energies  of  the  black 
struggle,  and  thereby  fragment  the 
black  community. 

For  example,  there  are  some 
black  women  who  believe  that 
forming  an  alliance  with  the  femi- 
nist movement  would  be  economi- 
cally detrimental  to  black  men. 

"A  secondary  reason  black  women  have 
little  input  in  the  women's  movement  is  be- 
cause some  of  them  feel  that  white  women 
are  taking  jobs  away  from  black  men  and 
that  the  women's  movement  is  helping  them 
do  it." 

Michele  Gautreaux 

That  which  benefits  blacks  in- 
cludes both  sexes,  but  that  which 
benefits  women  excludes  half  of 
blacks.  To  the  black  female  oppo- 
nents of  feminism,  it  does  not  mat- 
ter that  white  men  who  have  al- 
ways had  power  may  not  directly 
benefit  from  the  women's  struggle. 
It  does  matter  to  them  that  black 
men  who  have  never  had  power  re- 
ceive no  direct  benefits.  Any  alle- 
giance on  the  part  of  black  women 
to  the  women's  cause  will  only  re- 
sult in  an  even  smaller  slice  of  the 
pie  for  the  black  struggle. 

II.  Is  There  a  Need 
for  Black  Feminism? 

The  interviewees  see  the  need 
for  a  movement  initiated  by  black 
women,  controlled  by  black  wo- 
men, for  the  express  purpose  of 
black  women.  They  feel  that  such  a 
movement  is  necessary  to  help  the 
black  women  self-actualize,  to  edu- 
cate the  public  by  articulating  her 
concerns  and  her  status,  and  to  help 


effect  positive  social  change  for  all 
of  humanity. 

Effect  Social  Change 

We  need  a  black  feminist  move- 
ment because  it  necessarily  includes 
other  struggles  which  help  bring 
about  social  change.  Black  feminists 
identify  with  the  black  struggle  be- 
cause they  are  black,  the  women's 
struggle  because  they  are  women, 
and  the  class  struggle  because  they 
are — most  likely — poor.  The  issues 
of  class,  race  and  sex  converge  in 
the  experience  of  non-white  wo- 
men. This  is  what  makes  black  wo- 
men unique  and  the  potential  of  a 
black  feminist  movement  exciting. 

There  can't  be  liberation  for  half 
a  race.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  that 
black  women  participate  fully  in  the 
black  movement. 

"At  this  point  in  time,  J  feel  there  is  a 
need  for  a  black  feminist  movement,  but 
within  the  confines  of  the  black  struggle.  1 
don't  think  that  this  time  black  feminists 
can  afford  to  isolate  their  struggle  and  deal 
only  with  feminist  issues  because  we  face 
dual  oppression.  I  see  black  feminism  as  a 
tactic  to  be  used  within  the  black  struggle  to 
enhance  it,  as  we  can't  afford  to  have  51% 
of  our  number  unprepared  to  think  and  act 
independently....!  think  basically  black 
feminist  organizations  are  necessary  to 
speak  to  the  needs  of  black  women  in  partic- 
ular; however,  they  should  always  reflect 
the  perspective  of  black  people  in  general." 
Monica  Stewart 

Even  among  the  black  women 
who  imply  that  black  feminism 
should  be  confined  only  to  the  black 
struggle,  there  is  acknowledgement 
of  the  positive  influence  the  wo- 
men's movement  has  had  on  black 
women     within     black-movement 


Black  Feminism/23 


ranks   who   do   not   even   perceive 
themselves  as  feminists. 

Active  participation  in  the  black 
feminist  struggle  strengthens  the 
women's  movement  because  both 
advance  the  cause  of  women.  Black 
feminists  who  set  the  black  move- 
ment as  the  first  priority  recognize 
the  relationship  between  the  black 
woman's  plight  and  grass-roots 
feminist  issues.  Black  women  are 
also  keenly  aware  of  the  fact  that 
this  society  is  comprised  of  haves 
and  have-nots.  Black  women  are 
most  likely  to  lead  the  have-nots. 
Thus  some  black  feminists  recog- 
nize the  importance  of  joining 
forces  with  white  feminists  to  en- 
hance the  quality  and  quantity  of 
movement  gains. 

Self-Actualization 

A  primary  reason  for  the  exis- 
tence of  a  black  feminist  movement 
is  the  opportunity  for  the  black  wo- 
man to  self-actualize. 

The  movement  creates  an  envi- 
ronment within  which  she  may  re- 
ceive economic  advancement,  moral 
support,  social  intercourse,  aesthe- 
tic fulfillment,  outreach  for  her 
younger  black  sisters,  and  a  multi- 
tude of  other  services. 

In  the  economic  arena  a  black 
feminist  movement  can  encourage 
unemployed  black  women  to  enroll 
in  training  programs  that  will  pro- 
vide them  with  marketable  skills.  It 
can  encourage  under-employed 
black  women  to  get  on-the-job 
training  that  can  lead  to  promo- 
tions. It  can  also  provide  the  incen- 
tives for  black  women  to  explore 
various  career  opportunities. 

In  addition  to  career  encourage- 


ment, there  are  specific  programs, 
such  as  day  care,  that  can  lead  to 
economic  advancement.  The  Na- 
tional Alliance  of  Black  Feminists, 
for  example,  has  offered  panels, 
forums,  speak-outs,  conferences, 
and  workshops  on  topics  such  as 
woman/man  relationships,  peer 
counseling,  assertion  training,  drug 
awareness,  political  issues  and  black 
feminism.  In  addition  we  offer  re- 
treats, writers'  workshops,  study 
groups,  a  speakers'  bureau,  and  a 
black  women's  center.  Our  referral 
services  include  health,  education, 
employment,  legal,  consumer,  etc. 
We  have  worked  with  other  femi- 
nist groups  to  establish  a  women's 
credit  union,  to  offer  rape  counsel- 
ing and  anti-rape  advocacy,  to  testi- 
fy at  hearings  on  race  and  sex  dis- 
crimination, and  to  participate  in 
feminist  demonstrations  and  ral- 
lies. We  have  made  numerous  pub- 
lic appearances  and  in  addition, 
have  a  weekly  radio  show. 

Public  Edification 

A  major  concern  of  the  inter- 
viewees is  to  educate  the  public  a- 
bout  black  women. 

"Black  women  should  reach  the  white 
community  and  let  them  know  that  black 
women  are  not  dirt  and  that  not  all  black 
women  live  just  to  be  on  welfare  rolls." 

Rose  Diggs 

It  is  imperative  that  black  women 
set  their  own  norms  by  which  they 
are  compared.  In  addition  to  setting 
their  norms,  black  women  must  al- 
so speak  for  themselves.  When 
black  women  are  defined  by  others, 
the  qualities  ascribed  to  them  are  in 
the  interests  of  those  who  maintain 
power. 


24/  Quest 


Black  Feminism/25 


"Since  her  history  and  her  social  caste 
are  so  different  from  those  of  her  white 
counterpart,  it  seems  appropriate  to  have  a 
viable  movement  that  will  articulate  her 
specific  concerns,  needs,  and  aspirations,  as 
well  as  her  many  achievements.  Society  has 
misconstrued  the  black  female  and  distorted 
who  she  was  and  is  as  an  historical  and 
contemporary  figure.  Because  of  this  we 
need  to  begin  now  to  become  more  verbal 
and  articulate  in  letting  the  world  know 
what  we  as  black  feminists  are  all  about.  It 
is  important  that  we  define  that  we  are  not 
appendages  of  the  white  feminist  movement, 
but  that  we  are  very  separate  and  differ- 
ent." 

Cozetta  Milton 

The  interviewees  have  stressed 
the  importance  of  public  edification 
about  the  status  of  black  women. 
Her  media  image  certainly  needs 
improvement.  A  positive  media 
projection  of  the  black  woman  will 
raise  her  self-esteem  and  will  raise 
her  in  the  esteem  of  others. 

Social  Interaction 

Some  black  women  who  come  to 
NABF  have  indicated  that  their 
prime  reason  for  coming  was  to 
meet  other  black  women,  to  make 
friends,  or  simply  to  have  some 
place  to  go  once  a  week.  A  few  of 
the  women  who  have  families  have 
indicated  they  "just  want  to  get  out 
of  the  house/'  Regardless  of  their 
initial  reasons  for  coming  to  the  or- 
ganization, what  is  significant  is 
that  while  getting  their  needs  met, 
their  feminist  consciousness  was 
raised  and  they  became  feminist  ac- 
tivists as  a  result.  NABF  is  not  a  "soci- 
al" organization,  nor  should  any 
other  feminist  organization  be.  But 
black  feminists  do  perceive  the  black 


women's  movement  as  providing  a 
friendly  atmosphere,  regardless  of 
the  particular  activity  with  which  it 
may  be  involved. 

"There  is  a  need  for  a  black  feminist  or- 
ganization because  when  you  consider  the 
black  woman's  status  — she  makes  less 
money  than  any  other  worker — it  is  appar- 
ent that  she  cannot  afford  a  membership  fee 
to  a  social  club  or  health  club.  But  she 
does  need  an  open  atmosphere  where  she 
can  relate  her  pressures  and  her  problems 
and  receive  support  from  other  black  wo- 
men." Marta  White 

Part  of  socializing  is  an  apprecia- 
tion of  the  aesthetic,  an  inducement 
for  women  to  share  experiences 
such  as  going  to  the  theater,  visit- 
ing a  museum,  or  reading  a  classic. 

"Because  the  majority  of  people  J  know 
involved  in  the  fine  arts  are  white,  I  person- 
ally feel  the  need  to  share  my  experience  in 
the  arts  with  other  black  women.  1  feel  this 
way  because  it's  necessary  for  us  as  black 
women  to  get  together  and  draw  strength 
from  each  other.  It  will  help  us  to  get  very 
positive  images  of  ourselves." 

Michele  Gautreaux 

Moral  support  is  one  of  the  vital 
features  of  black  feminism.  It  is  es- 
pecially important  that  women  re- 
ceive encouragement.  While  wo- 
men are  often  accustomed  to  being 
moral  supporters — wife,  mother, 
hostess,  high-level  helper,  social  ap- 
pendage— they  are  not  always  ac- 
customed to  having  moral  support- 
ers. Within  the  context  of  the  femi- 
nist movement,  the  major  vehicle 
through  which  women  offer  each 
other  moral  support  is  conscious- 
ness-raising. Among  the  various 
programs  the  National  Alliance  of 
Black  Feminists  offers,  C-R  is  the 
most  popular. 


261  Quest 


The  black  feminist  movement  is 
most  equipped  to  offer  peer  sup- 
port for  the  black  woman.  For,  even 
though  the  poor  black  woman  and 
the  poor  white  woman  have  poverty 
in  common,  they  do  not  have  black- 
ness in  common.  The  black  woman  is 
unique. 

Black  women  often  feel  alienated 
from  those  activities  that  are  pre- 
dominantly for  white  women,  be- 
cause of  class  differences.  But  the 
black  woman  may  feel  just  as  alien- 
ated— in  fact  even  more  alienated — 
from  some  black  woman-related  ac- 
tivities because  of  the  same  class  dif- 
ferences. Thus  it  is  crucial  that  the 


black  feminist  movement  give  black 
women,  regardless  of  socio-econ- 
omic status,  the  feeling  of  belonging. 

"I  definitely  think  there's  a  need  for  a 
black  feminist  movement  because  something 
is  needed  that  relates  to  poor  black  women. 
There  is  already  something  the  upper-mid- 
dle-class black  woman  can  relate  to.  She  is 
off  into  the  society  world." 

Marion  Fisher 

Black  feminists,  whose  aim  is  to 
help  black  women  self-actualize, 
are  keenly  aware  that  social  inter- 
action must  be  an  integral  part  of 
black  feminism.  It  is  such  interac- 
tion which  has  been  the  foundation 
of  successful  black  institutions,  es- 


graphic    by    Cynthia  Washington 


Black  Feminism/27 


pecially  the  church,  in  which  the 
black  woman,  far  more  than  her 
male  counterpart,  has  been  the 
backbone.  The  black  feminist 
knows  that  if  the  energy  with 
which  the  black  woman  has  so  in- 
tensely worked  in  the  church  is 
harnessed  and  channeled  along 
black  feminist  lines,  there  is  no  force 
that  can  block  the  dynamo. 

Outreach  for  Young  Black  Women 

It  is  important  that  teenagers 
have  positive  adult  role  models.  A 
young  woman  at  this  age  is  most 
likely — whether  consciously  or  un- 
consciously— to  seek  an  older  per- 
son or  persons  she  admires  to  pat- 
tern her  life  after.  In  addition  to 
providing  support  services  for 
adults,  the  black  feminist  move- 
ment can  also  provide  supportive 
services  for  teenagers. 

"1  see  the  black  feminist  movement  as  of- 
fering an  outreach  program  to  our  younger 
black  sisters.  There  is  a  high  number  of 
young  black  women — 14,  15,  and  16 
years  old — who  are  perpetuating  the  wel- 


DYR£ 

flOUflR 


SUBSCRIBE! 

Sub  $8.00  per  year 

Sample  copy    $2  75  bv  mail 

|Checks  payable  to 

Tomato  Publications  Ltd 
70  Barrow  Street 
New  York.  NY  100"14 

IWe  are  looking  for  graphic 
and  written  contributions 
[We  pay  for  all  work  that 
I we  print  Write  for  details 


t    A  MAGAZINE  OF  LESBIAN  CULTURE  AND  ANALYSIS 

FALL  '76:  Making  a  Backpack  •  Mouth  Care  •  Photos  by 
Alice  Austen  •  Name  Change  •  Coming  Out  On  Celluloid 
•Giving  Up  Kidz  •  Plus:  analysis,  letters,  reviews,  humor 

WINTER  '76-'77:  Beautiful  4  color  poster  and 
magazmelette 

FUTURE  ISSUES  SPRING  '77  Ethnic  Dykes,  copy 
deadline  Feb  1st  SUMMER  '77  Animals,  copy  dead 
line  May  1st 


fare  cycle  by  becoming  pregnant.  We  need 
to  form  a  sisterhood  with  our  younger  black 
sisters  offering  school  counseling,  job  coun- 
seling, and  other  types  of  services  that  deal 
with  reality.. ..We,  in  a  black  feminist 
movement,  need  to  show  our  younger  sisters 
that  we  care — that  their  older  black  sisters 
can  provide  a  support  base  for  what  they 
will  have  to  deal  with  in  life." 

Marta  White 
It  is  important  that  black  femi- 
nism reach  out  not  only  to  high 
school  youngsters,  but  to  college 
students  also.  In  speaking  on  col- 
lege campuses  across  the  nation, 
deans,  professors,  and  students 
themselves  have  indicated  to  me 
that  there  is  a  need  for  some  kind  of 
black  feminist  organization  on  cam- 
pus. They  point  out  that  for  too 
long  the  only  outlet  for  the  black 
woman  has  been  the  sorority.  They 
indicate  a  need  for  something 
which  goes  beyond  the  superficial. 

Strengthen  Society 

The  existence  of  a  black  feminist 
movement  aids  the  black  woman  in 
self-actualization,  enhances  the  hu- 
manistic struggles,  and — because  it 
is  a  catalyst  for  social  change — 
strengthens  society.  "In  the  sophis- 
ticated society  in  which  we  live,  we  need  for- 
mal responses  to  social  problems  or  we  will 
not  be  effective.  In  our  society,  the  problems 
that  affect  one  group  usually  affect  other 
groups  also.  Therefore,  a  black  feminist  or- 
ganization tailors  itself  to  the  immediate 
needs  of  the  black  female  but  indirectly 
helps  others  too." 

Donna  Stutts 

Brenda  Eichelberger  is  a  founder  and 
Executive  Director  of  the  National  Alli- 
ance of  Black  Feminists. 


28lQuest 


By  JUDITH  WITHEROW 

graphics  by  Sue  Lenaerts 

Some  months  ago  I  saw  an  article 
in  the  newspaper  about  a  Mother  of 
the  Year  contest.  Fantastic,  I 
thought!  Here's  my  chance  to  make 
up  for  a  whole  lot  of  things.  Simple, 
too,  because  I  always  figured  I  had 
the  best  mother  in  the  world.  Then 
I  started  reading  the  necessary 
qualifications,  and  found  that  not 
one  of  them  applied  to  her.  This 
woman  that  I  had  always  loved  was 
a  complete  failure  according  to 
these  rules: 

"First,  that  she  be  a  successful 
mother,  as  evidenced  by  the  charac- 


ter and  the  achievements  of  her 
children.  Second,  that  she  be  an  ac- 
tive member  of  a  religious  body. 
Third,  that  she  embody  those  traits 
highly  regarded  in  mothers:  cheer- 
fulness, courage,  patience,  affec- 
tion, kindness,  understanding,  a 
good  homemaking  ability.  Fourth, 
that  she  exemplify  in  her  life  and 
her  conduct  the  precepts  of  the 
golden  rule.  Fifth,  that  she  have  a 
sense  of  responsibility  in  civic  af- 
fairs and  that  she  be  active  in  ser- 
vice for  public  benefit.  Sixth,  that 
she  be  qualified  to  represent  the 
Mother  of  America  in  all  responsi- 
bilities attached  to  her  role  as  na- 
tional mother,  if  selected/' 

Where  did  they  find  this  yard- 


Native  American  Mother/29 


stick  for  measuring  a  woman's 
worth?  From  the  same  measure 
that  has  always  stipulated  that  this 
be  a  one-culture  country,  and  ei- 
ther you  assimilate  or  you  pay  the 
consequences.  Why  must  everything 
be  based  on  white,  middle-class 
standards?  I  keep  asking  myself 
these  questions,  but  apparently 
there  are  no  simple  answers.  All  I 
know  for  sure  is  that  we  as  a  people 
no  longer  wish  to  deny  our  Native 
American  background — not  when 
we  see  the  alternatives  that  serve 
as  its  replacement.  Not  being  able 
to  enter  my  mother  in  this  contest 
may  seem  of  small  importance,  but 
it's  just  another  in  a  long  list  of 
ways  to  discriminate.  Therefore,  I 
would  like  to  give  another  version 
of  what  is  and  what  isn't  important 
in  a  mother. 

First,  that  she  be  a  successful  mother  as 
evidenced  by  character  and  the  achievements 
of  her  children.  I  can  only  presume 
this  means  college-educated  or  out- 
standing in  some  other  "reputable" 
field  of  endeavor.  This  first  qualifi- 
cation alone  is  wrong  for  many  rea- 
sons. The  sole  responsibility  for  the 
character  and  achievement  of  the 
children  is  placed  on  the  mother. 
The  role  of  the  father  is  of  no  ap- 
parent significance  and  outside  in- 
fluences are  totally  ignored.  What 
bothers  me  most  is  that  it's  only  the 
finished  product  that  counts.  What 
the  mother  may  have  had  to  sacri- 
fice in  raising  her  children  is  of  no 
relevance.  She  can  only  attain  the 
status  of  Successful  Mother 
through  the  achievements  of  others. 

Suppose,  in  your  culture,  that  the 
emphasis  was  placed  on  your  ability 
to  live  off  the  land.  Just  surviving 


would  be  a  great  achievement.  Any- 
one who  is  aware  of  the  socio-eco- 
nomic condition  of  Native  Ameri- 
cans could  attest  to  this;  we  have  it 
the  worst  of  any  race.  In  my  family 
we  are  all  highly  skilled  in  ways  per- 
taining to  our  natural  background.  I 
am  proud  to  be  considered  an  expert 
markswoman.  I  also  fish  and  hunt 
as  good,  or  better,  than  anyone  I 
know.  These  I  consider  achieve- 
ments. Society  does  not.  They  are  at 
best  considered  leisure  activities  or 
at  worst,  barbaric  practices.  It  is  not 
taken  into  account  that  a  segment 
of  this  society  still  lives  off  the  land. 
Fishing  and  hunting  are  natural 
means  of  survival  although  man's 
continued  interference  with  the  en- 
vironment will  soon  destroy  even 
this  option.  What  is  so  wrong  in 
preferring  meat  that  has  not  been 
shot  full  of  hormones?  Or  what  is 
so  cruel  about  giving  a  wild  animal 
an  even  chance  when  you  are  hunt- 
ing? Are  either  of  these  things  tak- 
en into  consideration  in  your  slaugh- 
terhouses? We  have  a  natural  re- 
spect for  all  living  things.  It  is  wrong 
to  misuse  anything  the  Earth  Moth- 
er has  provided  for  you.  These 
things,  I  believe,  constitute  charac- 
ter. Would  a  contest  judge  agree? 

Second,  that  she  be  an  active  member  of  a 
religious  body.  At  face  value,  this 
would  seem  to  mean  your  standard 
organized  church.  Possibly  just  ser- 
ving as  a  Sunday  school  teacher 
would  constitute  being  an  "active 
member."  Culture  aside,  we  all 
know  what  role  we  as  women  have 
been  allowed  to  play  in  any  church. 
This  country  has  always  been  big 
on  pushing  Christianity.  It  has  got- 
ten us  a  foothold  in  just  about  eve- 


30lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  4,  spring,  1977 


ry  other  country.  There  has  always 
been  this  overwhelming  project  to 
Americanize  and  Christianize.  The 
terrible  thing  is  that  it  works  so 
well.  You  are  given  religion,  and  in 
turn  you  lose  your  identity  in  your 
own  culture.  What  it  gives  you  is  a 
false  sense  of  being  accepted  by  this 
all-encompassing  religion.  In  reali- 
ty, it  is  only  another  ploy  on  your 
road  to  assimilation.  Therefore,  it 
would  not  be  enough  to  just  be  in 
awe  of  the  moon,  the  sun,  the  earth, 
and  all  of  its  elements.  Nor  would 
the  Earth  Mother,  or  any  other  dei- 
ty, be  acceptable  in  this  land  where 
a  white,  male  God  reigns  supreme. 


These  are  highly  commendable 
traits,  but  they  won't  "put  meat  on 
the  table. "  My  memories  are  of  a 
woman  carrying  water  from  a  creek 
to  wash  clothes  by  hand;  a  woman 
constantly  in  search  of  dead  trees  to 
chop  up  for  firewood;  a  woman 
wise  in  the  use  of  teas  and  herbs, 
because  unless  it  was  an  emergen- 
cy, doctors  were  an  unaffordable 
luxury.  Superstition  played  a  large 
part  in  some  of  the  cures.  Two  ex- 
amples: If  you  stepped  on  a  nail, 
you  greased  it  and  put  it  above  the 
door.  Then  if  the  evil  spirits  came 
in,  they  would  slip  back  out.  The 
wound  was  also  treated  with  poul- 


Third,  that  she  embody  those  traits  high- 
ly regarded  in  mothers:  courage,  cheerful- 
ness, patience,  affection,  kindness,  under- 
standing,   a    good    homemaking    ability. 


tices  so  you  were  doubly  protected. 
Another  cure  was  for  whooping 
cough.  When  my  mother  was  a  ba- 
by, her  brother  came  down  with  it, 


Native  American  Mother/31 


and  they  were  afraid  if  she  caught  it 
she  would  die.  So  they  had  a  neigh- 
bor bring  his  black  stallion  over, 
and  had  it  blow  its  breath  in  her 
face.  She's  never  had  the  disease, 
and  I  have  no  explanation  why  it 
worked.  I  also  know  willow  bark  is 
good  for  curing  headaches.  I  know 
society  sneers  at  cures  like  these. 
Well,  when  we  see  things  like  DES 
and  Flagyl  and  many  other  things, 
we  can't  help  but  wonder  if  our 
ways  really  are  uncivilized. 

I  would  say  she  had  most  of  the 
traits  mentioned  earlier — courage, 
patience,  and  so  on.  However,  if 
you  can  raise  six  children  to  adult- 
hood under  the  worst  of  conditions, 
whether  you  did  it  cheerfully  or  not 
is  of  little  importance.  When  you 
don't  have  running  water  or  electri- 
city in  your  house,  you  can  bet  you 
don't  have  much  else  either.  So  be- 
ing a  good  homemaker  in  the 
shacks  we  grew  up  in  would  have 
been  some  neat  trick! 

Fourth,  that  she  exemplified  in  her  life 
and  her  conduct  the  precepts  of  the  golden 
rule:  "Do  unto  others  as  you  have 
them  do  unto  you."  Here  she  would 
definitely  qualify.  She  would  never 
deliberately  hurt  anyone,  even 
when  it  was  over  some  things  we 
considered  justifiable.  She  can 
make  any  number  of  excuses  to  ex- 
plain why  someone  acted  a  certain 
way.  Maybe  her  pride  won't  allow 
her  to  admit  that  such  things  as 
racism  and  classism  do  exist. 

Even  the  destruction  of  a  family 
home  didn't  harden  her.  A  small 
fire  had  started  in  the  house,  and 
the  fire  department  was  called.  The 
firemen  came  in,  and  with  their 
hatchets  set  about  destroying  eve- 


rything in  the  house.  Only  two 
rooms  had  partially  burned,  so  we 
decided  to  clean  out  what  the  fire- 
men had  destroyed,  and  build  back. 
No  sooner  had  this  been  completed 
and  we  were  ready  for  rebuilding 
when  someone  else  came  in  with 
gasoline  and  burned  the  house  to 
the  ground.  This  list  could  go  on 
forever,  because  everyday  some 
sort  of  harassment  or  discrimina- 
tion occurs.  The  older  people  like 
my  mother  may  accept  it  as  the 
natural  order  of  things,  unlike  this 
generation,  which  is  learning  to 
question  every  aspect  of  this  socie- 
ty. So  much  for  the  "golden  rule." 

Fifth,  that  she  have  a  sense  of  responsi- 
bility in  civic  affairs  and  that  she  be  active 
in  service  for  public  benefit.  These  two 
are  really  hilarious.  If  you  are  hun- 
gry and  in  rags,  civic  or  public  ser- 
vices will  not  be  high  on  your  list 
of  "things  to  do."  Anyway,  your 
race  alone  might  exclude  you  from 
"responsibility  in  civic  affairs."  It 
still  happens.  Having  a  poor  woman 
volunteering  her  services  would 
upset  the  "natural  order"  even 
though  she  would  be  able  to  say 
where  those  services  could  really  be 
used.  So  a  working  woman  is  really 
discriminated  against:  she  can't  af- 
ford to  volunteer,  but  she  won't  get 
paid  either. 

Sixth,  that  she  be  qualified  to  represent 
the  Mother  of  America  in  all  responsibili- 
ties attached  to  her  role  as  national  mother, 
if  selected.  How  could  anyone  not 
tamed  and  trained  in  this  society's 
ways  ever  hope  to  qualify?  I 
wouldn't  want  to  qualify.  It  seems 
to  me  everyone  is  too  hung  up  on 
certificates  and  stuff  like  that. 
Sure,  I  would  have  liked  it  for  my 


321  Quest 


mother;  that  is,  I  would  have,  un- 
til I  gave  it  some  thought.  There  is 
no  way  I  would  expose  her  to  so 
much  phoniness.  She  may  have 
been  unacceptable  in  this  contest, 
but  in  my  world  she  is  without  com- 
parison. 

Maybe  I  haven't  expressed  all  of 
her  attributes  properly.  Maybe  no 
one  else  would  see  them  as  such. 
But  this  business  of  accepting  only 
one  life-style  as  proper  is  unreal. 
Somewhere  along  the  way,  the  true 
values  in  life  have  been  lost. 

Judith  Witherow  is  co-president  of  the 
N.O.W.  chapter  in  Southern  Prince 
George's  County,  Maryland. 


AWDMRft 


CONTRIBUTION*  WELCOMED 
IN  ANY  AREA  OF  THE 
HUMANTIESORTHESOCJAL 
SCIENCES.  WE  ARE  ALSO 
NTEHESTipW  ARTICLES  ON 
WOMEN'S  posmoN/oft 
INVOLVEMENT,  IN  ANY  OTHER 
AREAS.  REVIEWS  Of  FILMS 
PLAtf,  AND  ORIGINAL 
POEMS  AND  STORIES  ARE 
ALSO  WELCOME,  AS  WELLAS 
«APHXS.PH0f06RAMeT< 


Wan  $1 


DOROTHY  HEWETT  INTERVIEW,  WOMEN  OF 
CHINA,  SIMONE  DE  BEMOIR.THE  I9TH CENTURY 
WOMEN'S  MOVEMENT  IN  EN6LAND,  PROSTITUTION, 
KATE  MILLETT5CULPTURE5,  FEMINI5T5  ON  RADIO; 
P0EM5  ANP  5TORIE5 


SUBSCRIPTION  RATES  A  $2-50,  UK  £180,  US  $400  PA 
INSTITUTIONS  A$6  00  RA..UK  £4  50  PA,US  $10-00  PA< 
SUBSCRIPTIONS/ARTICLES  ETC  TO  CAROLE  FERRIER.  ENGLISH  p£ PT 
UNIVERSITY  OF  QUEENSLAND, ST  LUCIA  BRISBANE  4067,  <}U>,  AUSTRALIA 


SPECIAL  ISSUE 
GRAPHIC 
ARTISTS 
ON  THE 
LEFT 


Thisentire 

issue  is  devoted  to 

Bonnie  Acker,  Peg  Averill,  David 

Bragin,  Bulbul,  Jacky  English,  Ollie 

Harrington,  George  Knowlton,  Bill 

Plympton,  Shake,  Toni  Truesdale, 

Johnann  Vogelsang  and  Fred 

Wright;  people  who've  been  among 

those  expressing  the  sentiment  of  the 

left  movement  in  the  United  States 

through  graphics  for  over  forty  years 

WIN  Magazine  is  the  weekly 
magazine  written  by  and  for  people 
active  and  interested  in  the  social 
change  movement  You  can  order  this 
special  issueof  WIN,  48 pages,  for 
$1;  or  subscribe  to  a  year  of  WIN,  44 
issues,  for  $11  and  receive  "Graphic 
Artists  on  the  Left,"  free  as  a  bonus. 

□  Here' s  my  $11,1  want  to  read  a 
year  of  the  latest  news  and  analysis 
from  the  movement,  and  get  a  free 
copy  of  "Graphic  Artistson  the 
Left." 

□  Here's  $1,  send  me  a  copy  of 
"Graphic  Artistson  the  Left,"  a 
special  issueof  WIN. 

□  Here's  $6,  send  me  six  months  of 
WIN  just  to  get  my  feet  wet. 

Name 


Address. 


Zip. 


WIN/  503  Atlantic  Ave. 
Brooklyn,  NY  11217 


33 


CONFRONTATION 
Black  White 


Interview  with  Ginny  Apuzzo 
and  Betty  Powell 

photographs  by  Morgan  Gwenwald 

The  National  Black  Feminist  Organiza- 
tion was  formally  established  on  August 
15th,  1973  to  "address  the  specific  needs  of 
the  black  female  who  is  forced  to  live  in  a 
society  that  is  both  sexist  and  racist."  Saga- 
ris,  an  independent  institute  for  the  study  of 
feminist  politics,  held  its  first  two  extended 
sessions  in  the  summer  of  1975.  The  fol- 
lowing summer  both  organizations  formed 
a  coalition  to  sponsor  an  intensive  three-day 
conference  of  workshops,  lectures  and  dis- 
cussion sessions  to  explore  the  links  between 
racism  and  sexism.  Betty  Powell  and  Gin- 
ny Apuzzo  participated  in  the  event  as  fa- 
cilitators and  as  leaders  of  a  workshop  on 
forming  coalitions.  Dorothy  Allison  is  on 
the  staff  of  Quest. 

A  brief  excerpt  from  the  conference  bro- 
chure outlines  the  design  and  scope  of  the 
session:  "We  will  explore  the  linkage  be- 
tween racism  and  sexism,  its  importance  for 
political  change  and  how  to  move  towards 
that  change.  Our  intention  is  not  to  provide 
quick  and  easy  answers  but  to  provide 
training  to  eliminate  the  kinds  of  uncon- 
scious racist  or  sexist  blocks  within  our- 
selves that  prevent  the  building  of  a  multi- 
racial woman's  movement  that  really 
moves." 

D.  How  were  you  invited  to  parti- 
cipate in  the  Racism  and  Sexism 
conference? 


G.  For  over  a  year  before  the  con- 
ference was  scheduled,  I  had  been 
working  on  a  concept  of  coalitions, 
so  when  Betty  became  interested  in 
facilitating  the  conference,  she  ap- 
proached me  and  we  decided  to  hold 
a  joint  workshop  around  the  topic 
of  coalitions. 

B.  I  was  invited  to  participate  as  a 
facilitator  by  members  of  the  Na- 
tional Black  Feminist  Organization 
(N.B.F.O.).  There  were  to  be  twen- 
ty facilitators,  evenly  divided  be- 
tween black  and  white,  and  prior  to 
the  conference  we  were  to  have  a 
series  of  meetings  where  we  would 
literally  "walk  through''  the  entire 
conference.  We  engaged  in  work- 
shops and  exercises  that  we  were  to 
involve  the  participants  in,  with  the 
result  that  we  all  had  a  total  per- 
spective of  what  the  goals  of  the 
conference  were  and  what  our  roles 
were. 

D.  The  conference  itself  was  a  re- 
markable coalition  between  two 
very  different  groups — the  Sagaris 
Collective  and  the  National  Black 
Feminist  Organization.  How  did 
that  come  about? 

B.  There  were  a  number  of  criti- 
cisms of  the  first  Sagaris  Institute. 
One  of  the  criticisms  was  that  it 
was  extremely  theoretical  and  that 
there  was  little  concern  with  the  is- 


34lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  4,  spring,  1977 


sue  of  racism.  At  the  same  time,  the 
women  of  NBFO  had  the  feeling 
that  while  black  feminists  might  be 
very  much  in  touch  with  the  phen- 
omenon of  racism  because  they  ex- 
perience it  every  day  of  their  lives, 
they  are  probably  not  as  strong  in 
terms  of  feminism,  even  though 
they  might  consider  themselves 
feminists.  NBFO  could  see  a  need 
for  helping  "First  World"  women 
really  get  in  touch  with  feminism 
and  Sagaris  could  see  the  need  for 
non-First  World  women  to  get 
more  deeply  in  touch  with  racism. 
I  had  better  explain  what  I  mean 
by  First  World  women.  So  often  we 
see  the  term  "Third  World  women." 
Since  we  need  to  start  looking  at 
our  racism,  we  can  begin  with  the 
language.  Who  decided  who  was 
first  and  who  was  third?  What  does 


it  mean  anyway?  After  asking  these 
questions,  many  of  us  are  starting 
to  use  the  term  First  World  women 
as  an  affirmation  of  ourselves  as 
non-white  women  choosing  our 
own  definitions. 

It  was  Jane  Galvin  Lewis  who 
emphasized  the  idea  of  the  linkages 
between  sexism  and  racism  during 
the  organization  of  the  conference. 
She  helped  to  design  the  conference 
so  that  the  dominant  idea  was  try- 
ing to  see  those  links  from  each  per- 
spective. From  the  black  perspec- 
tive, it's  a  matter  of  having  racism 
as  an  integral  part  of  your  life  but 
rarely  seeing  its  relationship  to  sex- 
ism. For  the  white  feminist,  it's  a 
matter  of  emphasizing  sexism  while 
being  less  sensitive  to  racism. 

Throughout   the   conference  we 
used  Jane  Galvin  Lewis's  suggested 


®Copyright  1977,  Morgan  Gwenwald 


Confrontation:  Black/White/35 


definition  of  the  linkage  between 
racism  and  sexism.  Both  isms  as- 
sume superiority  of  one  group  over 
another  based  on  biology;  this  phe- 
nomenon is  manifested  through- 
out the  society,  in  theory  and  prac- 
tice. It  is  also  the  case  that  the  alleg- 
edly inferior  group  is  always  chal- 
lenging this  assumption  in  theory 
and  in  practice.  This  was  the  central 
concept  that  we  focused  on. 

G.  Most  of  the  exercises  we  went 
through  were  designed  so  that  we 
as  women,  sometimes  as  white  wo- 
men and  sometimes  as  black  wo- 
men, would  experience  the  fact  that 
the  allegedly  inferior  group  was 
constantly  challenging  our  oppres- 
sion. The  exercises  were  broken  up 
into  small  groups  with  white  and 
black  co-facilitators.  The  questions 
led  the  participants  to  deal  with  the 
broad  issues  of  racism  and  sexism  in 
their  everyday  lives,  in  a  very  per- 
sonal way.  There  were  questions 
that  forced  the  women  to  deal  with 
our  own  racism,  our  own  self-ha- 
tred, on  the  level  of  one-to-one  re- 
lationships. The  attempt  was  made 
to  set  up  a  situation  of  direct  con- 
frontation between  individual  wo- 
men, asking  "Why  do  we  behave  in 
the  way  that  we  do?  What  are  our 
reasons  and  what  are  our  excuses?" 
I  had  the  feeling  that  this  particu- 
lar aspect  of  the  conference  was  de- 
signed in  such  a  way  that  confron- 
tation was  evidence  of  success  of 
the  interaction.  Personally,  I  had  an 
enormous  sense  of  confidence  in 
what  would  happen  if  confrontation 
took  place  in  the  context  of  those 
workshops.  I  agree  with  the  women 
who  have  been  saying  that  we  have 


gotten  too  damned  polite;  we've 
gotten  so  polite  we  tend  to  say, 
"Well,  your  group  has  this  value 
and  our  group  has  that  value,  so 
we'll  just  make  our  base  all  the 
broader. "  What  has  happened  is 
we've  so  diluted  our  objectives  and 
our  values  that  confrontation  never 
takes  place.  It's  only  when  confron- 
tation does  yield  conflict  that  a  con- 
sequent change  can  take  place. 

The  Bottom  Line 

B.  One  of  the  exercises  we  did  the 
first  day  was  on  the  question, 
"What  is  your  bottom  line?"  It  was 
a  two-part  session  asking,  "What  is 
your  personal  limit;  how  far  can 
you  go  with  a  person  of  a  different 
race?"  and  in  part  II,  "How  do  you 
go  about  working  on  your  limita- 
tions?" The  situation  really  pushed 
you  to  be  absolutely  honest  and  so 
when  a  woman  said  it  would  be 
very  difficult  for  her  to  bring  a  per- 
son of  a  different  race  to  her  home, 
the  other  people  began  to  draw  her 
out  in  terms  of  why,  not  just  say- 
ing, "Isn't  that  horrible!"  It  was  all 
in  terms  of  confronting  racism 
rather  than  just  revealing  it. 

G.  In  that  workshop  I  really  saw 
some  women  facing  their  own  re- 
sponsibility for  their  racism.  One 
woman  in  particular  said  she 
couldn't  send  her  child  to  a  public 
school  because  in  her  area,  it  is  pre- 
dominately minority-populated.  I 
watched  the  expression  on  that  wo- 
man's face  when  she  was  confront- 
ed; she  started  to  give  her  reasons 
and  found  that  so  many  of  them 
didn't  belong  to  her.  It  was  the  fam- 


36/  Quest 


ily,  her  father,  her  mother,  or  her 
husband.  I  could  see  the  woman 
struggling  with  the  idea  of  her  own 
responsibility,  "You,  why  won't 
you  send  your  child  to  that  school?" 
In  a  sense  she  got  to  see  the  poverty 
of  her  own  lack  of  reasons  for  tak- 
ing that  stand. 

D.  I  would  think  that  the  overrid- 
ing tendency  in  any  situation  like 
that  would  be  a  lot  of  very  subtle 
pretense  and  shielding  of  feelings.  I 
don't  mean  actual  lying,  but  still 
trying  to  be  "nice,"  to  avoid  saying 
those  obviously  offensive  things. 
How  did  the  workshops  break 
down  that  tendency?" 

B.  What  we  did  was  break  up  first 
in  racial  groups.  Then  we  came 
back  together  and  reported  the 
statements,  positions  and  experi- 
ences recounted  in  each  group 
without,  at  first,  identifying  indi- 
viduals. Initially,  there  was  hesitan- 
cy on  the  part  of  the  women  to 
speak  out,  but  the  longer  we  went 
on  the  more  people  began  to  speak 
more  freely.  That  gave  a  kind  of 
space  for  people  to  become  more 
honest. 

G.  The  sexism  element  was  very 
interesting  around  that  question 
because  you  had  lesbians  who  said 
they  wouldn't  sleep  with  a  black 
man  because  they  wouldn't  sleep 
with  any  man.  But  the  big  discus- 
sion was  around  the  definition, 
what  was  meant  by  "bottom  line." 
I've  found  that  one  of  the  most 
common  tactics  used  in  the  begin- 
ning of  any  significant  dialogue  is 
to  debate  the  validity  of  the  ques- 


tion. The  white  women  in  my 
group  all  started  to  debate  that  def- 
inition. When  you  don't  want  to 
deal  with  something  you  tend  to 
make-believe  that  you  don't  com- 
pletely understand  the  question.  So 
before  we  could  get  down  to  the 
nitty-gritty  of  what  each  of  us 
meant  by  the  bottom  line,  an  enor- 
mous amount  of  time  was  wasted 
on  semantics.  The  women  were 
conscious  of  what  that  question 
would  bring  out.  There  was  great 
difficulty  in  recognizing  that  no 
matter  how  much  we  want  to  re- 
spond out  of  a  growing  conscious- 
ness, we  have  been  here  for  too 
many  years  and  are  still  encum- 
bered with  prejudice. 

B.  The  black  women  and  other 
First  World  women  were  much 
more  comfortable  in  stating  what 
their  bottom  line  was  because  it  is  a 
part  of  their  daily  dialogue.  There 
are  just  so  many  occasions  for  us  to 
express  those  feelings,  because  we 
are  constantly  talking  about  THEM 
and  the  world  out  there  and  what 
happened  last.  The  black  women's 
response  to  the  question  really  dif- 
fered from  the  white  women's. 
There  were  responses  like,  "I 
couldn't  join  a  white-dominated  or- 
ganization," mostly  talking  in  terms 
of  feminist  organizations,  or,  "I 
could  join  one  but  couldn't  tolerate 
it  if  there  were  any  manifestations 
of  the  power  play  where  the  white 
women  make  sure  that  they  remain 
the  ones  in  power."  The  white  wo- 
men would  not  only  tolerate  but 
would  want  the  black  women  to 
join  their  organizations,  but  be- 
cause   of    their    conditioning    just 


Confrontation:  Black/White/37 


would  not  see  themselves  being 
lead  or  directed  by  a  black  person. 
There  were  a  lot  of  questions 
brought  up  around  the  issue  of 
non-white  women  working  with 
white  women.  There  was  a  general 
assumption  that  "When  I  am  aware 
of  overt  racism  in  a  situation  then  I 
would  not  be  able  to  continue  my 
efforts  to  work  in  it." 

NBFO,  in  making  its  statements 
about  who  it  was,  why  it  existed 
and  how  it  relates  to  the  white  fem- 
inist movement,  makes  it  clear  that 
the  need  for  such  an  organization 
was  because  the  experiences  of  the 
black  feminist  are  somehow  oblit- 
erated or  just  not  presently  con- 
scious in  the  white  feminist  move- 
ment. It  is  not  so  much  a  matter  of 
overt  racism  as  the  need  for  space 
to  deal  with  our  own  priorities  and 
our  own  visions. 

NBFO  provided  a  list  of  ques- 
tions and  answers  about  black  femi- 
nism to  the  facilitators  and  it 
proved  very  valuable,  particularly 
where  it  clarified  some  of  the  ques- 
tions that  arose  around  black  and 
white  feminists  working  together. 
For  example,  on  this  issue  there 
was  a  statement:  "It  is  very  difficult 
to  get  anyone  to  work  on  issues 
that  are  not  close  to  their  experi- 
ence. The  areas  of  welfare,  domes- 
tic workers,  reproductive  freedom, 
the  unwed  mother,  and  many  other 
areas  are  things  we  feel  are  not  be- 
ing addressed,  as  well  as  the  profes- 
sional black  woman,  sexuality,  un- 
employment and  a  host  of  other  is- 
sues that  affect  us  as  black  women. 
...Many  of  us  come  out  of  the  wo- 
men's movement,  but  we  feel  that 
the  duality  of  being  black  and  fe- 


male made  us  want  to  organize 
around  those  things  which  affect  us 
most.  It  is  very  important  that  we 
set  our  own  priorities,  but  we  will 
lend  support  to  feminist  organiza- 
tions and  will  work  in  coalitions  in 
areas  that  affect  the  majority  of 
women  in  this  country." 

G.  This  conference  took  all  the  as- 
sumptions regarding  black  and 
white  feminists  working  together 
and  smashed  them.  I  was  in  two 
groups  where  there  were  more 
black  women  than  white  women. 

D.  How  did  it  change  the  interac- 
tion to  have  that  kind  of  composi- 
tion? You  know  it's  definitely  not 
the  usual  thing  at  feminist  confer- 
ences where  it's  typical  to  have  only 
a  few  black  women  among  many 
more  white  women. 

B.  It  made  everything  just  so 
much  more  real  for  me.  There  were 
enormous  numbers  of  black  women 
even  on  the  third  day  when  so 
many  women  had  to  go  back  to 
work.  We  still  had  an  incredible  ra- 
cial and  ethnic  diversity.  The  physi- 
cal setting  was  such  that  we  were 
together  the  entire  time  and  the 
topics  kept  reinforcing  that  whole 
business  of  interacting,  of  relating 
personally.  There  were  some 
people  who  left,  particularly  after 
the  first  day  when  there  was  such  a 
level  of  confrontation  that  some 
women  went  home  enraged,  em- 
barrassed and  turned  off  to  the 
whole  thing.  But  most  women 
came  back  and  there  was  a  com- 
pletely different  feeling  once  the 
fear  and  mistrust  had  been  worked 
through. 


38/  Quest 


D.  I'm  really  interested  in  the  fact 
that  the  workshops  were  designed 
to  go  beyond  just  asking  the  initial 
question.  For  example,  you  men- 
tioned how  the  workshop  on  the 
"bottom  line"  also  asked  how  to  go 
about  working  on  the  limitations 
the  initial  question  drew  out.  That's 
the  step  past  analysis  into  strategy. 
I  know  that  one  of  the  other  work- 
shops dealt  with  the  first  experi- 
ence of  racism.  In  that  case  too,  the 
discussion  moved  on  to  how  that 
situation  has  changed. 

B.  The  end  result  of  that  work- 
shop was  that  we  saw  that  nothing 
much  was  changed  in  terms  of  how 
those  feelings  and  attitudes  are  still 
prevalent  in  this  society.  There  is 
still  such  fertile  ground  for  racism 
and  sexism  to  grow.  It  was  a  phen- 
omenal experience  for  people  to 
really  get  a  grip  on  where  that  kind 
of  feeling  comes  from,  to  see  that 
society  has  been  nurturing  the  neg- 
ative   self-image    of    First    World 


people  or  nurturing  the  anti-life 
postures  that  white  society  is  con- 
ditioned and  socialized  to  take. 

G.  When  the  first  woman  spoke 
in  that  workshop  the  room  became 
terribly  quiet,  the  kind  of  silence 
that  makes  you  think  that  nothing 
can  be  more  quiet.  Then  the  next 
woman  spoke  and  the  room  got 
even  more  quiet.  It  was  just  an  in- 
credible feeling  of  people  letting 
something  echo  deep  inside  them. 
That  silence  spoke  eloquently  to 
the  way  women  were  attending  and 
responding  to  each  other. 

There  was  a  third  exercise  that 
took  us  back  to  the  definition  we 
were  discussing  earlier,  particularly 
the  idea  that  the  allegedly  inferior 
group  is  constantly  challenging  the 
assumptions  of  the  dominant 
group.  It  examined  attitudes  by 
asking,  "What  do  minorities  think 


Confrontation:  Black/White/39 


of  whites?  What  do  whites  think  of 
minorities ?"  and,  "What  do  women 
think  of  men?  What  do  men  think 
of  women?" 

B.  For  that  workshop  we  broke 
down  into  mixed  groups  and  every- 
one just  rattled  off  everything  they 
could  think  of;  then  we  came  back 
together  and  put  the  four  questions 
up  on  the  wall  where  the  facilita- 
tors could  list  all  the  responses.  The 
entire  group  then  examined  each  of 
the  statements  to  say  whether  each 
one  was,  in  fact,  true  or  false.  The 
object  of  that  exercise  was  to  get 
people  to  make  connections,  to  see 
the  linkage  between  the  oppression 
of  one  group  by  another.  It  quickly 
became  very  clear  that  the  op- 
pressed group  has  a  much  more  ac- 
curate picture  of  the  dominant 
group  than  the  powerful  have  of 
the  oppressed.  The  point  is  that  the 
oppressed  have  to  know  the  op- 
pressor in  order  to  survive. 

G.  That's  a  rule  that  applies  to 
both  racism  and  sexism.  As  women 
and  as  minority  people,  the  obliga- 
tion is  imposed  on  us  to  know  what 
we  are  plus  who  the  oppressor 
thinks  we  are,  especially  if  we  have 
a  particular  goal  to  achieve. 

D.  That  reminds  me  of  lessons 
from  my  college  psychology  classes 
about  the  "me  as  others  see  me." 
We  get  confused  between  who  we 
really  are,  who  we  are  seen  to  be 
and  a  kind  of  mock  identity  when 
we  have  to  play  to  the  man  in  order 
to  be  seen  at  all.  So  often  when 
dealing  with  a  more  powerful 
group,  our  behavior  isn't  under- 
stood at  all. 


G.  The  fact  that  the  group  in 
power  has  determined  the  boun- 
daries of  acceptable  behavior  is  an 
extraordinary  advantage  in  protect- 
ing the  status  quo.  Unacceptable 
behavior  can  be  readily  disregarded 
as  eccentric  or  downright  deviant. 


B.  When  we  looked  at  those  lists 
of  perceptions  the  idea  that  came 
up  was  that  we  are  really  enemies, 
that  those  words  have  to  come 
from  enmity.  There  just  seems  to 
be  no  in-between  there,  and  clearly 
we  are  destined  to  remain  enemies 
unless  we  change  the  whole  system 
that  perpetuates  these  ideas.  I  saw 
an  interview  with  Lois  Gould  re- 
cently where  she  was  asking  how 
there  could  be  any  love  between 
men  and  women  when  we  are 
raised  as  enemies.  How  do  we  ex- 
pect little  boys  to  come  out  of  their 
camp  at  13  years  old  loving  little 
girls,  or  for  that  matter,  blacks  lov- 
ing whites?  No,  we  came  out  slug- 
ging, fighting — so  the  only  answer 
is  to  retool,  to  change  the  whole 
system  that  creates  these  view- 
points. 

D.  It  is  when  I  think  about  how  we 
develop  our  perceptions  of  our- 
selves and  others  that  leads  me  to 
think  in  terms  of  class.  Sex  and  race 
are  in  a  way,  prime  determinants, 
what  defines  us  in  terms  of  this  cul- 
ture; but  equally  important  is  the 
economic  and  social  class  that  con- 
ditions so  much  of  our  later  behavi- 
or and  expectations.  I'm  curious 
about  how  the  issue  of  class  was  ex- 
amined in  the  Racism  and  Sexism 
conference. 


40/  Quest 


G.  There  was  not  a  particular 
workshop  or  exercise  directed  at 
the  issue  of  class,  but  it  came  up  in 
many  of  the  exercises  we  have  been 
discussing.  Women  came  to  grips 
with  the  fact  that  their  reasons  and 
their  values  came  out  of  their  ex- 
perience, the  x  number  of  years 
they  had  lived,  what  they  were 
bound  to  and  what  was  either  hold- 
ing them  up  or  opening  them  up.  I 
think  that's  the  way  they  got  in 
touch  with  certain  realities  of  class 
experience  for  themselves  and  for 
others.  You  are  not  only  who  you 
define  yourself  as,  now  in  this 
room,  but  all  the  things  that  have 
happened  to  you  before  and  all  the 
values  that  have  been  accumulating 
— I  am  the  particular  product  of  my 


experiences.  Much  as  I'd  like  to  be,  I 
am  not  culture-free.  Nor  do  I  have 
to  be  a  victim  of  my  experiences 
and  culture.  The  process  of  raising 
my  consciousness  involves  factor- 
ing out  values,  experiences  and  atti- 
tudes which  may  predispose  me  to 
certain  behaviors.  The  more  aware 
I  am  of  the  elements  involved  in  my 
predisposition,  the  more  I  can  work 
to  balance  them  with  the  factors 
that  I  have  determined  are  signifi- 
cant. 


Confrontation:  Black/White/41 


B.  I  want  to  say  something  about 
more  concrete  notions  of  where  we 
go  from  here,  how  we  begin  to  ac- 
tualize some  of  the  experiences  and 
the  knowledge  we  have.  I  think  a 
very  important  thing  that  came  out 
was  this  whole  notion  of  manda- 
tory presence.  I  had  a  sense  that 
people  were  aware  at  the  confer- 
ence that  realistically  speaking,  as 
rich  and  powerful  as  the  experience 
was  for  us  all,  we  were  not  all  going 
to  go  out  and  start  working  togeth- 
er as  minority  and  white  women  in 
any  kind  of  situation.  The  idea  of 
mandatory  presence  was  brought 
back  into  sharp  focus  as  the  under- 
standing that  a  black  does  not  have 
to  be  a  member  of  the  organization, 
a  native  american  doesn't  have  to 
be  present  at  the  meeting  or  con- 
ference, for  the  issues  of  concern  to 
blacks  and  native  americans  to  be 
part  of  the  agenda.  I  think  the  wo- 
men went  away  with  the  idea  that 
in  whatever  activities  and  endeav- 
ors they  would  be  involved,  they 
would  be  conscious  of  the  need  to 
raise  these  issues,  whether  a  mi- 
nority person  was  present  or  not. 

D.  Then  it  also  becomes  the  re- 
sponsibility of  the  white  women  to 
develop  their  own  consciousness  of 
these  issues  and  to  raise  the  ques- 
tions. 

G.  I  completely  disagree.  I  came 
away  from  there  and  subsequently 
have  had  a  large  number  of  experi- 
ences that  say  to  me  that  manda- 
tory presence  is  still  necessary.  I 
feel  that  if  there  weren't  lesbians 
there  and  if  we  didn't  call  for  a  les- 
bian caucus  to  meet,  that  the  con- 


ference could  very  easily  have  over- 
looked the  issue  of  heterosexism, 
and  in  fact  it  did.  I  think  the  lesbi- 
ans had  to  come  together,  had  to 
make  a  statement  and  had  to  open 
up  the  issue,  to  focus  on  that  for 
the  straight  women  to  say,  as  Char- 
lotte Bunch  has  said,  "No  woman  is 
free  until  all  women  are  free  to  be 
lesbians." 

D.  It  seems  that  the  idea  of  man- 
datory presence  can  be  applied  to 
class  and  lesbianism  as  readily  as  to 
race.  It's  extraordinary  to  me  that 
the  two  issues  that  seem  to  have 
been  pretty  much  neglected  at  the 
conference  were  the  issues  of  class 
and  heterosexism.  I  am  familiar 
with  two  analyses  that  might  have 
contributed  to  that.  One  is  the  idea 
that  you  can  not  apply  a  class  analy- 
sis to  the  lives  of  black  women 
which  centers  on  the  definition  of 
the  term  "working  class,"  that  mi- 
nority people  are  the  real  working 
class  of  this  society.  Another  is  the 
idea  that  you  cannot  make  demands 
on  black  women  to  deal  with  the  is- 
sue of  lesbianism  because  lesbian- 
ism threatens  the  solidarity  of  black 
men  and  women,  and  is  in  some 
ways  more  threatening  to  the  cul- 
tural concepts  of  the  black  woman. 

G.  I  think  there  was  one  black  wo- 
man who  spoke  during  the  lesbian 
caucus  who  spoke  to  that.  She  got 
up  and  said,  "People  all  my  life  have 
accused  me  of  being  a  dyke,  because 
I  am  aggresive  and  I  have  always 
had  to  be  out  there  functioning  this 
way  but  I  am  not  a  lesbian  and  I 
don't  know  any."  She  was  so  angry 
because  the  larger  society  saw  all 


42/  Quest 


those  characteristics  as  the  stereo- 
type of  the  lesbian,  and  those  were 
the  characteristics  she  had  to  devel- 
op to  survive.  In  a  sense  she  was 
giving  the  most  marvelous  state- 
ment of  the  oppression  of  the  lesbi- 
an but  she  didn't  realize  it. 

B.  She  was  not  able  to  carry  it  a 
step  farther  in  terms  of  an  analysis; 
she  just  took  it  where  she  needed  to 
take  it.  I  think  the  notion  of  lesbian- 


ism being  less  acceptable  to  black 
women  just  isn't  true.  It  has  validi- 
ty for  some  black  women  and  cer- 
tain experiences  but  in  terms  of  a 
general  posture,  I  would  tend  to 
think  exactly  the  opposite,  that 
more  black  women  would  be  in- 


Confrontation:  Black/White/43 


clined  to  accept  lesbianism. 

G.  I  would  disagree  with  your 
point.  I  think  that  for  those  black 
women  for  whom  the  church  rep- 
resents a  basic  social  institution, 
lesbianism  would  be  most  difficult, 
if  not  impossible,  to  accept.  For 
them,  the  church  and  the  social  life 
built  around  it  is  a  survival  struc- 
ture and  I  think  that  would  deter- 
mine a  lot  of  their  perceptions  and 
attitudes. 

B.  A  lot  of  that  would  depend  on 
the  particular  culture  that  different 
black  women  come  out  of— it's  a 
different  situation  for  a  black  wo- 
man active  in  her  church  who  lives 
in  a  non-urban  southern  communi- 
ty than  for  one  in  a  more  urban  set- 
ting where  a  very  different  notion 
of  homosexuality  prevails. 

D.  What  about  the  question  of 
whether  black  women  must  sup- 
port black  men  as  a  group  and 
therefore  lesbianism  is  a  dangerous 
concept? 

B.  It's  a  complex  question.  In  an 
urban  setting  like  New  York,  there 
would  be  black  women  who  would 
have  to  look  on  the  notion  of  homo- 
sexuality as  destructive  to  the 
building  of  a  black  nation  and  that 
stance  would  be  supported  by  black 
men.  There's  a  question  like  that  in 
the  NBFO  material.  It  goes: 
"Shouldn't  the  Black  woman  be  be- 
hind  her  man,  giving  him  support? 
After  all,  he  has  been  discriminated 
against  since  being  in  America." 
The  answer  is:  "We  would  never 
deny  the  injustice  or  abuse  put  up- 


on the  Black  man  in  this  country. 
But,  because  we  live  in  a  patriarchy, 
we  have  allowed  a  premium  to  be 
placed  on  male  suffering.  Black  wo- 
men have  also  faced  enormous 
hardship  and  pain,  and  rather  than 
getting  behind  someone,  we  should 
be  supportive  of  each  other.  Rather 
than  being  the  day  of  the  Black 
man,  it  is  the  day  of  the  Black 
people." 

I  think  it  just  really  depends  on 
how  far  along  a  woman  is  in  terms 
of  her  own  sense  of  self  as  a  wo- 
man. If  she  doesn't  feel  that  neces- 
sity to  respond  in  the  same  way 
that  the  black  man  does,  then  she 
may  be  able  to  deal  with  lesbianism 
and  homosexuality  in  a  much  more 
understanding  way. 

D.  What  was  the  response  to  the 
lesbian  caucus  that  organized  dur- 
ing the  conference? 

G.  The  responses  were  as  diverse 
as  the  women  there.  We  simply 
made  a  statement  relating  to  heter- 
osexism  and  the  fact  that  one  can- 
not look  at  sexism  without  looking 
at  the  implications  of  the  normative 
status  of  heterosexuality.  There 
were  women  who  then  said  they 
had  never  realized  that  talking 
about  sexism  meant  talking  about 
heterosexism.  But  then  there  was  a 
woman  who  came  into  the  work- 
shop on  coalitions  that  we  directed, 
who,  despite  the  fact  that  she  had 
expressed  an  interest  in  coalitions, 
literally  backed  out  of  the  room 
saying,  "I  just  can't  be  here,  this  is 
disgusting."  She  couldn't  be  in  the 
same  room  with  us  after  she  knew 
we  were  lesbians. 


44/  Quest 


Confrontation:  Black/White/45 


Still,  I  would  say  that  the  conse- 
quence of  the  caucus  was  positive. 
It  did  open  up  dialogue;  it  got 
people  talking  to  each  other;  and  it 
brought  the  issue  out  on  the  table 
with  all  the  pain  and  accompanying 
difficulty  that  racism  had  had  for 
women  who  were  there. 

D.  As  participants  and  facilitators 
you  saw  the  entire  event  through 
from  the  training  sessions  to  the 
last  criticisms.  If  you  were  to  design 
another  such  event  with  similar 
goals,  how  would  you  change  what 
was  done?  Particularly,  how  would 
you  incorporate  the  issues  of  class 
and  heterosexism? 

B.  The  only  way  I  could  see  in- 
corporating class  and  heterosexism 
in  a  more  vitalizing  way  within  the 
session  would  be  to  extend  the 
length  of  time  of  the  conference.  I 
think  the  structure  served  it  per- 
fectly  the     basic     structure    of 

presentation  and  workshops,  small 
group  encounter,  and  really  focus- 
ing on  trying  to  elicit  confronta- 
tion. I  would  resist  changing  the 
definition  that  specified  the  links 
between  sexism  and  racism.  I  would 
suspect  that  another  statement 
would  have  to  be  added,  and  that 
might  be  that  the  consequences  of 
acting  out  the  alleged  superiority  of 
one  group,  economically  and  cul- 
turally, would  bring  about  the 
kinds  of  class  differences  that  are 
perpetuated  by  a  racist,  sexist  socie- 
ty. In  the  day-to-day  world  perpet- 
uating the  status  quo  we  get  the 
kind  of  rigid  classist  attitudes  that 
cannot  be  separated  from  the  econ- 
omic reality. 


What  I  would  not  want  to  do 
would  be  to  dilute  the  importance 
of  these  two  issues — racism  and 
sexism.  They  need  to  be  looked  at 
in  just  the  terms  that  they  were  ad- 
dressed at  that  conference,  with  a 
balance  between  introducing  atti- 
tudes and  feelings  and  letting 
people  work  them  through,  as  well 
as  translating  those  attitudes  and 
feelings  into  the  issues  such  as 
abortion  or  reproductive  freedom, 
child-care,  employment,  political 
repression,  rape,  forced  steriliza- 
tion, crimes  against  women,  and 
practical  actions  we  need  to  work 
on  immediately.  On  the  last  day  of 
the  conference  we  held  a  series  of 
workshops  around  possible  actions 
for  women,  confronting  racism  and 
sexism  to  move  to  coalition  build- 
ing, backing  a  political  candidate  or 
being  one,  community  organizing, 
lobbying,  working  in  minority  me- 
dia or  organizing  women's  busi- 
nesses. That  design  should  contin- 
ue to  serve  us  well;  working  from 
mutual  education  to  honest  dialog- 
ue to  unified  action. 

Ginny  Apuzzo  is  co-chairperson  of  the 
Gay  Rights  National  Lobby.  She  is  on  the 
Coordinating  Committee  of  the  Manhattan 
Women's  Political  Caucus,  and  a  member 
of  the  faculty  of  Brooklyn  College,  C.U.- 
N.Y.,  for  the  last  eight  years. 

Betty  Powell  is  co-chairperson  of  the  Na- 
tional Gay  Task  Force  Board  of  Directors, 
a  former  member  of  the  National  Black 
Feminist  Organization,  and  the  Gay  Aca- 
demic Union.  She  is  presently  a  member  of 
the  New  York  State  Advisory  Committee  to 
the  U.S.  Commission  on  Civil  Rights  and 
is  an  instructor  at  Brooklyn  College  of  the 
City  University  of  New  York. 


46/  Quest 


£ss  Whsmi 


Yes,  these  women 

Are  sisters  too/ 

I  tell  my  mind 

Underneath  all 

The  dyed  hair/ 

Jewelled  fronts, 

They  have  suffered  too. 

What  matters  it 

That  they  cannot 

Quite  look  into 

My  dark  eyes 

Touch  my  dark  brown 

Skin/ 

We  must  both  come 

Beyond  it 

Must  we  not? 


They  have  long 

Followed  other  tunes 

Too/ 

Fashion  tunes  which 

Cause  long  sessions 

At  hair  dryers/ 

Vicious  talk 

About  the  young 

Coloring  whitewashed  fronts. 

And  while  I 

Have  once  moved  to 

Tunes  that  would  have  me 

Denounce  aggression/ 

Real  poetry, 

They  and  I  have 

Both  to  understand  the 

Nature  and  the  work  of  the 

Real 

Musicians  who  design 

These  tunes  and  see 

Ourselves  in  the  light 

Of  what  our  own 

Tunes  must  be. 

By  JYOTSNA   SANZGIRI 


At  Miami/47 


Class  Attitudes 
Professionalism 


By  MARY  McKENNEY 

graphics  by  Beth  Stone 


I  come  from  a  working-class- 
family  that  became  sub-working 
class  when  I  was  eight.  My  father 
became  completely  disabled  by  mul- 
tiple sclerosis  in  the  mid-1950's  and 
the  government  "supported"  our 
family  of  five  on  $66  a  month.  Be- 
fore he  got  sick,  my  father  had 
worked  in  a  foundry;  in  fact,  all  my 
relatives  had  working-class  jobs. 
But  not  understanding  anything 
about  social  class  (we  thought  we 
were  poor  only  because  of  my  fa- 
ther's illness),  I  grew  up  believing  I 
was  part  of  the  middle-class,  afflu- 
ent America  I  read  about  and  saw 
on  TV.  I  was  so  out  of  touch  with 
my  real  life  that  in  a  creative  writ- 
ing class,  I  portrayed  myself  as  hav- 
ing a  businessman  for  a  father,  a 
cocktail-drinking  bridge  player  for  a 
mother,  and  the  problems  of  a  mid- 
dle-class suburban  child.  Ironically, 
this  subversion  of  my  real  experi- 
ence helped  me  escape  the  life  of 
poverty  my  parents  had  led. 


I  always  knew  I  would  go  to  col- 
lege; it  was  my  mother's  life  dream 
for  herself,  instilled  in  me.  In  a 
small  town  in  the  Midwest,  with  a 
good  academic  record,  it  wasn't 
hard  for  me  to  be  noticed  and  pro- 
pelled along  the  college  prep/schol- 
arship/student loan  route.  Now  I 
have  a  B.A.,  a  Master's  in  library 
science,  and  a  semi-professional  job 
as  a  medical  copy  editor. 

Mine  is  the  typical  success  story 
that  is  supposed  to  make  poverty 
and  discrimination  sound  like  ex- 
cuses for  a  lack  of  personal  initia- 
tive and  hard  work.  The  ruling  class 
provides  "escape  valves"  for  a  small 
percentage  of  working-class  chil- 
dren to  go  to  college  and  get  low- 
level  managerial,  semi-professional, 
or  even  professional  jobs — but  it 
ensures  that  our  thinking  is 
changed  in  the  process.  The  high- 
er we  rise  economically,  the  less 
likely  we  are  to  identify  with  the 
people  we  left  behind.  So  we  serve 
two  purposes:  we  can  be  pointed  to 
as  successful  products  of  the  demo- 
cratic system  (Diana  Ross  was  born 
poor,  black,  and  female,  but  she  made 
it),  and  we  can  be  coopted  into  put- 
ting our  energies  into  that  system. 


ASlQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  4,  spring,  1977 


Professionalism 

Many  educated  working-class 
women  who  rise  into  a  middle-class 
income  bracket  by  working  in  the 
professional  or  semi-professional 
fields,  take  on  middle-class  ways 
and  values  as  well.  In  my  work  ex- 
perience, I  have  found  that  one  of 
the  major  middle-class  values— and 
the  one  that  operates  most  insidi- 
ously in  the  work-place— is  profes- 
sionalism. As  an  ideal,  professional- 
ism  and  the  middle-class  atti- 
tudes that  go  hand  in  hand  with  it 

are  used  to  justify  the  higher 

status  of  professionals  and  other 
middle-class  workers.  Professional- 
ism promotes  the  idea  that  middle 
and  upper-class  people  are  entitled 
to  more  "challenging/'  responsible 
and  rewarding  work  because  they 
are  more  intelligent,  dedicated,  and 
individualistic.  Their  jobs  seem  to 
bear  this  out:  doesn't  it  take  brains 
to  be  a  lawyer?  And  conversely,  if  it 
doesn't  take  brains  to  collect  gar- 
bage, garbage  collectors  must  be 
unintelligent,  or  at  least  lazy. 
People  in  San  Francisco  are  out- 
raged that  some  street  sweepers 
make  $17,000  a  year  (by  occupying 
the  crafts  category);  their  fury  de- 
rives not  from  simple  taxpayers' 
thrift  but  from  the  worker's  social 
position.  The  amount  is  only  a  frac- 
tion of  top  city  salaries. 

Not  all  middle-class  workers  are 
professionals.  But  the  ideology  of 
professionalism  keeps  both  low- 
level  white  collar  workers  and  semi- 
professionals  upwardly  identified 
and  divided  against  blue  collar 
workers.  Even  skilled  laborers  gain 
status  from  the  ideology  that  says 


they  are  better  than  common  work- 
ers. Professionalism,  then,  deter- 
mines more  than  the  internal  dy- 
namics of  professions  like  medicine 
and  law;  it  ranks  the  entire  hierar- 
chy of  jobs  according  to  a  status  sys- 
tem, ensuring  upward  identification 
and  "class  climbing." 

The  middle-class  "pride  of  profes- 
sionalism" is  supposed  to  be  an 
idealistic  commitment  to  others  or 
to  the  world.  But  professionalism, 
ostensibly  service-oriented,  still 
provides  the  means  to  control  oth- 
ers and  to  maintain  privilege  over 
them:  few  people,  especially  those 
who  are  poor  and  working-class, 
have  any  control  over  the  services 
professionals  offer  or  the  cost  of 
those  services.  And  we  have  little 
opportunity  to  change  this  pattern 
because  the  professions  are  closed 
to  those  who  cannot  or  will  not 
abide  by  middle-class  rules. 

The  professions  differ  from  other 
occupations  not  only  in  wages, 
working  conditions,  and  related  fac- 
tors, but  also  in  the  degree  they  are 
mystified,  and,  consequently,  in 
their  social  rewards  and  apparent 
value.  The  mystification  centers 
around  both  what  professionals  do 
and  who  can  be  part  of  the  group: 
knowledge  and  skills  are  closely 
guarded,  and  credentials  are  jealous- 
ly meted  out.  Professionals  all  have 
"larger  questions"  that  they  mull 
over  in  their  professional  journals 
and  at  annual  conventions.  This 
public  but  closed  discussion  sets  pro- 
fessionals off  as  concerned  with  the 
more  important  things,  and  excludes 
nonprofessionals  from  the  realm  of 
morality  and  decision-making.  The 
real  function  of  professionalism  is 


Class  Attitudes  and  Professionalism/49 


further  obscured  by  defining  it  as 
doing  the  best  job  one  can.  If  this 
were  really  the  case,  all  jobs — if  well 
done — would  have  equal  value. 
Thus  a  cook  in  a  cafeteria  may  take 


their  own  field  and  in  comparison 
with  the  male  professions.  This  ten- 
dency extends  the  feminist  message 
to  all  women:  become  doctors,  not 
nurses;  businesswomen,  not  house- 


■\  r 


pride  in  her  work,  but  her  dedica- 
tion is  not  rewarded  like  that  of  an 
upper-middle-class  professional. 
"Doing  the  best  you  can  at  the  level 
you  are"  (like  taking  pride  in  doing 
housework  for  love,  not  money)  is 
part  of  the  ideological  justification 
for  economic  inequities. 

Professionalism  is  a  big  issue  in 
the  semi-professional  fields  (teach- 
ing, nursing,  librarianship,  social 
work  and  so  on),  where  women 
predominate.  The  battlecry  of  the 
semi-professionals  is  "Upgrade!" 
Their  dangerous  proximity  to  cleri- 
cal or  menial  work  makes  them  es- 
pecially susceptible  to  the  syndrome 
of  mystification.  In  the  name  of 
feminism,  women  in  the  semi-pro- 
fessions fight  for  equal  rights,  op- 
portunities, and  salaries  both  within 


wives.  Middle-class  skills  are  seen  as 
desirable,  not  strictly  because  they 
pay  better,  but  also  because  they 
have  better  value  in  middle-class 
terms. 

But  sub-professionals  are  fight- 
ing a  losing  battle  by  aligning  them 
selves  with  higher-level  profession- 
als and  trying  to  upgrade  their  im- 
age. Attempts  to  upgrade  only  en- 
sure that  the  values  of  the  present 
economic  system  will  be  preserved. 
While  semi-professionals  gain  high- 
er status  and  salaries,  in  the  long 
run  their  interests  are  not  with  the 
rich  and  powerful.  They  don't  often 
control  their  own  working  condi- 
tions, and  their  power  over  the 
workers  they  do  supervise  is  limited. 
So  in  the  end  they  tend  to  have  the 
consciousness   and   ideology  of  the 


501  Quest 


more  powerful  sectors  without  their 
power.  Their  interests  rest  with 
non-professional  white  collar  and 
blue  collar  workers. 

Middle-Class  Norm 

Class  lines  in  the  United  States 
are  deliberately  obscured.  Few,  es- 
pecially in  the  middle  class,  will  be- 
lieve or  admit  the  degree  to  which 
our  society  is  stratified  along  class 
lines.  While  the  values  and  atti- 
tudes promoted  among  us  by  the 
higher  classes  do  not  in  themselves 
create  unequal  economic  condi- 
tions, they  do  play  an  invaluable 
role  in  rationalizing  and  disguising 
the  class  system. 

Ruling  class  ideology  says  we're 
all  middle  class,  except  for  certain 
groups  like  ethnic  minorities. 
Working-class  people  are  described 
as  "middle  class"  (or  "lower-middle 
class"),  "middle  income,"  "middle-A- 
merican," and  other  terms  imply- 
ing an  adequate,  stable  standard  of 
living.  Working  class  people,  even 
those  below  the  poverty  level,  often 
describe  themselves  in  the  same 
terms,  unwilling  to  take  on  an  iden- 
tity considered  undesirable  (just  as 
blacks  once  denied  their  blackness). 

The  idea  that  the  majority  of 
white  Americans  is  economically 
comfortable  is  far  from  the  reality. 
In  1974,  33%  of  white  families  and 
58.7%  of  Third  World  families  were 
living  below  the  lowest  of  three  hy- 
pothetical family  budgets  proposed 
by  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics. 
Fifty-eight  percent  of  white— and 
77.7%  of  Third  World— families 
were  living  below  the  Bureau's  very 
modest  "Intermediate"  budget.1* 


I  stress  the  income  of  whites  be- 
cause liberals  and  leftists  are  condi- 
tioned to  attribute  Third  World 
poverty  solely  to  racism,  but  tend 
to  categorize  the  white  working 
class  as  paunchy,  contented  Archie 
Bunker  types  or  high-paid  union 
manipulators  who've  literally 
bought  the  American  Dream.  In 
fact,  workers  in  higher-paid  work- 
ing-class jobs — carpenters,  electri- 
cians, mechanics,  plumbers,  etc. — 
who  are  at  the  lower  end  of  a  "mid- 
dle-class" standard  of  living  ($20,777 
for  an  urban  plumber's  family  of 
four  in  1974),  comprised  only  1.5% 
of  the  total  work  force  in  1969  (1.7% 
of  the  white  work  force,  0.5%  of  the 
Third  World  work  force)  and  only 
1.9%  of  the  working  class  itself 
(2.2%  of  the  white  working  class, 
0.5%  of  the  Third  World  working 
class).2  In  other  words,  this  tiny 
fraction  of  workers  is  portrayed  in 
the  middle-class  media  as  "typical." 

But  despite  the  statistics,  the 
myth  of  solidly  middle-class  America 
remains.  When  an  image  doesn't  jibe 
with  reality,  there  must  be  a  reason. 
The  twin  ideologies  of  the  middle- 
class  norm  and  professionalism  ob- 
scure real  economic  differences  and 
allow  distinctions  between  classes  to 
be  made  on  other  grounds.  If  we  are 

*Every  year,  The  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  issues  a 
hypothetical  budget  for  an  urban  family  of  four,  di- 
vided into  three  income  levels.  In  1974  the  "Lower" 
budget  was  $9,198.  (A  sample  item  was  $146.50  a 
month  for  housing;  food  was  $13.28  per  week  per  per- 
son.) The  "Intermediate"  budget  was  $14,33  3  with 
housing  $269.67  a  month  and  $17.05  for  food  per 
week,  per  person.  In  1974,  33%  of  white  American 
families  had  an  income  of  less  than  $10,000;  an- 
other 25.1%  lived  on  more  than  $10,000  but  less 
than  $15,000.  For  Third  World  people,  58.7%  were 
earning  less  than  $10,000,  and  another  19%  made 
below  $15,000. 


Class  Attitudes  and  Professionalism/51 


all  in  the  middle  class  economically, 
each  with  an  equal  chance  for  ad- 
vancement, then  observable  differ- 
ences in  status  and  wealth  must 
stem  from  other  causes,  like  differ- 
ences in  intelligence,  talent,  culture, 
creativity,  usefulness  and  morality. 

A  middle-class  woman  said  to  me 
that  those  who  rise  from  the  work- 
ing class  to  go  to  college  and  get 
good  jobs  are  "the  intelligent  ones/' 
Although  this  statement  would  be 
obviously  racist  if  directed  toward 
an  ethnic  minority,  it  is  the  prevail- 
ing view  of  the  white  working  class 
in  all  social  institutions:  media, 
schools,  libraries,  churches,  govern- 
ment. 

When  confronted  with  the  issue 
of  class,  most  people  point  to  the  hy- 
pothetical $20,000-a-year  plumber 
and  $20,000-a-year  professor,  say- 
ing that  one's  income  will  buy  as 
much  as  the  other's.  But  financial  se- 
curity and  economic  potential  in- 
volve more  than  annual  income.  The 
cultural  differences  (and  economic 
"fringe  benefits")  between  the  plum- 
ber and  the  professor  are  far-reach- 
ing, just  as  the  social  status  and  eco- 
nomic potential  of  a  white  woman  or 
a  minority  woman  or  man  is  not 
equal  to  that  of  a  white  man,  even 
when  they  earn  the  same  salary. 

Middle-class  people  tend  to  be- 
lieve either  that  working-class 
people  are  no  different,  just  under- 
privileged— just  as  men  believe  that 
women  are  weaker,  less  fortunate 
versions  of  themselves— or  that 
they  are  different  but  would  rather 
be  middle-class.  Although  the 
working  class  is  certainly  upwardly 
mobile  to  the  extent  that  they  want 
to  have  decent  things,  an  education 


for  their  children,  and  a  secure  re- 
tirement, they  do  not  necessarily 
hunger  for  the  middle-class  life. 
Working-class  life  is  demeaning, 
not  because  its  culture  or  values  are 
inferior,  but  because  of  the  lack  of 
money,  lack  of  opportunity,  lack  of 
job  responsibility,  lack  of  respect, 
lack  of  power — i.e.,  because  of  op- 
pressive treatment  of  the  working 
class  by  the  higher  classes.  (Cf .  "pe- 
nis envy.") 

Working  class  people  do  resent 
those  with  money  and  power;  they 
do  know  that  the  middle  class  is 
born  with  a  better  chance;  they  do 
feel  pride  in  doing  "hard  honest 
work"  rather  than  pushing  papers 
and  controlling  people.  But  at  the 
same  time,  they  believe  the  myth 
that  economic  insecurity  is  an  indi- 
vidual problem,  the  result  of  the 
personal  inadequacy  of  one  who 
doesn't  work  hard  enough,  and  the 
myth  that  working  with  the  mind  is 
more  important  than  working  with 
the  hands.  There  is  apology,  defen- 
siveness,  and  contradiction  in  white 
working-class  people  because  no- 
where is  their  culture  validated, 
their  opinion  solicited,  or  their  ef- 
fort rewarded.3 

Class  Snobbery 

Any  middle-class  attitude  that  is 
seen  as  superior  (class  snobbery) 
acts  in  the  same  ideological  capacity 
as  professionalism  and  the  middle- 
class  norm  by  disguising  the  real 
differences  between  classes.  Pro- 
fessionalism could  not  exist  with- 
out class  snobbery;  but  whereas  it 
is  often  defended,  class  snobbery  is 
denied  even  as  it  is  practiced. 


52lQuest 


Implicit  in  the  view  that  workers 
are  culturally  backward  oafs  who 
squander  their  riches  on  color  TV's, 
class  snobbery  has  its  basis  in  the 
belief  in  the  //superiority,,  of  the  up- 
per classes.  And  this  snobbery  ex- 
ists not  only  in  the  "establishment," 
but  also  among  the  forces  that  con- 
sider themselves  "alternative,"  and 
supportive  of  "the  workers" — that 
is,  among  younger,  hip  profession- 
als influenced  by  leftist,  feminist, 
and  counter-cultural  beliefs. 

We  are  more  dedicated. 
Professionals  are  supposedly  more 
dedicated,  more  idealistic  than  oth- 
ers— not  just  working  for  a  buck, 
but  people  who  are  truly  concerned. 
Naturally,  those  who  make  plenty 
of  money  can  pursue  ideals  beyond 
mere  money,  while  those  unimagi- 
native file  clerks  just  do  their  work 
and  take  home  their  pay  checks.  A 
clerk-typist  making  $500  a  month 
may  care  less  about  social  programs 
or  intellectual  freedom  than  about 
her  annual  raise,  but  then  she's 
never  consulted  about  these  issues. 
She  is  no  less  "dedicated"  for  being 
dedicated  to  survival.4 

Radical  teachers,  social  workers, 
lawyers,  and  other  professionals 
often  raise  valid  issues  that  affect 
us  all,  but  it  is  unreasonable  to  ex- 
pect clerical  or  other  workers  to 
rise  above  their  place  in  the  hierar- 
chy to  join  in  a  political  struggle 
with  people  who  don't  recognize 
their  own  material  privileges  and 
class  biases.  Similarly,  middle-class 
women  in  lower-level  jobs  often 
identify  with  broader  issues;  their 
background  makes  them  more  will- 
ing and  able  to  risk  "shit  jobs"  over 


political  issues.  Frequently,  they 
can't  understand  why  their  co- 
workers seem  to  want  to  preserve 
the  status  quo;  they  interpret  as  reac- 
tionary certain  attitudes  they  don't 
understand. 

We  are  less  bourgeois. 
One  of  the  contradictions  in  our  so- 
ciety is  that  the  working  class  gets 
dumped  on  for  being  "bourgeois" — 
materialistic,  security-conscious, 
and  conventional — all  classic  defini- 
tions of  middle-class  behavior.  Fem- 
inists, liberals,  and  other  hip  people 
are  opposed  to  everything  that's 
"straight"  or  "plastic."  But  without 
a  class  perspective,  this  approach 
lumps  the  working  class  in  with 
those  who  actually  run  the  system. 
Here  are  some  examples  of  "rejec- 
tions" of  bourgeois  values  that  actu- 
ally support  those  values:5 
— Middle-class  feminists  often  feel 
superior  to  women  who  want  to  or 
must  wear  dresses,  makeup,  bras, 
and  other  survival  gear.  Middle- 
class  women  can  often  flaunt  dress 
rules  or  can  afford  the  more  mascu- 
line attire  that  is  currently  fashion- 
able; working-class  women  fre- 
quently have  to  work  harder  to 
maintain  an  acceptable  feminine  im- 
age— a  "liberated"  working-class 
woman  may  be  considered  a  slut. 
— The  romanticization  of  poverty — 
and  the  resulting  downward  mobili- 
ty— is  common  not  only  among 
those  who  actually  drop  out  of  the 
system,  but  among  working  profes- 
sionals and  semi-professionals  who 
disguise  their  earnings  through  a 
downwardly-mobile  lifestyle  (old 
clothes,  communal  living,  etc.)  or 
find  "meaningful"  part-time  work 


Class  Attitudes  and  Professionalism/53 


that  offers  a  comfortable  wage. 
— Those  who  think  they  are  defect- 
ing from  the  middle  class  are  al- 
ways on  guard  against  bourgeois 
tendencies  in  themselves  and  oth- 
ers. It's  a  form  of  puritanism.  A- 
mong  most  radical  and  counter-cul- 
tural adherents,  one  must  rational- 
ize (or  not  get  caught)  enjoying  any 
kind  of  mass  culture.  Depending  on 
the  political  or  esthetic  conscious- 
ness of  the  peer  group,  there  is 
pressure  not  to  watch  big  league 
football,  eat  junk  food,  play  cards, 
go  bowling,  watch  TV  except  for 
"serious"  programs,  or  go  to  the 
movies  except  for  "heavy"  films.  I 
share  the  legitimate  objections  to- 
ward what  big  business  tries  to 
shove  down  our  throats,  to  "plas- 
tic" American  culture,  "consumer- 
ism," and  so  forth.  But  self-right- 
eously  judging  the  masses  of  people 
for  not  having  one's  good  taste  is 
simply  another  form  of  middle- 
class  elitism. 

We  are  more  liberated. 
Professional  and  semi-professional 
feminists  almost  invariably  confuse 
their  "liberated"  lifestyles  with 
some  kind  of  personal  or  political 
choice,  rather  than  view  it  as  a  priv- 
ilege of  their  economic  security.  In 
this  way,  "feminism"  becomes  just 
another  indicator  of  middle-class 
supremacy.  Liberation  defined  as 
personal  freedom  from  sex  roles  is 
a  purely  middle-class  phenomenon. 
Middle-class  women  gain  by  get- 
ting some  of  the  jobs  their  hus- 
bands or  fathers  once  monopolized. 
Middle-class  men  gain  still  more  by 
increasing  their  options  to  include 
expressing  their  feelings,  working 


part-time  or  taking  nontraditional 
jobs,  and  becoming  more  passive  in 
relation  to  women  and  family  re- 
sponsibilities. Working-class  wo- 
men have  long  been  "liberated"  to 
work  but  their  jobs  are  not  of  the 
responsible,  rewarding  variety. 
Working-class  men  have  much  less 
economic  and  cultural  leeway  than 
middle-class  men  for  making 
changes  in  the  traditional  family 
(like  part-time  jobs  for  husband 
and  wife)  and  giving  up  the  little 
power  they  have  in  this  world.  The 
idea  that  working-class  men  are 
more  sexist  than  middle-class  men 
is  based  on  the  truism  that  the 
more  money  and/or  power  you 
have,  the  less  obvious  and  crude 
you  have  to  be  to  fuck  over  wo- 
men. Although  sex  roles  certainly 
exist  in  the  working  class,  they  are 
more  visible  there  precisely  be- 
cause of  economic  oppression. 

We  are  more  liberal. 
Many  feminists  emerged  from  the 
white  male  left  where  workers  are 
romanticized,  like  nineteenth-cen- 
tury proletarians  coming  out  of  the 
factories  with  fists  raised.  "Work- 
ers" are  almost  always  men,  who 
work  in  factories  or  drive  trucks; 
their  wives  aren't  workers  unless 
they  work  in  factories  too;  and  their 
daughters  are  never  workers,  espec- 
ially if  they  go  to  college.  But  the 
left's  view  of  class  is  confused  and 
romantic.  "Rednecks,"  for  instance, 
are  despised  for  sitting  in  front  of 
the  boob  tube,  voting  for  George 
Wallace,  and  being  disagreeable 
when  young  male  revolutionaries 
come  to  work  in  the  factory.  The 
working  class,  engulfed  in  its  con- 


54/  Quest 


tradictions,  is  dismissed  as  counter- 
revolutionary, even  as  its  fictional 
or  historical  counterpart  is  exalted.6 
The  ruling  class  encourages  this 
portrayal  of  the  working  class  be- 
cause it  further  divides  middle-class 
liberals  and  leftists  from  their  tra- 


ditional allies.  Most  middle-class 
people  have  no  firsthand  know- 
ledge of  the  working  class  because 
their  living  situations  and  often 
their  jobs  are  completely  segre- 
gated. Their  ideas  about  the  work- 
ing class  are  governed  by  media  im- 


Class  Attitudes  and  Professionalism/55 


ages  like  "All  in  the  Family"  and  by 
commentators  and  academics  who 
expound  on  the  working  class  as 
the  new  reactionary  force  in 
America.7 

That  the  working  class  is  the  last 
bastion  of  racism  in  this  country  is 
a  popular  view  among  many  obser- 
vers. Because  middle-class  people 
don't  themselves  have  to  deal  with 
changing  schools  and  neighbor- 
hoods, they  can  afford  to  be  terribly 
"tolerant"  and  abstract  about  race 
relations:  to  be  against  busing  is 
automatically  to  be  a  racist;  to  be  a- 
fraid  of  one's  neighborhood  turning 
into  a  slum  is  to  be  a  racist.  I  am  not 
denying  that  racism  may  be  an  im- 
portant motive,  and  that  there 
might  be  a  tendency  for  poor  or 
struggling  whites  to  fear  and  hate 
blacks  even  more  for  being  just  be- 
low them  on  the  social  scale  and, 
therefore,  threatening.  But  work- 
ing-class people  control  only  their 
own  feelings,  not  institutions.  It  is 
those  in  positions  of  power — the 
politicians,  the  bankers,  the  real  es- 
tate brokers — who  use  racism  to 
further  their  own  ends,  who  profit 
from  containing  the  rage  of  black 
people  to  certain  parts  of  town,  to 
certain  groups  of  whites.  For  exam- 
ple, through  "redlining,"  banks  can 
restrict  housing  loans  for  blacks  to 
any  areas  they  choose,  controlling 
the  racial  composition  of  a  neigh- 
borhood. Through  "blockbusting," 
real  estate  agents  encourage  white 
residents  to  sell  "while  they  can" 
and  inflame  the  fears  of  people  who 
in  many  cases  have  lived  in  a  close- 
knit  ethnic  neighborhood  all  their 
lives.  These  people  don't  want  their 
neighborhood  to  "turn" —  not  be- 


cause they  have  a  particular  aver- 
sion to  black  skin,  but  because  they 
know  city  services  will  decline,  their 
children  will  confront  racial  ten- 
sions in  the  schools,  and  they — not 
the  bankers,  politicians,  or  intellect- 
uals— will  have  the  consequences  of 
years  of  racism,  poverty,  and  ne- 
glect dumped  on  their  doorsteps. 


We  will  define  class. 
If  an  educated  working-class  wo- 
man tries  to  confront  middle-class 
women  about  class,  they  tell  her 
that  she  is  not  working-class  any 
more,  so  what's  the  fuss?  Accord- 
ing to  the  stereotypes,  she  can't  be 
working-class  if  she  went  to  col- 
lege, seems  intelligent,  cares  about 
larger  issues,  has  good  table  man- 
ners, or  likes  the  arts.  If  she  acts 
and  talks  middle-class,  she  must 
have  "become"  middle-class.8  But 
education  and  a  good  job  don't  turn 
a  black  person  white  and  they  don't 
negate  a  white  working-class  per- 
son's background  or  her  continuing 
financial  needs.  A  working-class 
woman  who  borrows  money  to  go 
to  college,  then  gets  a  $10,000 
teaching  job  and  buys  a  new  car  and 
a  new  wardrobe  may  pass  for  mid- 
dle-class, but  her  life  experience 
and  outlook  are  still  different,  and 
her  economic  security  is  more  tenu- 
ous than  that  of  a  middle-class  wo- 
man in  the  same  apparent  (or 
"poorer")  circumstances.  Among 
other  things,  they  may  differ  in  fi- 
nancial responsibilities  (especially  as 
relatives  age),  sources  of  financial 
help  during  unemployment  or  ill- 
ness, sources  of  loans,  favors,  or 
gifts   (including  inheritance),  desire 


56lQuest 


for  material  possessions,  and  need 
for  security. 

If  ruling-class  ideology  says  we're 
all  middle-class,  leftist  ideology 
tends  to  say  we're  all  working-class 
(except  for  the  bosses).  Though  it  is 
important  for  middle-class  people  to 
understand  that  their  interests  are 
not  with  the  ruling  class  but  with  all 
working  people,  it  is  irresponsible  to 
pretend  that  common  interest  is  the 
same  as  common  oppression.  To  be 
"for  the  workers"  without  examin- 
ing one's  own  class  background  and 
attitudes,  and  to  claim  to  be  work- 
ing class  by  virtue  of  an  abstract 
"consciousness"  leads  only  to  obfus- 
cation  of  real  issues. 


gressive"  ways  of  dividing  people  a- 
long  class  lines,  some  healthy  alli- 
ances might  be  formed  between 
more  privileged  and  less  privileged 
workers.  Among  working-class  wo- 
men who  go  to  college  and  enter 
semi-professional  fields,  there  is  at 
least  a  dormant  understanding  of 
class  and  an  impetus  for  changing 
elitist  attitudes  among  their  co- 
workers who  have  middle-class 
backgrounds.  The  combatting  of 
professionalism  at  this  level  would 
do  a  great  deal  toward  exposing  the 
economic  (class)  basis  of  cultural  at- 
titudes and  realigning  the  interests 
of  semi-professionals  with  the 
working  class. 


Class  and  Professionalism 

By    combatting    both    traditional 
professionalism  and  the  more  "pro- 


An  earlier  version  of  this  article  was  pub- 
lished in  Booklegger  Magazine 
(Spring,  1976)  published  at  555-29th  St., 
San  Francisco,  CA,  94131. 


Class  Attitudes  and  Professionalism/57 


Footnotes 

HJ.S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  "Autumn 
1974  Urban  Family  Budgets."  For  more  thor- 
ough examinations  of  the  incredibly  confus- 
ing statistics  that  relate  to  class,  see  (a)  Judah 
Hill,  Class  Analysis:  United  States  in  the  197 O's 
(1975),  available  from  P.O.  Box  8494,  Em- 
eryville, CA  94662;  and  (b)  Andrew  Levison, 
The  Working-Class  Majority  (New  York:  Pen- 
guin, 1974). 

2U.S.  Statistical  Abstracts,   1975,  p.  390. 

3Class  Analysis,  p.  39. 

4For  an  entire  book  on  the  subject,  see 
Richard  Sennett  and*  Jojnathon  Cobb,  The 
Hidden  Injuries  of  Class  (New  York:  Random 
House,  1972). 

5See  Charlotte  Bunch  and  Nancy  Myron, 
eds.,  Class  and  Feminism  (Baltimore:  Diana 
Press,  1974),  especially  Rita  Mae  Brown, 
"The  Last  Straw,"  and  Tasha  Petersen, 
"Gimme  Shelter." 


6But  see  Class  Analysis  for  an  extremely 
useful  breakdown  of  the  class  system  today, 
a  leftist  analysis  that  takes  women,  minori- 
ties, and  the  media-inspired  image  of  the 
"reactionary"  worker  into  account. 

7In  one  important  area — sociology — the 
trend  is  finally  beginning  to  change.  See  es- 
pecially Lillian  Breslow  Rubin,  Worlds  of  Pain: 
Life  in  the  Working-Class  Family  (New  York:  Ba- 
sic Books,  1976). 

8See  "Ways  of  Avoiding  Class  Conscious- 
ness," Women:  A  Journal  of  Liberation,  Vol.  2, 
No.  3,  p.  49;  and  Class  and  Feminism,  especially 
"The  Last  Straw"  and  "Revolution  Begins  at 
Home,"  by  Charlotte  Bunch  and  Coletta 
Reid. 


Mary  McKenney  is  a  copy  editor  in  San 
Francisco,  and  has  written  for  several  li- 
brary-related publications. 


edeentRie 


"A  voice  no  one  concerned  with  education  can  ignore"      Jonathan  Kozol 

EDCENTRIC  publishes  both  general  and  special  issues.  Issue  ff  38- Educations/  Resource  Guide  is  a  special 
directory  featuring  listings  that  are  selected  especially  to  keep  you  in  touch  with  new  educational  materials 
and  programs  growing  out  of  the  struggle  for  change.  Listings  include  curriculum  materials,  organizations, 
bibliographies,  media,  periodicals  and  other  important  tools  that  you  probably  won't  find  elsewhere. Subscribe 
today  and  receive  this  valuable  guide  or  any  other  issues  listed  below  as  a  free  sample. 


"Among  journals  of  change  in 

education,  EDCENTRIC  is  one  of  the 

best." 

—  Bill  Katz,  Library  Journal 


"Dedicated  to  radical  educational 
change  EDCENTRIC  is  a  truth-speak 
in  that  cause." 
—  Whole  Earth  Epilog 


EDCENTRIC:  A  Journal  of  Educational  Change  sup- 
ports people  working  to  change  education  and  to 
make  change  through  education.  EDCENTRIC  re- 
flects the  deepening  awareness  of  the  role  schools 
play  in  supporting  the  present  social  structure  and  of 
the  important  part  they  can  play  in  transforming  it. 


edeentme 

P.O.  Box  10085 
Eugene,  OR  97401 

\~]  I'd  like  a  sample  copy  for  $  1 .  25 
Please  send  issue  #  . . 

□  Payment  Enclosed  j 


DID  LIKE  A  Four-Issue 
SUBSCRIPTION  TO  EDCENTRIC.  I'll 
also  receive  as  a  free  sample  issue 

SUBSCRIPTION  RATES: 
Four  Issues  (One  Year) 
I  for  individuals,  $10  for  institutions 


City 


Zip 


58lQuest 


Primavera 


A  Unique  Women's  Magazine 

Original  Poetry,  Prose,  and  Graphics 
with  "Grey  Matter,  Guts,  and  Gender" 

We  present  works  representing  a  wide  variety  of 
styles  and  feminine  perspectives;  and  especially  en- 
courage new  women  writers  of  all  ages,  origins,  and 
destinations. 

Past  contributors  have  included  Anne  Sexton's  student, 
Arlene  Stone,  Marya  Argetsinger  Smith;  Saul  Bellow's 
student,  author  Shouri  Daniels,  and  Artemisia  Gallery's 
Nancy  Redmond. 

Future  issues  will  offer  works  by  Lyn  Lifshin  and  Vera  Berdich 
of  the  Art  Institute  of  Chicago 

"...  a  magazine  that  wishes  to  capture  the  breaking  bud 
urgency  of  creating  a  woman's  culture." — Off  Our  Backs 

"...  Vital,  haunting,  beautiful." — Paul  Carroll,  Chicago 
Magazine 

"...  the  library  with  a  good  feminist  collection  should 
not  miss  this  anthology  of  women  writers  and  artists." 
—  Library  Journal 


3 


r^ef 


Subscriptions 

□  Please  enter  my  3-year  retroactive  charter  subscrip- 
tion, to  include  Issues  I,  II,  and  III:  $9.50 

□  Please  enter  my  2-year  subscription,  to  include 
Issues  III  and  IV:  $6.50 

□  Please  send copies  of:  □   Issue  I  ©  $3.20 

□   Issue  II  ©$3.70     □   Issue  III  ©$3.90 

Postage  is  included  on  all  orders.  I 

Name  

Address  _ 
City   


State/Country 


Zip 


Please  mail  your  check  or  purchase  order  to: 
Primavera,  Ida  Noyes  Hall,  University  of 
Chicago,  Chicago,  Illinois  60637 


h 


in 


59 


etters 


As  a  Third  World 
Feminist,  a  student  in 
Ethnomusicology,  a  per- 
former of  Belly  Dance 
and  a  researcher  in  Eth- 
nic Dance  in  general,  I 
would  like  to  voice  my 
reaction  to  the  article, 
"Lifting  the  Veil  of 
Isis",  an  interview  with 
Daniella  Gioseffi,  pp. 
70-76  in  the  Fall,  1976 
issue  of  Quest. 

Although  such  an  ar- 
ticle needs  to  be  writ- 
ten about  the  origins 
and  purpose  of  the  Bel- 
ly Dance,  I  was  some- 
what appalled  by  the 
lack  of  scholarship  and 
choice  of  words  on  the 
part  of  Ms.  Gioseffi  in 
presenting  the  history 
of  the  dance.  The  ori- 
gins are  still  speculative 
though  one  fact  can  be 
stated:  this  dance  was 
and  is  still  performed 
by  the  common  people 
in  North  Africa  (Egypt 
included).  Very  little  is 
known  as  to  the  origins 
of  where  the  dance  ori- 
ginated but  it  would 
seem    to    me    that    the 


dance  has  an  AFRICAN 
rather  than  an  Asian 
origin  from  two  facts: 
(1)  the  movements 
from  the  stomach  and 
hips  is  common  in 
many  dances  on  the 
Continent  and  (2)  the 
dominance  of  these 
movements  in  the 
dances  of  the  peoples  of 
Northern  Africa,  espec- 
ially the  Berbers  and 
Atlas  peoples  who  rep- 
resent pre-Islamic  cul- 
tures where  the  status 
of  women  is  relatively 
high  compared  to  the 
traditional  Islamic  sta- 
tus. The  childbirth  con- 
cept is  basically  African 
— such  a  dance  is  part 
of  the  Berber  reper- 
toire as  well  as  part  of 
certain  Central  African 
groups.  The  mating 
concept  is  also  there  in 
the  Belly  Dance— the 
applications  of  the 
movements  reflect  an 
active  participation  of 
the  woman  in  coitus. 
Whether  the  mating  or 
childbirth  concept  pre- 
dominates in  the  Belly 


Dance  I  don't  know, 
but  the  woman's  use  of 
the  movements  in  her 
dance  does  reflect  on 
whether  her  status  as  a 
creator  of  life  is  most 
important  in  that  cul- 
ture. Ms.  Gioseffi  may 
not  know  this,  but 
there  are  a  couple  of  re- 
gions in  the  Middle 
East  and  several  in  Af- 
rica where  only  the  men 
move  the  hips  and 
stomach.  But  there  are 
many  more  areas  where 
only  the  women  move 
these  parts,  areas  like 
Africa  and  Micronesia, 
and  it  may  reflect  the 
ancient  matriarchal 
heritage  of  Woman  as 
the  Giver  of  Life.  There 
are  areas  where  both 
men  and  women  use 
the  hip  and  stomach 
movements  (Africa  and 
Polynesia)  but  even  in 
the  case  of  both,  it  is 
usually  the  women 
with  the  more  active 
part.  Ms.  Gioseffi 
speaks  of  "birth  dances" 
in  many  parts  of  the 
world.     I     don't     know 


601  Quest 


where  she  got  her  in- 
formation from  but 
there  has  never  been  a 
"birth  dance"  so  to 
speak  in  Oceania  (refer- 
ring to  Micronesia  and 
Polynesia).  For  five 
years,  I  studied  the 
dances  of  the  Pacific 
and  I  can  safely  attest 
that  Eastern  Polynesia 
(i.e.,  Hawaii,  Tahiti, 
Marquesas,  etc.  where 
the  hips  are  used)  had 
no  "birth  dance".  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  hula 
of  Old  Hawaii  was  per- 
formed primarily  by 
men  until  the  advent  of 
later  migrations  from 
Tahiti.  Even  then,  wo- 
men performed  mostly 
when  the  men  went  to 
war.  The  hula  was  sac- 
red and  remained  so 
even  when  women  per- 
formed it,  because  the 
Female  Principle  was 
there  (represented  as 
Laka  who  was  both  fe- 
male and  male  ).  On 
the  Big  Island  of  Ha- 
waii, the  hula  reached 
higher  goals  for  women 
as  it  was  dedicated  to 
Pele,  the  main  goddess 
of  the  Hawaiian  people 
(who  is  still  respected  to 
this  day)  and  Hi'iaka, 
her  sister.  Tahiti's  otea 
(the  fast  hip  dance)  was 
traditionally  performed 
after  a  series  of  slower, 


more  sacred  dances 
(which  are  no  longer 
performed)  done  by 
both  men  and  women. 
The  otea  was  a  dance  of 
mating  and  women  are 
the  most  actively  in- 
volved. 

For  Ms.  Gioseffi  to 
use  such  words  as 
"primitive"  and  "hocus 
pocus"  is  highly  un- 
scholarly  and  ego-cen- 
tric and  would  leave  the 
serious  dancer  with  the 
tendency  to  take  her 
statements  with  little 
more  than  a  grain  of 
salt!  It's  fine  if  she's 
creating  her  own  thing 
and  she  should  define 
herself  as  doing  so  and 
be  cautious  of  stating 
outright  what  used  to 
exist  if  the  evidence  is 
scarce.  What  a  dance 
was  like  CANNOT  be 
determined  fully  from 
imprints  or  paintings 
on  walls!  Furthermore, 
apart  from  Ms.  Giosef- 
fi's  creation,  there  are 
many  kinds  of  Belly 
Dance  recognized  by 
those  in  the  tradition — 
the  Cafe  style  is  only 
one  construction.  To 
complicate  matters, 
there  is  a  DIFFERENCE 
to  what  is  danced  here 
in  cafes  and  what  is 
danced  in  Egypt,  Leba- 
non,     Syria,      Turkey, 


Greece,  Tunisia,  need  I 


go  on 


?? 


I  think  I  have  covered 
much  of  the  spottiness 
of  what  Ms.  Gioseffi 
had  to  say  but  I  am  con- 
cerned about  the  quali- 
ty of  what  is  said  in 
your  quarterly  about 
the  Arts!  In  the  end,  it 
reflects  the  knowledge 
and  substance  of  those 
who  are  feminists  and 
that  bothers  me!  In  the 
future,  I  suggest  more 
thorough  articles 
should  be  written  on 
Arts  and  how  they  ap- 
ply to  women  in  such  a 
style  that  I  and  many 
others  who  face  the 
world  of  the  Arts  from 
day  to  day  can  be  proud 
to  show  the  skill  of 
your  journal  to  anyone! 
Thank  you. 
Sincerely  yours, 
Ms.  Beverly  Mendheim 


DEAR  Quest, 

After  exhaustive  (I'm 
not  kidding)  considera- 
tion of  letters  to  the  ed- 
itor, last  issue,  I  have 
come  to  this  conclu- 
sion: Thanks  to  Carol 
P.  Christ  for  making 
resoundingly  clear  to 
me — though  she  did 
not  mean  to  do  this — 
who  the  real  separatists 
are:     straight     women 


who  won't  face  the  is- 
sue of  heterosexism  (+ 
even  sexism).  She  sep- 
arates from  us  and 
threatens  withdrawal 
of  support  from  Quest 
over  the  very  issue  she 
insists  is  not  the  issue. 
Enough  said! 

Personally,  I  have 
found  some  straight 
women  who  are  femi- 
nists who  get  very  hurt 
and  rejected  when  they 
are  not  accepted  as  les- 
bians by  lesbians;  when 
they  have  no  real  un- 
derstanding of  what 
my  lifestyle  and  convic- 
tions mean  —  either 
day-to-day  or  for  the 
future.  Though  I  want 
to  stay  open  to  all  wo- 
men— on  some  level  at 
least — this  lack  of  un- 
derstanding is  hard  to 
take.  However,  action 
is  empty  if  it  does  not 
spring  from  a  real  per- 
sonal necessity  and  dif- 
ferent games  will  come 
from  different  sources. 
I  only  hope  Quest  can 
survive  without  the 
women  to  whom  real 
change  from  the  heter- 
osexual (or  in  any  sense 
sexist — regardless  of 
sexuality)  cage  is  too 
threatening  to  think 
about. 

To  the  end  of  real 
change  and  alternatives 


offering  a  real  choice  to 
all  women — not  the 
phallacy  known  as 
//choice,/,  the  article 
about  the  Alpha  Ome- 
gas was  best,  as  Flying 
Clouds  said. 

Abby  M.  Light 
Brooklyn,  New  York 


Dear  Quest, 

I  recently  began  a 
subscription  to  Quest, 
partly  because  I  want  to 
learn  what  my  lesbian 
sisters  are  saying,  and  I 
want  to  analyze  the 
heterosexist  structures 
of  which  I  am  a  part.  I 
could  not  possibly  do 
the  latter  without  get- 
ting a  Quest-type  per- 
spective, because  I  lack 
the  necessary  objectivi- 
ty. Furthermore  I  find 
many  of  your  articles 
relevant  to  women,  re- 
gardless of  sexual  pref- 
erence. I  do  hope  wo- 
men who  do  not  label 
themselves  lesbians 
will  continue  to  sub- 
scribe, for  dialogue — as 
well  as  love — among  us 
all  is  necessary  for  our 
movement  to  succeed. 

Judith  Pruess 

Berkeley,  California 


Dear  Quest, 

I've    just    finished 


reading  my  first  copy  of 
Quest  and  am  tremen- 
dously impressed  and 
amazed  to  have  discov- 
ered such  a  fascinating 
magazine.  I  didn't  find 
any  of  the  articles  diffi- 
cult to  read  as  men- 
tioned in  the  letters 
section;  in  fact,  it  was  a 
relief  to  pick  up  a  maga- 
zine and  have  my  mind 
stretched  a  little!  I  en- 
joyed it  so  much  I'd  like 
to  catch  up  on  what  I've 
been  missing  so  please 
send  me  the  bound  vol- 
umes. 

Marsha  J.  Ward 
Rochester,  New  York 


To  the  Staff  of  Quest, 

Just  received  our  la- 
test in  the  mail,  and 
thumbed  through  it. 
Decided  to  immediately 
send  off  a  check  to  you 
...to  say  in  a  way  that 
we  believe  in  what  you 
are  doing.  Eugenia  just 
called  out  a  thought  to 
you-"Don't  soft  pedal 
your  intelligence!"  (in 
answer  to  a  recent  criti- 
cism that  Quest  was  too 
hard  to  read!!)Hooray 
for  you! 
In  support, 
Eugenia  Forehand 

Lemon 
Nancy  Markowe 
St.  Augustine,  Florida 


62lQuest 


"  .  .  .  substantial,  scholarly,  and  interesting.  Indeed,  it  could 
become  the  most  important  periodical  in  the  field."— Choice 


QI/-NK  |Q,  Journal  of  Women 
DlwlNO.  in  Culture  and  Society 

Established  in  Autumn  1975  to  provide  a  forum  for  the  new 
scholarship  about  women,  Signs  publishes  articles  and  criticism  in 
a  broad  range  of  academic  disciplines. 

Representative  articles 
from  volume  1 

Carroll  Smith-Rosenberg,  The  Female  World  of  Love  and  Ritual:  Relations 

between  Women  in  Nineteenth-Century  America 
Elizabeth  Hardwick,  Reflections  on  Simone  Weil 
Gertrud  Lenzer,  On  Masochism:  A  Contribution  to  the  History  of  a  Phantasy 

and  Its  Theory 
William  J.  Bremner  and  David  M.  de  Kretser,  Contraceptives  for  Males 
Nancy  Tanner  and  Adrienne  Zihlman,  Women  in  Evolution.  Part  I:  Innovation 

and  Selection  in  Human  Origins 
Nancy  E.  Williamson,  Sex  Preferences,  Sex  Control,  and  the  Status  of 

Women 

Supplements  and 
special  issues 

Signs  also  published  a  supplementary  issue  in  volume  1 ,  Women  and  the 
Workplace:  The  Implications  of  Occupational  Segregation  (now  available  in 
cloth  and  paperback)  and  began  volume  2  with  a  special  issue  devoted  to 
The  Women  of  China  (Autumn  1976). 

Published  quarterly  by  The  University  of  Chicago  Press 
Catharine  R.  Stimpson,  editor 


Order  Form  Signs:  Journal  of  Women  in  Culture  and  Society 

Three-year  charter  subscription  rates  (beginning  with  vol.  1 ,  no.  1 ) 

tl  Institutions  $40 .00  Individuals  $30.00  Students  $24.00  (with  faculty 

signature) 
One-year  subscription  rates  i      Institutions  $20.00  Individuals  $15.00 

"  1  Students  $12  00  (with  faculty  signature) 
In  countries  other  than  USA  add  $1 .50  per  year  for  postage. 

Please  send  me  information  about  Women  and  the  Workplace. 

Name 

Address  

City    State/Country    Zip    

Please  mail  with  your  check  or  purchase  order  to  The  University  of  Chicago  Press, 
11030  Langley  Avenue,  Chicago,  Illinois  60628. 

12/6 

Que 


63 


glow,  1/tytette& 


Writing  By  Ahshe 

Graphics  by  Shari  McCoul 


■',     ***** 


7&e  alt  fave  *ule  60064,  o£  oufat't,  done 
and  cv6*t'<i  not  done.  ;4U  t6e  fco&tijkltft&i 
o£  dealing  cuit6>  any  ftno6le*K  one  coitAcK 
t6e4e  tale  6006&.  Sotneoue  el&e  6a&  anotfen, 
tcde  6006  and  6&1  fio44i6itiiie&  one  ut  it. 
S6e  may  neve*  6ho#i  t&at  my  6006  exi&fo  0* 


64lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  4,  spring,  1977 


**.:: 


me  6en&.  0ta44,  title  60*64,  and  t6e  intenac- 
&oh4,  6etcueeH  tAent  o^teK  lead  to  clatAe*, 
and  coh£u4iok.  1  come  out  o£  my  tule  6006 
and  you  cone  out  o£  yottnA,  and  t&e*t  tAene  C& 
4o*Heti*He&  t6e  cta4&,  and  Htottly  it  doe&  in- 
deed tead  to  a  tot  <x£  coh^Uok  and  flout. 


Class  Vignettes/65 


^  c/occ'ne  wo>t6inq>-cla&&,  you  don't  tave 
muc&  money,  fy  you  tave  tfou*  money, 
tontetfanp  i&  yonna  Aafifien,  U4e  you*  old 
tody  i&  youna  yet  fvteynant and  you  U 6ave 
to  pay  fa*  6e*  *6o*tion.  tyou  mi$6t  }u4t  a& 
cvell  attend  t6e  money  today  6efa*e  t6e 
emenyency  a*iAe&.  ;4l&o>,  i£  you  come  into 
money  ovAen  you'ne  cvo*6inq<-cla44,  you'd 
fino&z6ly  yiue  it  acuay.  tyou  wouldn't  tfanA 
o£  putting  it  away  fa*  a  6ette*  afiattntent 
<vi  4omet£iny  U6e  an  inductance  policy.  Ttty 


661  Quest 


ma  to  t6i4,  day  6eefi&  money  all  ove*  t6e 
6ou4e.  tyou'd  find  it  undent  tAe  tup,  in 
tocfo,  in  dnaouen&;  Kotfan^'t,  in  t6e  6an6. 
S6e  4tUf&,  "tyou  neve*  6noui  ouit&  tAe  econ- 
omy t&e4£  day<i,  it  miy&t  fall  o*  4ome- 
tfany.   *)  ain't  putting  it  in  ho-  6an&. ' 

Ifou*    middle-claw,  fieofile    6elieve   in, 
aavinfy  money.  *76ey  tifanA  i£  you  &ave  mon- 
ey you  can  yet  educated,  6uy  a  6ou4e  o* 
can,    cud   c£a*tce&   one   i£  an   etKenyency 
comet  ufi  it  ain't  yonna  ouifie  out  eveny- 
tfcny.   *7&ey  even  &ave  fan  emenyenci&i.  *)t 
€vo*i6&  fan  t6em.  7(J6en  t6ey  aave  t£ein  mon- 
ey, t6ey  one  a6le  to  6uy  t6at  can  on  ta6e 
that  vacation,,  ^ut  a  ouon6infy-cla44,  fien&on 
6kow4,  it' 4,  ttuftid  fan  t6e*K  to  4ave  money 
fan  a  vacation  tAey'te  neve*  yonna  yet.  1 
ouxutt  to  too&  at  t6e  6ienane6ical  ttnuctune 
o£  society,  tyou  6ave  t&e  ccfrfren  claw,  on  tofi, 
t6e  middle  cla&&  4andtvie6ed  in  6eUveen 
and  t6e  loiven  cta4&  on  t£e  bottom.   *76ene 
one  a  lot  o£  4imilanitie4,  tettoeet  t6e  two 
piece*,  o£  6nead  in  t6i4,  4andudc6>,  6etcueen 
cvon6iny-cla44,    and    ufcfien-cla&a    cvomen. 
*7&ey  one  aimilan  fan  ueny  dififanent  nea- 


Class  Vignettes/67 


4***4,  7{Jon6iHp-claA4,  people  Relieve  cu 
tue&.  7{ppe*-cta44,  people  6koui  tfat  too. 
*7&ey  6hocv  t6at  everuft6utfy  61  a  ycwtltte. 
7to#t  Ht£cUUe-cla4&  people  6el£eve  ut  6anct 
ouonA.  *7&ey  t6i*t&  t&zt  t£  you  cuonA  &and, 
you  yet  ctAead.  tyou  can  6e  eccentnic  6k  tAe 
evo>i6iHty  cla44,  6ecau4e  you  've  fot Hot&iHf>  to 
lote.  *)k  t6e  uppesi  claw,  you  cau  6e  eccet- 
tncc  too,  6ecau4e  you  cau  a^ond  it.  tyou  cau 
play  out  yowi  frttttadie^,  you  cau  play  out 
youn  <Otea*H&  6ecau4e  you  6ave  t6e  meant,. 


s4tl  t6o4e  ctAon6iH$,-clci&&  people  6ave  6cy 
c(ne4AU&  too.  *76ecf%e  all  yonnaGe  neat  nic6>, 
not  ?u4t  yet  aAead  autd  yet  educated,  ^i&e 
one  t^ey'ie  youua  6e  nicAr  and  famous — 6iq> 


681  Quest 


cOtea*K& — cve'ie  yonna  &ave  evem/tAuty,  coe 
cuant.  76e  (vonld  c&  f&ma,  6e  ju&t  ncyAt  fan, 
at,.  TVe'ie  yonna  6aue  a  teA&OH,  nation,, 
fiantiet  all  t6e  tunc,  faod  cOtofifuH^  front, 
t6e  46cf,  Ko6odcf4,  yonna  6ave  to  cvon&,  eue- 
nif6ocUf4,  gonna  yet  cOuat&  all  t6e  tune  and 
love,  eacA,  ot&en,.  76e£*dnea*H4,a>teKt6&4£d 
on  nealttcf,  and  tAat't,  6and  fan,  vtyanifinq,. 
*)t'4,6andto  yet  cUumc  to  t6e  cUdltfAAtt  <tfu££ 
cvAen  you,  dont  Relieve  in  famd  cuonA.  Tl/e 
cuotA,  6and  fait  cute  don't  t6in&  tAat  &04, 
aniftAiny,  to  do  ccdtA  it.  *)t'4,  tnue,  coonfany, 
fated  doesn't  6ave  to  do  cuitA  antftAiny,  en 
tAe  wonAinq,  claw,. 


Class  Vignettes/69 


An  Open 
Letter 
to  the  Academy 


By  MICHELE  RUSSELL 

graphics  by  Sue  Kahan 

It's  not  as  simple  as  talkin  jive:  the  daily 

struggle  just  to  stay  alive.     Nina  Simone 

Revolution  I 

The  starting  points  for  my  re- 
marks on  women  in  the  academy 
are  historical  and  situational,  per- 
sonal and  political:  categories  that 
the  women's  movement  has  en- 
couraged us  to  connect  but  not  to 
debase.  I  speak  as  someone  who 
was  born  into  a  revolutionary  soci- 
alist tradition,  who  has  had  the 
benefit  of  what  Westerners  call  a 
"classical  humanist  education/7  who 
has  defined  teaching  as  her  life- 
work,  and  who,  for  a  variety  of  rea- 
sons, pursues  that  work  outside  of 
the  institutional  framework  of  a 
university. 

Much  has  been  written  and  said 
of  late  concerning  the  knowledge 
explosion,  the  interdisciplinary  pos- 
sibilities of  Women's  Studies,  and 
the  institutional  restructuring  that 
form  the  immediate  context  for  a 
consideration  of  women  in  the 
academy.  I  would  like  to  widen  the 
discussion  to  address  the  responsi- 
bility of  women's  studies  to  those 
outside    the    academy's    walls:    the 


mass  of  women  whose  lives  will  be 
fundamentally  affected  by  the  ver- 
sion of  reality  developed  there,  but 
who,  as  yet,  have  no  way  of  directly 
influencing  your  direction. 

To  begin  with,  some  reflections 
on  the  academy  as  it  now  exists  are 
now  in  order.  For  me,  the  academy 
has  become  a  mental  ward,  an  ivory 
tower  which  harbors  and  encour- 
ages the  slow  madness  induced  by 
social  isolation.  Its  predisposition, 
intellectually,  is  to  regard  anything 
dead  as  good,  and  the  living  as  sus- 
pect and  intrusive.  Like  any  suburb, 
it  is  clean — pruned,  well-mani- 
cured, sanitary — but  psychotic.  Its 
social  isolation  is  technologically 
masked  by  the  availability  of  WATS 
lines,  xerography,  and  archives.  But 
these  only  act  as  surrogates  and 
substitutes  for  direct  contact  with 
the  world.  They  constitute  the  ma- 
jor aspect  of  the  "privilege"  you  ex- 
perience. Beyond  this,  you  pay  in  or- 
der to  reduce  your  contact  with 
people.  You  pay  for  sanctuary.  The 
sanctuary  lies  in  suspension. 

The  suspension  is  somewhere  be- 
tween the  15th  and  the  19th  cen- 
turies. Bound  by  feudalism,  the  age 
of  enlightenment,  and  the  bour- 
geois revolution,  it  hardly  provides 
a  viable  standpoint  from  which  to 


70lQuest,  vol.  Ill,  no.  4,  spring,  1977 


©Michele  Russell,  1977. 


An  Open  Letter  to  the  Academy/71 


approach  present-day  reality.  It  is 
only  useful  insofar  as  we  define 
ourselves  in  a  critical  relationship 
to  that  past  which  the  academy  dei- 
fies as  "the  march  of  civilization/' 
When  I  do  that,  the  one  constant, 
historically,  culturally,  politically, 
and  economically,  which  winds  like 
a  black  snake — coil,  rope,  whip — 
through  those  centuries  is  colonial- 
ism; not  civilization,  but  the  tri- 
umph of  barbarism  in  the  guise  of 
progress.  From  the  Inquisition  and 
the  Crusades  to  the  current  incar- 
nation of  J.C.  as  President,  I  see  the 
institutionalization  of  the  vigilante 
tradition  in  the  uniform  of  the 
State,  with  all  the  robes  and  trap- 
pings of  high  office.  And  the  primary 
political  and  cultural  role  of  Western  wo- 
men and  the  academy  in  that  process  has 
been  to  rationalize  it.  European  and 
Anglo-American  women  have  acted 
as  the  domesticators  of  subject 
peoples:  indoctrinating  them  into 
the  manners  of  servitude  and  pro- 
viding the  illusion  of  protection 
once  in  captivity,  while  the  acade- 
my has  acted  as  the  ideological 
apologist  for  conquest  in  the  name 


of  civilization.  This  is  your  mission- 
ary tradition:  smallpox  carried  in 
blankets  to  natives  by  nurses, 
backed  by  bibles  and  swords. 

The  examples  of  this  process  can 
be  documented  ad  nauseum.  The 
point  is  for  black  people,  the  op- 
pressive pendulum  of  imperialism's 
timeclock  has  swung  precisely  be- 
tween assimilation  and  annihila- 
tion, between  the  velvet  glove  and 
iron  fist.  And  we  have  become 
adept  at  recognizing  the  continuity 
of  its  swing. 

Even  in  the  context  of  the  so- 
called  liberal  atmosphere  of  Ameri- 
can universities  in  the  1960's,  it  was 
clear,  as  I  wrote  then,  almost  ten 
years  ago,  that: 

Black  studies  programs,  although  an  ap- 
parent departure  from  the  "equal  rights" 
mode  of  struggle,  is  only  the  latest  phase  in 
America's  domination  over  us.  To  under- 
stand how  serious  the  situation  is,  all  we 
need  do  is  to  compare  the  major  characteris- 
tics of  African  slavery  and  colonialization 
in  the  U.S.  with  the  process  by  which 
blacks  are  brought  into  established  institu- 
tions of  higher  education.  The  parallels  are 
striking  and  instructive. 


72lQuest 


In  the  initial  stages  of  African  coloniali- 
zation  four  things  occurred  which  we  can 
identify  as  "Before  Arrival"  (B.A. 
prerequisites.  First,  "recruitment"  chan- 
nels had  to  be  established  between  European 
slavers  and  Africans  in  positions  of  trust 
and  power  who  would  act  as  mercenaries 
against  their  people.  Secondly,  African 
mercenaries  and  European  colonizers  had  to 
cooperate  in  collecting  and  selecting  large 
populations  "suitable"  for  transport  to  the 
New  World.  Third,  those  who  were 
"lucky"  enough  to  be  chosen  had  to  under- 
go the  shock  of  passage,  usually  with  other 
blacks  of  different  tribes  whose  local  cus- 
toms had  previously  set  them  apart  rather 
than  binding  them  together.  And  fourth, 
upon  landing  in  America,  the  blacks  who 
survived  had  to  submit  to  a  plantation  dias- 
pora which  was  the  final  complement  to  the 
systematic  separation  and  disruption  of 
families  and  tribes  that  had  begun  with  re- 
cruitment. 

Once  ensconced  in  the  plantations  of 
the  New  World,  there  were  still  more  tests 
to  pass.  After  a  trial  period  during  which 
Africans  were  consistently  excluded  from 
the  language  and  customs  of  the  planta- 
tion social  system,  it  was  decided  that  the 
slaves  could  be  used  most  effectively  if  cer- 
tain "liberalizing"  procedures  were  fol- 
lowed. To  facilitate  our  ability  to  take  or- 
ders (and  be  satisfied  exclusively  with  that) 
we  were  taught  only  the  vocabulary  of  our 
specific  jobs.  To  undermine  our  sense  of  na- 
tionhood and  inculcate  identification  with 
our  masters,  there  was  widespread  rape  and 
mongrelization  of  our  people.  Once  this  was 
accomplished,  our  colonizers  felt  it  was  safe 
to  let  us  congregate,  but  only  for  activities 
(like  religious  worship)  considered  peripher- 
al and  non-antagonistic  to  doing  the  mas- 
ter's work.  And  finally,  with  emancipation 
(the  end  of  our  enforced  stay  as  non-paid 
workers  on  the  plantation)  we  were  granted 


the  "privilege"  of  becoming  either  rural 
tenant  farmers  or  joining  an  underem- 
ployed urban  class  and  incurring  a  mone- 
tary indebtedness  to  the  system  which  had 
been  built  through  our  oppression. 

With  a  very  slight  transposition  of  vo- 
cabulary (for  Before  Arrival,  read  the  Bach- 
lor  of  Arts;  for  Africa,  read  the  South  and 
for  the  New  World,  the  North;  for  dias- 
pora, read  brain  drain;  for  plantation,  read 
college  system;  for  mongrelization,  read  in- 
tegration and  cultural  diversity  programs; 
for  religious  worship,  substitute  Black 
Studies;  and  for  tenant  farming,  substitute 
the  monetary  aid  system  by  which  black 
students  are  consistently  given  loans  over 
scholarships),  the  whole  process  becomes  a 
perfect  metaphor  of  the  dynamics  of  black 
educational  colonization  in  America.1 

While  for  us,  the  lessons  of  this 
experience  have  been  driven  home 
with  unmediated  force,  white  wo- 
men have  often  been  caught  in  the 
middle.  As  a  victimized,  accomplice 
population  in  this  process,  you  have 
been  confused.  Your  oppression 
and  exploitation  have  been  more 
cleverly  masked  than  ours,  more 
delicately  elaborated.  The  tech- 
niques, refined.  You  were  rewarded 
in  minor  ways  for  docile  and  active 
complicity  in  our  dehumanization. 
At  base,  the  risk  of  your  complete 
alienation  from  the  system  of  white 
male  rule  that  also  exploited  you 
was  too  great  to  run.  The  perpetua- 
tion of  the  race  depended  upon 
your  reproductive  capacity:  your 
willingness  to  bear  and  rear  suc- 
ceeding generations  of  oppressors. 
If  you  think  this  is  far-fetched,  you 
have  only  to  look  at  the  struggle  for 
abortion  being  waged  now  by  wo- 
men in  Italy  who  must  contend 
with    Fascist   legislation   passed   in 


Open  Letter/73 


1930  and  still  in  force  which  explic- 
itly declares  "abortion  is  a  crime 
against  the  sanctity  of  the  race/' 
While  your  reproductive  function 
has  been  the  only  reason  for  your 
relative  protection  in  the  colonizing 
process,  ours,  on  the  contrary,  has 
sharpened  the  knife  colonialism  ap- 
plies to  our  throats  and  wombs. 
Witness  government-sanctioned 
mass  sterilization  in  Puerto  Rico, 
New  York,  and  Brazil. 

I  draw  on  these  discrepancies  in 
our  condition  not  to  assign  blame 
or  to  suggest  that  you  are  blind  to 
the  implications  of  this  process.  We 
also  know  that  history  is  full  of  ex- 
amples of  white  women  rejecting 
the  cultural  and  economic  blackmail 
that  kept  you  in  service.  You 
walked  out  on  your  jobs:  in  the 
home,  in  mills  and  mines,  in  heavy 
manufacturing,  in  bureaucracies. 
Occasionally,  small  minorities  suc- 
ceeded in  creating  artistic  and  intel- 
lectual communities  which  sus- 
tained elements  of  a  culture  inde- 
pendent of  the  dominant  commodi- 
ty relations  of  bourgeois  society. 
But,  on  balance,  that  history — the 
one  of  your  resistance — is  still  to  be 
discovered  and  amplified  by  this 
generation.  All  of  you.  That  is  why 
you  are  important. 

What  Stories  Will  You  Tell 

At  this  point  in  the  history  of  the 
American  academy,  a  substantial 
section  of  the  white  female  popula- 
tion is  being  selected  and  is  choos- 
ing to  take  on  the  civilizing  func- 
tion as  well  as  the  domesticating 
one.  Many  of  you  even  come  from 
social   origins   which   the  academy 


deems  suspect,  backgrounds  that 
you  are  supposed  to  grow  out  of, 
or,  at  least,  leave  at  the  gate.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  you  are  there,  defin- 
ing the  legitimate  areas  of  your 
study  and  concern.  And  you  must 
decide  if  you  are  going  to  lend  your 
minds  as  well  as  your  bodies  to  re- 
producing the  hierarchies  and  in- 
herited privilege  that  shore  up  co- 
lonialism's power. 

The  central  question,  of  course, 
is:  "What  version  of  civilization  will 
you  construct?"  What  stories  will 
you  tell  each  other  and  leave  for  fu- 
ture generations?  What  truths  will 
consistently  inform  your  plot?  How 
will  you  define  yourselves  in  rela- 
tion to  the  central  patterns  of  domi- 
nation in  the  world,  and  how  will 
you  align  on  the  side  of  freedom? 
How  rigorously  will  you  face  your 
own  past  with  all  its  warts? 

If  your  field  is  literature,  for  ex- 
ample, and  you  are  interested  in  the 
pastorale  as  a  form  in  western  civil- 
ization, how  central  will  Georgia 
be  to  your  vision?  Not  Walden 
woods,  or  the  Bois  du  Bologne,  or 
Arcady,  but  your  President's  home 
state?  In  1941,  it  produced  the  fol- 
lowing statement  by  Billie  Holiday: 
Southern  trees  bear  a  strange  fruit 
Blood  on  the  leaves  and  blood  at  th.e  root 
Black  bodies  swinging  in  the  Southern 

breeze 
Strange  fruit,  hanging  from  the  poplar 

trees. 
Pastoral  scene  of  the  gallant  South 
The  bulging  eyes,  the  twisted  mouth 
Smell  of  magnolias,  sweet  and  fresh 
Then  the  sudden  smell  of  burning  flesh 
Here  is  a  fruit  for  the  crows  to  pluck 
For  the  rain  to  gather,  for  the  wind  to  suck 
For  the  sun  to  rot,  for  the  tree  to  drop 


74/  Quest 


Here  is  a  strange  and  bitter  crop.2 
What  will  you  do  with  that?  Will 
you  let  the  academy  dismiss  it  as  lit- 
erature because  it  is  a  song?  De- 
grade it  as  history  because  of  its 
creator's  social  origins?  Or  ignore  it 
politically  because  it  contains  no  ex- 
plicitly "feminist"  statement?  Will 
you  teach  it  in  its  own  terms — 
which  is  to  say,  educate  yourselves 
to  what  its  terms  are. 

Are  you  willing  to  go  further,  to 
"Portrait  in  Georgia/'  and  deal  with 
the  historical  and  cultural  implica- 
tions of  what  the  face  and  form  of 
white  women  evoke  to  Jean  Too- 
mer,  who  writes  in  1923: 
Hair-braided  chestnut,  coiled  like  a  lynch- 
er's rope, 
Eyes  -  fagots, 

Lips  -  old  scars,  or  the  first  red  blisters, 
Breath  -  the  last  sweet  scent  of  cane, 
And  her  slim  body,  white  as  the  ash 

of  black  flesh  after  flame.3 
Will  you  treat  that  as  the  exception, 
or  the  rule?  And  after  making  that 
decision,  in  what  context  will  you 
accept  the  new  "first  lady  of  the 
land"  as  a  sister?  If  you  are  redefin- 
ing the  canon,  in  what  pantheon 
will  you  place  Nina  Simone? 

If  your  field  is  history,  and  you 
are  interested  in  the  persistence  of 
the  social  division  of  labor  inherited 
from  plantation  economy,  what 
status  will  you  accord  Bessie 
Smith's  Washwoman's  Blues  as  an  his- 
torical document?  What  impor- 
tance will  you  assign  to  the  cultural 
expression:  "Lord,  I  do  more  work 
than  40-11  Gold  Dust  twins."  And 
the  washwoman's  aspiration: 
"Rather  be  a  scullion,  cookin'  in 
some  white  folk's  yard;  I  could  eat 
up  plenty,  wouldn't  have  to  work  so 


Open  Letter/75 


hard."  And  will  you  feel  confident 
quoting  her  and  Bessie  Jackson 
against  Herb  Guttman  in  assessing 
the  consciousness  of  black  women 
as  they  made  the  transition  from 
rural  to  urban  circumstances? 

What  weight  will  you  give  Emma 
Shield's  account  of  the  structure  of 
the  tobacco  industry,  and  how  will 
you  unearth  the  consciousness  that 
flowed  between  black  and  white 
women  under  the  following  condi- 
tions: 

Negro  women  are  employed  exclusively 
in  the  rehandling  of  tobacco,  preparatory  to 
its  actual  manufacture.  Operations  in  the 
manufacture  of  cigars  and  cigarettes  are 
performed  exclusively  by  white  women 
workers.  Negro  women  workers  are  abso- 
lutely barred  from  any  opportunity  for  em- 
ployment on  the  manufacturing  operations. 
The  striking  differences  in  working  condi- 
tions which  these  occupational  divisions 
provoke  are  further  facilitated  by  the  abso- 
lute isolation  of  Negro  workers  from  white 
in  separate  buildings. ...It  is  not  unusual  to 
find  the  white  women  workers  occupying 
the  new  modern  sanitary  parts  of  the  fac- 
tory and  the  Negro  women  workers  in  the 
old  sections  which  the  management  has  de- 
cided to  be  beyond  the  hope  of  any  improve- 
ment.4 

The  principles  of  exclusion,  isola- 
tion, and  marginalization  are  con- 
sciously built  into  that  part  of  the 
production  process  which  black  wo- 
men are  allowed  to  do.  The  persis- 
tence of  a  colonial  division  in  the 
heart  of  a  capitalist  setting  here  is 
the  fundamental  structural  reality 
conditioning  the  relations  between 
black  and  white  women. 

As  a  labor  historian,  you  may  go 
on  to  discover  that,  as  more  privi- 
leged victims  in  the  industrial  pro- 


cess, white  women's  economic  role 
vis  a  vis  black  women  consistently 
has  been  the  workforce  breaking 
into  production  at  the  point  when 
its  organization  is  in  transition 
from  a  semi-feudal,  patriarchal 
mode  to  an  industrialized  one. 
White  women  are  then  in  the  posi- 
tion of  paving  the  way  for  black 
women's  entry  into  those  jobs  just 
at  the  point  when  necessary  skill 
levels  decline,  speed-up  becomes 
routine,  and  the  interchangeability 
and  easy  replacement  of  workers 
becomes  rationalized.  Food  process- 
ing and  office  work  are  two  labor- 
intensive  examples.  And,  converse- 
ly, when  specifically  arduous  or  cul- 
turally onerous  conditions  of  labor, 
considered  ''off-limits"  to  white 
women,  come  under  improved  reg- 
ulation, the  black  women  tradition- 
ally employed  there  get  displaced. 
The  whole  area  of  domestic  labor, 
which  under  capitalism  has  devel- 
oped its  own  hierarchal  organiza- 
tion, is  the  clearest  expression  of 
this  pattern. 

Domestic  labor  means  cooking, 
cleaning,  washing,  ironing,  and  the 
care  of  those  who  consume  the  pro- 
ducts of  that  work.  As  socialized 
processes  under  capitalism,  that  la- 
bor market  translation  of  those  ac- 
tivities is  personal  service,  restau- 
rant and  hotel  work,  and  laundry 
work.  In  the  post-World  War  I  per- 
iod, when  black  and  white  women 
both  lived  through  the  experiences 
of  filling  the  vacancies  in  produc- 
tion left  by  departing  soldiers,  the 
"return  to  normalcy"  in  domestic 
labor  looked  as  follows: 

"With  the  fixing  of  the  minimum  wage 
in  the  hotels,  restaurants,  etc.,  at  $16.50 


761  Quest 


for  a  forty-eight  hour  week,  and  the  in- 
creasing number  of  white  women,  Negro 
women  were  to  a  very  large  extent  dis- 
placed. Wages  for  domestic  service  for  the 
rank  and  file  have  fallen  in  the  past  twelve 
months  (of  1921)  from  $10  a  week  with- 
out any  laundry  to  $7  and  $8  with  laun- 
dry work. 

Only  two  of  the  Washington,  D.C. 
laundries  are  today  paying  the  minimum 
wage.  The  average  wage  in  the  other  laun- 
dries is  $9  per  week  and  a  few  workers  get 
as  little  as  $6.  Ninety  percent  of  these  laun- 
dry workers  are  Negro  women.  As  soon  as 
some  of  the  laundries  began  to  fear  that  they 
would  be  forced  to  pay  the  minimum  wage 
they  began  to  ask  the  employment  bureau 
about  the  possibility  of  obtaining  white 
girls.  Now  that  they  are  not  paying  the 
minimum  wage  they  are  perfectly  satisfied 
with  Negro  women."5 
We  could  continue  in  this  vein.  The 
question  is,  will  you? 

If  your  field  is  anthropology,  how 
will  you  extend  the  work  of  Zora 
Neale  Hurston?  If  your  field  is  law, 
what  will  you  say  about  Scottsboro 
and  Emmett  Till,  Inez  Garcia  and 
Joanne  Little?  If  you  are  a  social  sci- 
entist, or  a  "communications  spec- 
ialist/' what  status  will  you  give  to 
"gossip"  and  "commiseration?"  If 
you  are  a  home  economist,  will  you 
produce  studies  on  the  functions  of 
the  kitchen  in  Immigrant,  Slave, 
and  Latina  communities  in  the 
U.S.?  And  what  new  categories  of 
meaning  will  you  develop  to  help 
people  distinguish  between  cooking 
and  eating?  If  your  field  is  biology, 
how  will  you  effectively  combat  the 
genetics  of  Schokley,  Jensen,  and 
Hernstein?  Or  in  medicine,  what 
relationship  will  you  establish  with 
the  following  account  of  midwifery: 


"The  wives  and  daughters  of  workers 
and  farmers  rely  on  folk  remedies,  some  of 
them  extremely  dangerous — parsley,  anise 
and  other  vegetable  extracts,  phosphorous 
potions  made  out  of  the  ground-up  heads  of 
matches.  And  then  there  is  a  kind  of  mid- 
wife.... Always  available  through  the  fe- 
male grapevine,  she  charges  little  and  she 
will  never  betray  your  secret.  Often  she  is 
sympathetic,  a  poor  woman  helping  other 
poor  women.  Her  operating  room  is  often 
her  kitchen.  Her  usual  method  is  to  insert 
into  the  uterus  a  probe  a  little  larger  than  a 
needle.  The  probe  is  left  in  the  uterus,  after 
which  miscarriage  follows — sometimes  ac- 
companied by  infection,  sometimes  attended 
by  death."6 

How    will    your    work    help    alter 
these  conditions? 

Beyond  the  search  for  heroines 
and  transcendent  moments  of  vic- 
tory, what  will  you  do  with  every- 
day life?  And,  once  you  decide  all 
these  things,  will  you  put  your 
findings  in  a  form  to  be  of  use  to  a 
woman  with  five  children  who 
works  the  night  shift  in  a  bakery? 

The  question  is  this:  how  will  you 
refuse  to  let  the  academy  separate 
the  dead  from  the  living,  and  then, 
yourselves,  declare  allegiance  to 
life?  As  teachers,  scholars,  and  stu- 
dents, how  available  will  you  make 
your  knowledge  to  others  as  tools 
of  their  own  liberation? 

This  is  not  a  call  for  mindless  ac- 
tivism, but  rather,  for  engaged 
scholarship.  These  are  not  new 
questions.  But  they  must  be  an- 
swered anew  by  every  generation 
whose  minds  and  energies  are  bent 
in  the  direction  of  the  future.  It  is  a 
pathway  that  has  its  perils. 

In  pursuing  the  imperatives  sug- 
gested by  this  orientation,  many  of 


Open  Letter/77 


us  have  been  forced  outside  the 
university's  walls.  But  we  continue 
to  work.  For  many  of  us  who  have 
gotten  pushed  out  of  the  traditional 
academic  settings  in  the  past  ten 
years,  and  for  many  who  did  not 
succeed  in  pushing  their  way  in, 
pedagogy  has  become  peripatetic. 
We  go  where  invited,  under  aus- 
pices where  we  usually  must  cri- 
tique, in  hopes  of  making  contacts 
that  will  be  useful  at  some  future 
date.  At  best,  this  activity  feels  like 
swimming  in  the  sea  of  the  people; 
at  worst,  it's  treading  water.  And 
while  through  years  of  practice, 
many  of  us  have  arrived  at  princi- 
ples of  effectively  sharing  know- 
ledge, the  present  circumstances 
call  for  fresh  thinking  and  quick 
study. 

Our  teaching  opportunities  must 
be  created — in  conference,  private 
homes,  buses,  offices,  churches,  the 
streets.  Sometimes  they  involve 
three  or  four  days  of  intensive, 
round-the-clock  interaction  with 
hundreds  gathered  together.  More 
often,  they  are  meetings  of  two, 
three,  five  people  who  may  or  may 
not  have  previous  knowledge  of 
each  other  but  who  share  a  com- 
mon situation.  Our  intervention  is 
meant  to  break  through  the  anony- 
mous character,  the  isolation  in  the 
midst  of  thousands,  that  most 
people  regard  as  "normal."  It  re- 
quires meeting  masses  of  people  on 
their  turf,  and  on  their  terms.  In- 
teraction. Not  "lectures  to"  or 
"reading  about"  or  "observations 
of" — but  working  with.  It  requires 
participating  in  the  rhythms  of 
their  daily  lives  with  the  object  of 
giving  greater  coherence  and  artic- 


ulation to  that  experience,  as  it  is 
lived.  It  is  a  process  which  does  not 
fit  neatly  into  a  50-minute  hour  or 
a  disciplinary  definition  of  "field  of 
study"  or  a  classroom  on  a  campus. 

For  those  who  define  this  as  our 
lifework,  the  present  exclusionary 
trend  in  the  academy  is  a  spur  to  ac- 
tivity. Rescinded  open  admissions 
policies,  budgetary  cutbacks,  cur- 
tailed Veterans'  benefits  and  facul- 
ty layoffs  have  demanded  that  new 
contexts  for  meeting  be  developed. 
Those  who  want  to  learn  and  those 
who  want  to  teach  are  finding  each 
other  through  media  other  than  the 
classroom. 

While  you  have  the  temporary 
luxury  of  libraries  and  archives  to 
sustain  you  in  a  conversation  with 
one  another,  and  the  leisure  to  con- 
sult a  common  set  of  references,  we 
carry  our  texts  in  our  heads  and  on 
our  backs.  Those  we  hope  to  influ- 
ence must  be  struck  with  the  truth, 
applicability,  originality  and  famili- 
arity of  our  formulations  in  pass- 
ing. Our  wit  must  stick  and  have  the  vera- 
city of  experience  digested,  not  just  books 
well-remembered.   We  teach  in  the  world. 

The  roadwork  demanded  is  gru- 
elling. We  sleep  while  sitting  and 
stand  while  eating.  And  we  must 
answer  for  the  consequences  of  our 
theories  in  action. 

Let's  say  we  want  to  interact 
with  women.  Our  critical  apprecia- 
tion of  their  home-life  must  em- 
brace iridescent  icons,  clear  plastic 
sofa  covers,  curling  irons,  prize- 
fighting, the  fine  print  in  a  UAW 
contract,  and  a  work  schedule 
which  may  allow  Thursday  and 
every  other  Sunday  off.  Abstract 
declarations  of  sisterly  solidarity  in 


781  Quest 


these  situations  won't  do.  We  must 
have  a  perspective  on  automatic 
cookie-cutters,  modular  auto  as- 
sembly, and  silicone  surgery  and, 
at  some  point,  relate  all  of  them  to 
commodity  fetishism  under  capital- 
ism. We  must  be  able  to  explain  the 
consciousness  of  Jane  Fonda  in 
Klute,  of  Elizabeth  Ray  and  Margo 
St.  James  (and  even  throw  in  a  com- 
ment about  white  slavery  in  the 
Victorian  era) — not  in  a  semester, 
but  in  a  half  an  hour  and  on  a  mo- 
ment's notice.  When  hard  questions 
are  put  to  us,  we  cannot  say,  with 
smugness,  "That  is  not  my  field"; 
we  can  only  say,  "I  don't  know." 

We  must  have  a  stock  of  stories 
to  tell — the  funnier,  the  better — in 
an  idiom  that  draws  us  and  our  sub- 
ject closer  together.  Over  coffee. 
Over  kitchen  tables.  In  employ- 
ment offices  where  women  stand 
and  wait  for  hours  only  to  be  told 
they  didn't  bring  the  right  papers  to 
qualify  for  relief. 

We  must  demonstrate  the  capaci- 
ty to  organize  the  information  we 
get  from  people  in  ways  which  help 
all  of  us  move  towards  wholeness. 
That  is  what  our  education  should 
enable  us  to  do. 

However,  our  academic  training 
is  of  little  help.  Everything  that  the 
bourgeois  university  has  succeeded 
in  disassembling  (by  department, 
division,  period,  class,  race,  and  sta- 
tus), we  must  bring  together  again. 
That  is  the  imperative  of  conscious- 
ness-raising that  I  and  those  like 
me,  in  Detroit,  and  elsewhere,  ex- 
perience as  we  go  about  our  work. 
It  is  what's  waiting  for  you  if  you 
have  anything  beyond  self-satisfac- 
tion in  mind.  It  cannot  be  accomp- 


lished in  four  years,  or  deemed  suc- 
cessful by  a  committee  after  oral 
and  written  exams.  Some  of  its  di- 
mensions are  suggested  in  remarks 
made  by  Fidel  during  a  visit  to  Chile 
before  the  coup: 

"This  is  a  tiring,  arduous  trip  not  be- 
cause of  the  lack  of  oxygen  in  the  pampas 
where  the  saltpeter  mines  are  located,  or  the 
lack  of  humidity  in  the  North,  or  too  much 
rain  or  cold  in  the  South  hut  because  it  en- 
tails an  endless  pilgrimage,  without  any 
physical  or  mental  rest.  At  times  it  is  a 
lonely  trip.  One  would  like  to  arrive  in  a 
place  and  have  three  professors  who  would 
brief  one,  in  a  matter  of  minutes,  on  the 
history  of  where  one  is  and  thus  have  a  cer- 
tain degree  of  reference  to  back  up  one's 
statements  when  faced  with  these  problems. 
But  as  life  would  have  it,  we  have  to  tackle 
our  task  as  travelers  all  by  ourselves  in 
these  circumstances."7 


HERESIES: 

A  FEMINIST  PUBLICATION 
ON  ART  AND  POLITICS 


An  idea  oriented  journal  de- 
voted to  the  examination  of  art 
and  politics  from  a  feminist  per- 
spective —  including  research, 
theoretical  articles,  analysis,  fic- 
tion, poetry,  visual  art 


No.  2  Patterns  of  Communica- 
tion and  Space  Among 
Women  —  May.  1977 

No.  3  Lesbian  Art  and  Artists  — 
September.  1977 

No.  4  Women's  Traditional  Art 
and  Artmaking 

No.  5   The  Great  Goddess 


■  SUBSCRIBE  NOW 

—  one  year  subscription/4  issues     $10. 
ALSO  AVAILABLE: 

■  Collectively  designed  Heresies  fan  poster  $  5.00 

■  issue  No    1,    Feminism.  Art.  and  Politics, "  $3.00 

HERESIES   BOX  766  CANAL  STREET  STATION    NEW  YORK.  NY  10013 


Open  Letter/79 


If  Women's  Studies  does  any- 
thing, it  should  act  as  a  bridge  to 
make  that  journey  easier  and  less 
lonely.  We  need  the  resource  that 
your  situation  can  provide.  That  is 
why  I  say,  "Rapunzel,  let  down 
your  hair."  Make  it  a  rope  for  your 
own  descent  from  the  tower  to  the 
earth;  from  the  house,  to  the  world; 
from  isolation  to  community;  from 
bondage  to  freedom.  Struggle 
where  you  are  in  ways  we  can  use. 
By  whatever  means  necessary.  And 
for  the  empowerment  of  us  all. 

This  article  is  to  be  published  in 
College  English,  V.  39,  N.l,  Septem- 
ber, 1977. 

See  also,  "Black-Eyed  Blues  Con- 
nections: From  the  Inside  Out,"  an 
article  by  Michele  Russell  discuss- 
ing her  approach  to  teaching  Black 
Studies  for  women,  to  be  published 
in  the  Fall,  1977,  by  Daughters, 
Inc.,  in  Not  By  Degrees:  Essays  in  Femi- 
nist Education,  edited  by  Charlotte 
Bunch. 

Footnotes 


1Michele  Russell,  "Erased,  Debased  and  En- 
cased," College  English,  1969. 
2Billie  Holiday,  "Strange  Fruit,"  a  recording. 
3Jean  Toomer,   Cane,  (New  York:   Liveright 
Publishers,  1951). 

4Emma  L.  Shields,  "The  Tobacco  Workers," 
Black  Women  in  White  America  (New  York:  Vin- 
tage Books,  1973),  p.  253. 
5Elizabeth  Ross  Haynes,  "Two  Million  Wo- 
men at  Work,"  Black  Women  in  White  America, 
p.  256. 

6Ellen  Cantaro,  "Abortion  in  Italy." 
7Fidel  in  Chile  (New  York:  Monthly  Review 
Press,    1971). 

Michele  Russell  is  a  freelance  writer 
and  teacher,  and  is  a  board  member  of  the 
Puerto  Rican  Solidarity  Committee. 


u   u 


1  program  requirements  for  thl 
:lude  the  following: 
'  introductory  lecture  courses  fro 
>r  programs. 

ar  advanced  or  intermediate  level 
:ience  departments  or  programs  in 

and  programs  include  electrical 
nathemati 
neering). 


coded  (N),  (Q),  or  (SJ 
,  two  areas. 

including  engineering  sciences 
of  1  20  credits, 
foreign  language  at  the  intermedi 
at  the  intermediate  level  or 

nplished  in  study  at  Johns  Hi 
l^ng  knowledge  of  a  second  foreigi 
those  students  who  plan  to 


e  principal  aim  of  J 
jwledge,  and  many  o: 

of  educating  pot' 
is  Hopkins  is,  in  many 
graduate   studies   are 
'Ote  their  efforts  to  both.  C 


always  been  the  advancement  of  hu 
i  graduates  have  reflected  this  aim. 
ilars  and  teachers  continues  undiminis 
],uely  fitted  for  the  task.  Its  undergrad 
ky  connected.   The  same   faculty 
le  scholarship,  at  the  undergraduate  as 
at  the  graduate  level,  is  a  strong  tradition  here. 

jV  departmental  major  usually  is  most  appropriate  as  a  step  toward  a  ca 
College  or  university  teaching  and  research. 


80/  Quest 


Notes  About  Writing 

We  have  often  been  told  that  Quest  is  abstract  or  "too  hard  to 
read."  We  seek  concrete  suggestions  on  how  to  present  political  anal- 
ysis (which  is  never  going  to  be  "easy  reading"),  more  clearly.  We  try 
to  provide  a  balance  of  different  styles  of  writing  in  each  issue,  but 
often  we  do  not  receive  enough  variety  in  the  manuscripts  you  sub- 
mit. Our  goal  in  editing  is  clarity;  whatever  the  author  is  saying,  we 
work  to  make  it  as  clear  as  possible. 

For  most  of  us,  our  writing  reflects  our  education.  We  were  trained, 
if  at  all,  to  write  "essays"  and  "papers."  It  has  been  suggested  that  wo- 
men who  write  for  Quest  might  experiment  with  a  more  journalistic 
style.  We  don't  know  how  well  it  works  to  use  this  style  for  political 
analysis,  but  we  welcome  such  efforts.  Some  examples  that  might  be 
useful  models  are  articles  in  The  Progressive,  Social  Policy,  or  The  New  Re- 
public. 

We  would  also  like  to  print  more  interviews,  and  we  encourage  you 
to  submit  them.  Another  suggestion  is  taping  a  discussion  and  making 
that  into  an  article.  Much  of  our  history  is  not  recorded  because  acti- 
vists seldom  take  time  to  write.  But  it  is  important  to  exchange  our 
stories,  our  growth,  and  our  understanding.  We  would  like  to  create 
new  ways  to  share  this  learning,  since,  though  much  of  our  verbal  dia- 
log is  our  best  analysis,  it  never  gets  on  paper. 

For  each  issue,  we  send  out  mailings  and  announcements  to  as  many 
women  as  possible  to  encourage  submissions  to  Quest.  We  also  intend 
the  back  cover  blurbs  as  an  open  invitation  for  articles.  Writing  is  not 
easy  for  any  of  us.  Our  challenge,  as  feminists,  is  to  find  new  ways  to 
express  our  experiences  and  our  analysis  so  that  they  aid  us  better  in 
changing  society. 

— — — ——  ■  ■  ■   — ■— 

Articles  should  be  double  spaced  and  submitted  in  duplicate  (orig- 
inal plus  one  copy).  Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500 
words  (10  typewritten  pages)  for  reviews,  responses,  and  short  arti- 
cles, to,  at  most,  7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where 
appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  typed  at  the  end  of 
the  article.  All  manuscripts,  poems,  and  graphics  should  be  original, 
unpublished  material  and  must  be  accompanied  by  a  stamped  self- 
addressed  envelope. 


Future  Issues 

KALEIDOSCOPE  TWO 

Summer,  1977  Vol.  IV,  No.  1 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an 
open  forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  three  years  of  pub- 
lication and  for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discus- 
sion of  topics  and  ideas  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on 
previous  articles.  Copy  Deadline:  February  15,  1977 

INTERNATIONAL 

Fall,  1977  Vol.  IV,  No.  2 

Advances  for  women  demand  that  our  analysis  and  strategies  be 
drawn  from  different  angles,  from  different  cultural  and  national 
settings.  This  issue  will  be  devoted  to  international  perspectives  and 
articles  with  a  focus  on  varying  feminist  concerns  and  activities,  the- 
oretical and  programmatic  developments,  and  how  these  are  affected 
by  different  socio-economic  and  governmental  factors. 

Copy  Deadline:  May  1,    197  7 

THE  BODY  POLITIC 

Winter,  1977-78  Vol.  IV,  No.  3 

Our  bodies — how  we  use,  view,  and  treat  them — are  basic  to  our 
vision.  We  want  this  issue  to  explore  body  politics  in  its  broadest 
sense,  through  articles  that  discuss:  the  body  industry,  from  birth  to 
death;  feminist  and  environmental  politics;  the  future  of  reproduc- 
tion, and  its  effect  on  the  female  nature;  dying;  age,  class,  and  body 
perspectives;  health  services  and  insurance  and  the  politics  of  geno- 
cide and  labor  control.  Copy  Deadline:  }uly,  31,   197  7 

WOMEN  IN  THEIR  COMMUNITIES 
Spring,  1978  Vol.  IV,  No.  4 

A  critical  aspect  of  community  is  affinity  or  identification.  A  com- 
munity is  a  group  of  people  who  share  something.  Some  of  the 
things  shared  are  common  place,  common  work,  and/or  common 
perception.  This  issue  will  explore  how  we  define  our  communities; 
how  they  develop  and  interact;  how  well  they  serve  women  working 
on  common  goals,  and  how  we  relate  as  individual  women  within 
them.  Copy  Deadline:  September,  30,   1977 


