$2.75  ^ 


QUEST 

a  feminist  quarterly 


Kay  Whitiock 

NOW's  New 

Power  Elite 


Sidney  Oliver 

Defining  Common  Ground 

A  Feminist  Prinner  on  Environmentalisnn 
and  Appropriate  Tecinnology 


Ann  Markusen 
A  Review  of 

Northern  Lights 


Political  Art 

A  Dialogue  Between 
Judy  Chicago  and 
Elizabeth  Hess 


NOTICE  TO  OUR  READERS 


We  received  manv  complaints  from  our  readers  stating  that  they  had  never 
received  their  copies  of /'Kaleidoscope  HI."  If  you  did  not  receive  your  copy, 
let  us  know  and  we  will  extend  your  subscription  for  one  issue. 
Thank  you  for  bearing  with  us. 

The  Quest  Staff 


QUEST 

a  f emmisf  qmarferly  voi.  v,  no.  2 

Special  Issue 


Contents 

REPORTTO  READERS  3 
LETTERS  9 
MEDIA  &  CULTURE  11 
It  Is  Art  .  .  .  But  Is  It  Political? 

A  conversation  with  Judy  Chicago  by  Elizabeth  Hess  15 
Who  Were  Your  Grandmothers,  John  Hanson? 

A  review  of  Northern  Lights  by  Ann  IVIarf^usen  25 
POWER  BROKERAGE  AND  SINGLE  ISSUE  POLITICS  IN  NOW 

by  Kay  Whitiocf^  36 
WORD  WATCH  57 

Rape:  The  Power  of  Consciousness  by  Susan  Griffin 

Reviewed  by  Caroline  Sparks 

The  Curious  Courtship  of  Women's  Liberation  and  Socialism  by 
Batya  Weinbaum. 

Reviewed  by  A  lex  a  Freeman  and  Jayne  Loader 
TILLING  COMMON  GROUND  67 
Feminism,  Environmentalism  &  Appropriate  Technology 

by  Sidney  Oliver  70 


©Copyright  1980  by  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly.  Inc.  All  rights  reserved.  Reproduction 
without  pernnission  is  strictly  prohibited.  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly ,  Inc.,  is  a  tax  exempt, 
non-profit  organization.  Address  all  correspondence  to  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly,  P.O. 
Box  8843,  Washington,  DC  20003. 

Subscription  rates  are  $9.00/year  (4  issues)  to  individuals;  $1 0.00/year  in  Canada  and 
Mexico;  $1 1 .00/year  overseas  surface,$1 4.50/year  overseas  air;  $25.00/year  to  insitutions, 
$3.35  for  all  single  issues.  Advertising  rates  and  deadlines  available  upon  request.  Foreign 
bookstores  and  bookstores  in  New  York,  Chicago  and  Atlanta  should  order  directly  from 
Quest.  All  other  bookstores  may  order  directly  from  Carrier  Pigeon,  75  Kneeland  St.,  Rm. 
309,  Boston,  MA  02111. 
ISSN  0098-955  X 


Editorial  Staff 

Arleen  Rogan,  Managing  Editor* 
Sarah  Begus 

Lynn  Gorchov,*  Circulation 
Marilyn  Lerch,  Copy  Coordinator* 
Jackie  MacMillan,* 
Sara  Shepard,  Production 
Isabelle  Thabault,  Distribution 
Tracy  Thiele,  Promotion* 
Gerri  Traina,  Copy  Intake* 
Cynthia  Washington 

*Steering  Committee 

Kerry  Thalheim,  Management  Consultant 


Lisa  Hoogstra,  Associate 
Alexa  Freeman,  Associate 
Sidney  Oliver,  Associate 
Joan  Twiggs,  Associate 
Emma  Buenaventura,  Associate 
Jayne  Loader,  Associate 


cover  design  by  Tracy  Thiele  &  Sara  Shepard 


We  would  like  to  thank  all  the  people  listed  below  who  contributed  to 

Quest  ixom  Sept.  9,  1979  through  April  1,  1980: 

Mary  Coleman  Diane  Kunkel  Nancy  Polikoff 

Ann  Ferguson  Mary-Helen  Mautner  Janet  Schauer 

Jane  Flax  R.  McArthur  Eleanor  Self 

Laureen  France  Phyllis  Palmer  Sue  Ann  Sprague 

Ruth  S.  Howell  Janet  C.  Perkins  Judy  Waits 


Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  is  seeking  long-term,  in-depth  feminist  political  analy- 
sis and  ideological  development.  Quest  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a  process  leading 
to  new  directions  for  the  women's  movement,  possibly  including  such  concrete 
forms  as  regional  or  national  conferences,  a  national  organization,  or  a  political 
party.  We,  the  editors,  are  all  women  who  have  been  in  the  movement  several  years 
and  have  reached  a  point  where  each  answer  leads  us  to  more  questions.  We  have 
been  through  various  ideological  and  activist  metamorphoses  and  end  up  feeling  that 
our  overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  the  struggle  brought  us? 
Closer  to  the  end  of  the  exploitation  of  and  violence  against  women?  Closer  to  self- 
determination  for  all  women?  We  do  not  have  all  the  answers  ourselves  and  expect 
that  feminists  across  the  country  and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  process  of 
seeking. 


The  first  issue  of  Quests  "Processes  of  Change,"  published 
in  1974,  defined  the  goals  of  Quest.  Committed  to  the  build- 
ing of  an  independent  feminist  movement,  the  journal  was 
conceived  as  a  forum  for  the  exchange  of  ideas  and  strategies 
among  theorists  and  activists.  Quest  was  devoted  to  the  search 
for  comprehensive  change  in  society.  Now,  six  years  later, 
these  goals  remain  the  same  but  the  "processes  of  change" 
have  affected  the  magazine  itself:  its  structure,  its  staff,  its 
content. 

This  report  will  talk  about  what  some  of  those  ciianges  have 
been  and  how  they  might  affect  future  issues  of  Quest.  How- 
ever, while  much  has  changed  at  Quests  much  has  also  remain- 
ed the  same.  Underlying  the  history  of  our  last  six  years,  and 
currently  guiding  the  direction  of  the  magazine,  is  the  commit- 
ment to  work  toward  achieving  the  radical  change  in  society 
required  to  transform  the  lives  of  women. 

This  last  year  has  brought  significant  changes  to  Quest.  Be- 
hind those  changes  has  been  a  process  of  reevaluation  on 
several  levels.  The  staff  has  had  to  develop  realistic  financial 
plans  to  survive  the  stringent  economic  conditions  facing  small 
publishers  in  the  1980s. 

Secondly,  the  staff  itself  changed  considerably.  In  "Kalei- 
doscope III,"  we  talked  about  the  staff  changes.  Many  found- 
ing members  of  Quest  have  moved  into  other  arenas  of  femi- 
nist work  and  new  energy  and  ideas  have  come  with  new  staff 
members. 

Thirdly,  we  have  made  an  attempt  to  evaluate  our  publish- 
ing process  and  to  evolve  new  management  techniques  to  make 
our  production  as  efficient  and  cost  effective  as  possible.  And 
finally,  we  have  instituted  changes  in  the  format  and  content 
of  the  journal. 

All  of  these  changes  relate  to  each  other.  Some  of  them 
were  painful  and  costly.  It  was  painful  to  say  goodbye  to 
women  who  had  served  the  journal  tirelessly  for  five  or  six 
years;  it  was  equally  painful  for  them  to  realize  that  it  was 
time  for  them  to  move  into  other  fields  of  work.  The  process- 
es of  evaluation  and  restructuring  were  costly  in  that  they  ne- 
cessitated a  period  of  introspection  and  critical  examination 
which  resulted  in  a  publishing  hiatus  of  nearly  a  year. 


Report  to  Readers/3 


But  we  have  emerged  from  this  period  of  reevaluation  and 
change  with  renewed  vigor  and  dedication  to  mal<e  Quest  a 
journal  of  quality  in  service  to  the  women's  movement.  We  in- 
tend to  face  realistically  the  challenge  of  creating  a  financially 
viable  journal  and  we  recognize  the  necessity  of  reaching  a 
broader  audience  of  women  by  expanding  our  circulation 
and  diversifying  the  content  and  structure  of  the  magazine. 

What  do  these  changes  mean  concretely  for  Quests  as  they 
affect  both  how  the  magazine  will  look  and  how  it  is  produc- 
ed? What  can  you,  our  readers,  expect  to  see  as  a  result  of 
these  changes? 

Varied  Format 

The  format  changes  in  Quest  mean  that  we  will  no  longer 
publish  issues  with  solely  theme-related  material.  Each  issue 
will  have  a  theme  section,  but  with  only  three  or  four  articles 
addressed  to  it.  We  want  the  journal  to  be  timely;  we  want  to 
allow  space  for  articles  which  speak  to  issues  of  current  inter- 
est or  controversy  in  the  women's  movement.  The  theme  ori- 
entation locked  in  copy  potential  for  nearly  an  entire  volume. 
The  space  that  our  new  non-theme  approach  creates  will  be 
devoted  to  ongoing  features,  reviews  and  to  articles  which 
are  timely  and  of  interest  to  our  readers.  Thus,  we  hope  that 
as  we  broaden  the  content  of  the  journal,  we  will  broaden  its 
appeal.  We  do  not  want  to  see  Quest  read  only  by  a  specializ- 
ed audience  of  women.  On  the  contrary,  an  underlying  politi- 
cal principle  of  Quest  always  has  been  to  make  feminist  theory 
accessible  to  a  wide  variety  of  women.  We  believe  that  our 
thought  and  experience  should  be  shared  among  all  women. 
We  intend  to  make  the  journal  more  lively  in  content  and 
style.  We'd  even  like  to  see  Quest  be  funny  on  occasion. 
Quest  has  sometimes  been  criticized  for  its  formal  style  and 
concentration  on  "heavy"  articles.  We  want  to  loosen  that  up, 
add  some  pizazz  to  the  pages,  but  without  sacrificing  quality. 

Structures  for  Working 

We  have  developed  several  new  organizational  structures  to 
produce  this  new,  livelier,  more  \\v(\e\y  Quest.  We  used  to  have 
a  three-person,  full-time  paid  staff,  as  well  as  a  volunteer  staff. 


4/Quest,  vol.  V  no.  2 


When  we  terminated  our  affiliation  with  the  Institute  for  Pol- 
icy Studies  in  April  1977,  our  budget  was  drastically  reduced 
and  we  had  to  slowly  cut  back  our  paid  staff.  We  now  have 
only  one,  full-time  staffer,  our  managing  editor.  The  remain- 
ing staff  is  all  volunteer,  people  who  mostly  have  full-time, 
outside  jobs. 

Because  our  resources  are  limited,  both  financially  and  in 
terms  of  woman  power,  the  entire  staff  has  become  very  aware 
of  the  crucial  importance  of  strong,  collective  management, 
planning  and  organization,  if  we  are  to  make  the  production  of 
the  journal  efficient.  We  have  divided  the  workload  and  re- 
sponsibilities among  the  steering  committee  which  recom- 
mends policy  and  does  long-range  planning;  the  managing  edi- 
tor who  administers  the  daily  operations  of  the  journal;  and 
the  entire  staff  which  decides  policy  and  performs  the  editorial 
functions.  Our  decision-making  is  done  by  consensus  and  the 
actual  work  of  producing  the  journal  is  divided  among  the 
staff,  based  on  skill  and  interest.  Our  recent  management  de- 
velopment sessions,  which  we  conducted  with  the  help  of  a 
consultant,  helped  us  build  skills  for  more  precise  task  defini- 
tion and  allocation. 

We  have  developed  a  board  of  contributing  editors  which 
will  perform  functions  of  copy  outreach  and  networking. 
Many  of  those  who  have  left  the  editorial  staff  have  agreed  to 
become  contributing  editors.  In  addition  we  have  asked  sever- 
al women  outside  the  staff  to  serve  in  that  capacity.  We  see 
this  as  a  way  for  people  to  maintain  a  commitment  to  Quest 
without  taking  part  in  the  day-to-day  operations  of  the  jour- 
nal. 

Financial  Stability 

This  last  year  was  our  grimmest  financially,  and  we  found 
ourselves  in  a  downward  spiral  of  not  publishing  because  there 
was  not  enough  money,  and  therefore  not  generating  income 
through  the  sale  of  journals.  We  considered  folding,  but  de- 
cided that  the  work  of  Quest  had  to  be  continued.  By  June 
1979,  our  new  staff  had  achieved  cohesion,  and  we  reaffirmed 
our  initial  statement  of  purpose.  We  were  ready  to  begin  solv- 
ing serious  financial  problems.  Our  first  step  was  to  hire  a 


Report  to  Readers/5 


fundraising  consultant  to  help  us  write  grant  proposals  and 
identify  potential  funding  sources.  We  learned  quickly  that 
foundations  rarely  fund  publications  and  so  we  have  tried  to 
develop  other  fundraising  techniques.  During  the  summer,  we 
held  a  raffle  which  raised  $1 ,600. 

The  summer  of  1979  also  saw  the  demise  of  Women  in  Dis- 
tribution, Inc.,  our  sole  bookstore  distributor.  A  staff  member 
assumed  the  responsibility  of  developing  distribution,  and  we 
now  have  distributors  in  Boston,  New  York,  Chicago  and  At- 
lanta. She  is  still  seeking  a  distributor  for  the  South  and  for 
overseas  bookstores.  But,  we  now  have  the  potential  of  in- 
creasing our  bookstore  distribution  to  over  1,000  copies  for 
each  issue. 

As  we  neared  publication  of  "Kaleidoscope  III,"  we  recog- 
nized the  need  to  step  up  our  promotion  campaign,  both  to 
encourage  old  subscribers  to  renew,  and  to  solicit  new  ones. 
We  developed  a  Christmas  mailing  and  a  two-step  renewal 
campaign  and  two  large  direct-mail  efforts  to  be  coordinated 
with  our  publication  dates.  If  we  can  continue  to  implement 
other  fundraising  efforts,  we  should  be  able  to  publish  Quest  on 
time. 

We  can  no  longer  afford  to  wait  until  a  crisis  is  upon  us  and 
the  bank  balance  is  dangerously  low,  to  turn  our  attention  to 
financial  matters  and  begin  fundraising.  We  have  learned  that 
it  must  be  ongoing  and  that  the  financial  solvency  of  the  maga- 
zine only  will  come  about  with  careful  financial  development 
and  sound  planning.  This  solvency  must  be  sought  in  partner- 
ship with  our  readers  on  whom  we  rely  for  subscriptions  and 
contributions.  Quest  has  always  depended  on,  and  been  favor- 
ed by,  loyal  readers  who  subscribe  and  contribute.  Wc  hope 
this  relationship  will  become  strengthened  as  we  continue  our 
efforts  to  improve  the  magazine  and  broaden  our  readership. 

One  of  the  lessons  we  have  learned  throughout  this  period 
of  change  is  that  all  areas  of  our  operation  are  critical.  We 
cannot  isolate  one  particular  area  for  attention  and  focus  sole- 
ly on  strengthening  that  one  area.  If  we  are  to  build  a  healthy 
organization  which  produces  an  interesting  journal  valuable  to 
the  women's  movement,  we  must  have  a  staff  with  a  variety  of 


6/Quest 


skills;  we  must  have  a  process  which  encourages  growth  in  all 
areas:  financial,  political,  editorial,  administrative.  We  will 
work  hard  for  this  growth  and  we  entreat  you,  our  readers, 
to  encourage  and  support  our  efforts.  You  can  do  this  by 
subscribing  to  Quest,  by  contributing  any  amount  of  money 
possible,  by  sending  us  copy  to  consider,  by  encouraging  oth- 
ers to  subscribe  and  submit  copy,  and  by  continuing  to  com- 
municate your  comments  and  reactions  to  the  journal. 

We  hope  you  like  our  new  cover  format,  and  the  features 
we  have  introduced  in  this  issue:  "Tilling  Common  Ground," 
"Media  <&  Culture,"  and  "Word  Watch." 


If  you  would  like  to  subscribe  or  make  a  contribution  to  Quest:  a 
feminist  quarterly ,  please  fill  out  the  coupon  and  enclose  a  check  or 
nnoney  order  to: 
Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
P.O.  Box  8843.  Dept.  A 
Washington,  DC  20003 

□  $9.00/vear  for  individuals 

□  $17.00/2  years  for  individuals 

□  $25.00  for  Sustaining  Contributor 

□  $10.00/year  for  Canada  and  Mexico 

□  $25.00/year  for  institutions 

□  $2.00/year  extra  for  overseas  surface 

□  $5.50/year  extra  for  overseas  air 

□  $3.35/single  issues 

□  Check  here  if  this  is  a  renewal 


Name 


Address 


Zip  

Report  to  Readers/7 


art  by  Debbie  Salzer 

8/Quest 


Letters 


Dear  Quest: 

I  just  read  the  introduction  and 
the  first  three  papers  from  your 
Vol.  V,  No.  1,  and  I  must  tell  you 
right  away  how  pleased  I  am  to 
find  your  fine  periodical.  And  your 
outlined  future  issues  sound  as  in- 
viting and  informative  as  I  found 
"Kaleidoscope  III"  to  be.  I  immed- 
iately must  subscribe.  .  .  . 

I  enjoyed  your  Quest  "Com- 
munique" immensely!  That  you 
recognize  the  need  to  communicate 
with  your  readership  is  itself  part  of 
the  process  of  feminism  as  an  alter- 
native world  view.  .  .  .  Sidney  Oliv- 
er's introduction  lends  a  coherence, 
and  your  vision  to  the  Kaleido- 
scope issue. 

in  short,  women,  I'm  impressed 
and  happy  that  you  exist  .  .  .;  that 
your  values  are  mine  (more  or  less) 
and  part  of  a  larger  "ours";  that 
you  are  thus  simultaneously  an  ex- 
ample or  teacher  for  me  and  my  po- 
tential student;  that  you  see  change 
as  a  process  (my  personal  faith  is  in 
something  I  call  "process");  and, 
most  of  all,  that  you  are  "spreading 
the  word." 

Cathy  Carr 
Washington,  DC 

Dear  Quest: 

1  enjoyed  your  "Kaleidoscope 
III"   issue,  and  I'm  glad  to  see 


Quest  back  again.  But  I'm  writing 
about  Charlotte  Bunch's  article, 
"Not  By  Degrees."  Although  on 
the  whole  I  think  the  article  value- 
able,  a  couple  of  remarks  which 
Bunch  made  in  passing  really  scared 
me.  Bunch  seems  unaware  of 
school  oppression,  and  the  great  ef- 
fects it  has  on  teaching  and  learn- 
ing. 

Yes,  it  is  vital  to  the  Women's 
Liberation  Movement  for  women 
to  learn  to  abstract  and  generalize 
from  our  experience,  to  create  vi- 
sions and  formulate  goals  and  strat- 
egies, to  learn  from  other  women's 
work.  If  Bunch  can  help  us  do  this, 
fine.  But  there's  an  immense  dif- 
ference between  teaching  in  a  wom- 
en's school  or  women's  center  and 
teaching  in  a  traditional  university. 
In  the  former,  the  only  goals  are 
our  learning  and  our  betterment; 
in  the  university,  functions  of 
labeling  and  screening  people  must 
be  fulfilled. 

Let's  never  underestimate  the 
feelings  of  fear  that  exams  and 
grades  can  generate.  The  academic 
system  deliberately  instills  these 
feelings  so  that  many  people  will 
emerge  from  school  with  their  self- 
esteem  impaired  to  some  degree. 

Bunch  says  she  requires  a  jour- 
nal. She  points  out  that  her  class  is 
not  a  "soft  women's  course."  But 
how  can  she  "require"  something 
and  make  a  course  "hard"?  Only  if 
her  natural  authority  as  a  know- 
ledgeable woman  is  backed  up  by 
the  academic  system's  power  to 
punish   non-compliance   with  the 

Letters/9 


"requirements"  —  by  denying  stu- 
dents self-esteem  and  future  eco- 
nomic power. 

If  this  school  oppression  re- 
mains unacknowledged,  not  only 
will  students  continue  to  feel  bad 
about  themselves,  but  the  scope  of 
feminist  thought  will  be  at  least  in 
some  measure  restricted. 

Elly  Janesdaughter 
Cambridge,  MA 

Dear  Quest: 

I  found  the  section  on  "Femin- 
ism &  Education"  very  provocative 
—  provoking  feelings  and  thoughts. 
Excellent  suggestions  re:  teaching 
theory  —  though  Charlotte  Bunch's 
tone  was  a  bit  condescending  to 
women,  I  thought.  Too  much  of  a 
"them  and  us"  split.  Jo  Freeman 
was  illuminating  (especially  for  a 
women's  studies  person)  —  but  per- 
haps too  bitter.  She  seems  to  for- 
get that  we  do  make  strong  impacts 
on  our  students'  thinking  and  in 
their  lives.  Glad  you're  back.  I 
missed  your  voice. 

Evelyn  Torton  Beck 
Madison,  Wl 

Dear  Quest: 

I  was  a  charter  subscriber  to 
Quest  and  renewed  faithfully  with 
each  volume.  Knowing  you  were 
having  problems,  I  waited  until 
summer  1979  before  writing  a  post- 
card of  enquiry.  .  .  . 

Last  week,  guess  what  I  noticed 
in  the  ALFA  (Atlanta  Lesbian  Fem- 
inist Alliance)  library  —  a  copy  of 
Quest  they  had  received  in  Decem- 


ber and  I  have  still  not  received. 

Do  not  send  it!  I've  spent  at 
least  $25  a  month  on  women's  pub- 
lications for  almost  ten  years.  I  ex- 
pect I  have  the  finest  women's  li- 
brary in  the  southeast.  Over  those 
years  I've  been  ripped  off  of  at  least 
$100  worth  of  issues-not-sent, 
books  or  shirts  not  mailed,  etc.  1 
wouldn't/don't  put  up  with  1%  of 
this  from  male  mailers  and  I'm  too 
poor  to  continue  it  with  women 
either. 

Please  cancel  my  subscription. 

Diana  Kaye 
Decatur,  GA 

Editor's  Note:  We  regret  all  the 
problems  our  subscribers  have  had 
in  receiving  Quest.  Because  we 
published  only  one  issue  in  1979, 
we  lost  our  second  class  mailing 
permit.  This  necessitated  that  we 
mail  "Kaleidoscope  III"  third  class 
—  a  more  expensive  and  less  effici- 
ent way  to  mail.  We  have  learned 
that  many  issues  failed  to  reach 
subscribers  even  though  their  names 
appear  on  our  master  list,  and  labels 
were  made  for  them.  We  are  work- 
ing with  the  Post  Office  to  deter- 
mine what  went  wrong  so  that  it 
won't  happen  again. 

Other  readers  who  did  not  re- 
ceive "Kaleidoscope  III, "  but  who 
have  subscribed,  should  let  us  know 
and  we  will  extend  your  subscrip- 
tion for  an  additional  issue. 

We  hope  our  readers  will  con- 
tinue to  support  us  through  this 
trying  period. 


10/Quest,  vol.  V  no.  2 


As  a  journal  of  theory,  Quest  has  been  primarily  concerned  with  structures  — 
structures  of  class,  race,  gender,  economy  and  family.  We  have  been  less  con- 
cerned with  the  ways  in  which  those  structures  are  sustained  and  perpetuated  by 
culture  and  ideology.  In  devoting  a  feature  to  media  and  culture,  we  hope  to 
bring  to  an  analysis  of  culture  —  of  film,  art,  music  —  a  feminist  perspective  in- 
formed by  structural  analysis.  A  t  the  same  time,  we  hope  to  maf^e  the  Journal 
more  responsive  to  cultural  nuances. 

Our  focus  will  be  two-fold.  We  will  examine  trends  within  the  mainstream  — 
in  television,  film,  publishing  and  popular  music.  It  is  clear  from  a  quick  glance 
at  such  media  that  feminist  ideas  have  had  an  impact  on  themes  and  issues  select- 
ed. What  does  it  mean  that  a  woman-hating  film  like  Kramer  vs.  Kramer  wins  an 
academy  award?  In  what  ways  does  mainstream  culture  coopt  the  issues  we 
raise,  invert  them,  and  use  them  against  us?  How  do  these  perverted  versions  of 
our  reality  support  and  encourage  the  backlash  against  abortion  rights,  sexual 
freedom  and  economic  reforms  gained  over  the  last  two  decades?  On  the  other 
hand,  in  what  ways  have  feminist  ideas  had  a  positive  impact  on  mainstream 
ideology? 

As  a  feminist  journal,  we  have  a  particular  interest  in  the  cultural  phenomena 
and  institutions  produced  by  our  own  movement.  We  will  look  at  the  art,  music, 
drama  and  other  media  which  have  emerged  over  the  last  decade.  We  will  bring 
you  recent  developments  of  feminist  film  theory  as  well  as  critiques  of  movies, 
plays,  music  and  art  created  by  women.  These  media  offer  us  illuminations  of 
our  history,  perspectives  on  our  current  lives,  and  visions  for  our  future. 

In  short,  we  will  assess  the  cultural  phenomena  and  institutions  of  our  times 
—  from  disco  to  soap  opera,  from  women 's  music  festivals  to  feminist  science 
fiction.  We  want  to  bring  to  that  assessment  a  feminist  perspective  out  of  which 
we  can  develop  stronger  and  clearer  lines  of  communication  within  the  women's 
movement,  and  between  our  movement  and  others. 

If  you  have  any  ideas  for  articles  you  would  like  to  see,  or  if  you  have  an 
article  you  would  like  to  submit,  contact  Jayne  Loader,  4717  Arlington  Blvd., 
Arlington,  VA  22203. 

This  feature  begins  with  two  articles:  a  dialogue  between  artist  Judy  Chicago 
and  Elizabeth  Hess,  and  Ann  Markusen's  review  of  the  socialist  "docudrama" 
Northern  Lights. 

1  Media  1 

& 

'  Culture  ' 

Media  &  Culture/1 1 


As  the  most  ambitious  worf?  to  date  of  a  pioneering  woman  artist,  THE  DIN- 
NER PARTY  In  as  been  both  lavishly  praised  and  exhaustively  analyzed  by  the 
feminist  press,  in  her  conversation  with  THE  DINNER  PA  R  TV's  creator,  Judy 
Chicago,  Elizabeth  Hess  focuses  on  an  area  that  other  critics  have  neglected:  the 
politics  underlying  both  the  production  of  THE  DINNER  PARTY  and  the 
piece  itself.  It  is  not  Hess'  goal  to  re-examine  THE  DINNER  PARTY  as  a  work 
of  art  but  rather  to  probe  Chicago 's  political  ideology.  Their  interchange  con- 
tributes to  our  understanding  of  how  Chicago's  feminism  and  aesthetics  inter- 
sect, as  well  as  illuminating  important  areas  of  controversy  in  feminist  theory 
and  practice. 

Hess  and  Chicago  grapple  with  questions  of  art  and  politics,  of  who  makes 
history,  of  the  spiritual  nature  of  women  under  patriarchy,  of  group  structure, 
process  and  leadership  in  the  feminist  movement.  The  tensions  which  many  of 
us  perceived  in  this  wide-ranging  dialogue  reflect  very  real  political  differences 
between  the  two  women,  differences  which  are  replicated  throughout  the  femin- 
ist movement.  It  would  be  inaccurate  to  attribute  these  differences  simply  to  a 
clash  between  socialist  feminism  and  radical  feminism,  for  such  labeling  tends  to 
obscure  and  to  flatten  ideology  rather  than  reveal  it,  and  deny,  through  generali- 
zation, both  ideological  complexity  and  the  points  at  which  differing  ideologies 
overlap.  Among  feminists,  these  points  of  convergence  are  particularly  impor- 
ant  to  identify,  for  they  often  enable  women  from  disparate  cultural  and  politi- 
cal backgrounds  to  work  together  as  a  force  for  change.  The  following  dialogue 
between  Hess  and  Chicago  contributes  to  the  ongoing  and  critical  process  of  de- 
fining and  clarifying  feminist  politics,  as  well  as  broadening  our  knowledge  of 
Chicago 's  ideas  and  her  art. 


12/Quest,  vol.  V  no.  2 


art  by  Debbie  Salzer 
Media  &  Culture/13 


14/Quest 


It  Is  Art.. .But  Is  It  Political? 


A  Conversation  with  Judy  Chicago  by  ELIZABETH  HESS 

EH:  Is  the  women's  movement  in  California  healthy  these  days? 
JC:  You  mean  is  the  movement  dead? 

EH:  No!  No!  I'm  curious  about  v^hat  specifically  is  going  on. 

JC:  I 've  spent  most  of  the  last  five  years  in  my  studio.  I  haven't  been  out  very 
much.  If  I  compare  nov^  to  five  years  ago,  there  are  more  women  in  positions  of 
power.  Women  have  more  ability  to  get  their  views  out  into  the  culture,  but  we 
still  are  incredibly  powerless.  Consciousness  has  changed  a  lot,  but  translating 
that  into  fundamental  change  and  personal  power  is  still  in  the  future. 

EH:  It  seems  to  me  that  only  token  women  have  been  given  positions  of  power 
to  make  the  majority  of  women  feel  as  if  real  change  has  occurred. 

JC:  I  think  that's  a  ridiculous  statement.  For  example,  look  at  me!  Here  I  am 
today  whereas  five  or  ten  years  ago  I  never  would  have  had  these  avenues  of 
communication.  I  have  this  now  by  and  large  because  of  women.  Women  are 
more  in  control  of  the  media:  they  can  get  books  out,  they  are  in  magazines, 
they  can  write,  get  on  the  radio  and  talk.  This  is  all  very  important. 

EH:  Perhaps  you  are  one  of  the  tokens  that  slipped  through.  I  think  the  wom- 
en's movement  is  a  very  marketable  commodity. 

JC:  That's  because  you  live  in  New  York  City,  the  world's  greatest  marketplace. 

EH:  It's  also  because  we're  sitting  in  a  Doubleday  suite,  and  because  Doubleday 
held  a  party  for  you  in  the  First  Women's  Bank  last  night.  The  women's  move- 
ment is  in  the  process  of  being  institutionalized. 


Media  &  Culture/15 


JC:  If  it's  not  institutionalized  it's  going  to  disappear  just  lii<e  it  did  before. 

EH:  How  does  the  institutionalization  of  the  movement  help  women  make  gains 
—all  women,  minority  women,  poor  women? 

JC:  I  just  know  how  to  put  one  step  in  front  of  the  other  to  try  to  go  a  little 
farther.  We're  not  going  to  have  heaven  on  earth  in  our  lifetimes.  We're  not 
going  to  see  the  end  of  oppression.  If  we're  lucky  we'll  lay  another  brick  and 
leave  our  mark.  That  is  how  history  changes  and  the  human  race  moves  forward, 
inch  by  inch.  Anything  else  is  fantasyville.  When  people  talk  to  me  like  this  I 
can't  relate  to  it. 

EH:  Do  you  have  a  theoretical  construct  that's  either  a  "fantasy,"  as  you  call 
it,  or  an  ideology? 

JC:  Of  course!  There  has  to  be  a  fundamental  change  on  the  planet  that  must 
affect  all  human  relationships.  We  need  an  equalized  world  structure  —  politi- 
cally, racially,  sexually. 

EH:  How  does  this  change  come  about?  Do  you  think  we  need  some  form  of 
social  revolution? 

jC:  You  mean  a  political  revolution?  Like  a  war?  Oh  God,  no!  That's  another 
male  trip  —  more  war. 

EH:  Well,  how  is  this  vast  change  going  to  come  about? 

JC:  Through  evolution,  education  and  art  —  all  the  avenues  through  which 
human  beings  can  communicate.  In  a  women's  revolution  the  terms  are  differ- 
ent: the  nature  of  the  revolution  is  to  care  for  people,  not  to  destroy  human  life. 

EH:  Do  you  think  it  is  a  priority  for  the  women's  movement  to  think  about 
strategies  for  bringing  about  change? 

JC:  I'm  an  artist.  I'm  not  interested  in  making  change  through  politics.  I'm 
trying  to  make  change  my  way.  Those  women  interested  in  making  change 
through  politics  should  do  it  their  way.  I  don't  want  to  become  a  Sylvia  Pank- 
hurst  and  sacrifice  my  art  to  my  politics.  I  want  to  make  art.  Do  we  have  to 
subsume  our  individual  gifts  to  work  for  some  theoretical  revolution  that  may  or 
may  not  ever  come?  I  think  it  is  revolutionary  to  be  an  individual  at  the  highest 


16/Quest 


level  you  can  be.  That's  revolutionary  and  we've  never  been  able  to  do  it.  We*ve 
never  been  able  to  write  good  music,  make  great  art  or  theory,  or  shape  philoso- 
phy or  politics. 

EH:  What  about  women  like  Emma  Goldman  or  Alexandra  Kollantai?  Their 
ideas  are  still  relevant  today. 

JC:  Only  if  you  are  a  Marxist. 

EH:  That's  not  true. 

JC:  I  have  trouble  with  all  this.  I  support  it,  but  it's  not  where  it's  at.  I'm  in- 
terested in  myth  and  the  way  in  which  myth  shapes  our  perception,  the  way 
images  reflect  values,  the  way  it  is  possible  to  change  perceptions  by  making  new 
myths.  That's  what  I  know  about.  If  I  go  off  the  base  of  my  own  experience  I 
feel  less  secure.  I'm  afraid  of  saying  the  wrong  thing,  focussing  on  the  wrong  as- 
pect. I'm  afraid  of  revealing  my  own  racism  and  classism. 

EH:  It's  surprising  that  you  are  having  so  much  trouble  getting  "The  Dinner 
Party"  into  museums. 

JC:  They  tell  me  it  isn't  art. 

EH:  What  is  it  then? 

JC:  They  call  it  a  "sociological  phenomena." 

EH:  The  art  itself  is  beautiful  in  a  very  traditional  sense.  Of  course  there  aren't 
many  artists  who  distribute  their  own  work. 

JC:  I  didn't  exactly  choose  to  do  it  this  way.  It's  that  the  system  doesn't  work 
for  me.  If  I  didn't  do  it  this  way  there  would  have  been  a  complete  blockout  of 
my  work.  There  is  a  lot  of  resistance  to  the  dialogue  my  work  elicits.  "The  Din- 
ner Party"  challenges  certain  ideas  about  the  nature  of  Western  civilization  and 
the  nature  of  women.  Ordinarily  these  issues  are  blocked  out  by  ignoring  them, 
pretending  they  are  not  there.  But  now,  there  is  a  real  physical  object.  The 
dialogue  has  been  started  about  whether  or  not  art  is  only  those  rarefied  objects 
that  hang  on  those  white  walls  that  20  people  see,  one  person  owns  and  nobody 
cares  about. 

EH:  The  kind  of  work  you  have  been  making  up  until  "The  Dinner  Party"? 


Media  &  Culture/17 


JC:  Yes,  that's  true.  It's  taken  me  a  long  time  to  figure  out  how  to  change  that. 
And  I  could  go  much,  much  further.  I  can  foresee  all  kinds  of  changes  in  the  na- 
ture of  the  way  images  interface  with  society. 

EH:  What  kind  of  changes? 

JC:  People  in  this  country  shouldn't  have  to  have  bad  art  when  there  is  good  art 
available.  Most  people  buy  lousy  paintings,  prints  or  reproductions. 

EH:  You  mean  like  that?  (pointing  to  a  reproduction  of  an  ordinary  geometric 
print  on  tlie  wall  of  the  Doubleday  office) 

JC:  Yes.  It's  based  on  what  people  see  in  hotel  rooms.  This  is  because  they  are 
not  educated  about  art. 

EH:  It's  also  because  people  can't  buy  art  that  is  very  expensive. 

JC:  No,  it's  not  all  expensive.  There  are  posters  and  books,  for  instance. 

EH:  Did  any  posters  come  out  of  "The  Dinner  Party"? 

JC:  Yes,  lots  of  them.  But  they  are  difficult  to  get  because  the  system  doesn't 
distribute  posters.  There  are  three  levels  of  problems:  1 )  the  images  themselves 
must  be  accessible,  which  is  the  job  of  the  artist;  2)  the  meaning  of  the  art  must 
be  accessible,  which  is  the  work  of  the  critics  (and  they  are  doing  a  lousy  job); 
3)  the  work  itself  must  be  accessible,  which  is  the  work  of  galleries  and  muse- 
ums. Nobody  is  doing  it.  Feminist  artists  are  trying  to  make  their  work  access- 
ible and  change  the  nature  of  the  audience,  and  a  few  critics  like  Lucy  Lippard 
care,  but  those  of  us  trying  to  build  an  alternative,  need  a  great  deal  of  help. 

EH:  Critics  in  this  country  are  largely  trying  to  sell  art.  I  always  get  the  feeling 
that  when  a  critic  does  a  good  job  of  mystifying  the  artist's  intentions  and  con- 
fusing the  results  of  his  or  her  work,  the  art  object  becomes  more  valuable  on 
the  marketplace.  One  of  the  things  that  I  like  about  "The  Dinner  Party"  is  your 
attempt  to  reach  a  mass  audience,  which  is  not  a  major  concern  in  the  main- 
stream of  contemporary  art. 

JC:  Reaching  a  mass  audience  has  been  a  very  strong  impulse  in  art  ever  since 
art  lost  its  social  base.  The  Mexican  muralists  reached  masses  of  people.  Du- 
buffet  wanted,  at  first,  to  reach  a  mass  audience.  This  was  important  in  the 


18/Quest 


Media  &  Culture/19 


Bauhaus,  Art  Nouveaux,  in  the  arts  and  crafts  movement  and  in  the  WPA.  But, 
since  World  War  II,  there  has  been  a  retreat  from  this  kind  of  art  and  a  silencing 
of  artists  on  an  unbelievable  scale. 

EH:  Why  do  you  think  this  is  so? 

JC:  Some  of  it  grows  out  of  the  alienation  of  the  artist  from  society  that  was  a 
result  of  the  industrial  revolution.  Some  of  it  is  from  the  profit  motive  that  has 
become  so  major  in  our  culture  that  art  is  no  longer  profitable.  Art  embodies 
spiritual  values  and  the  fact  that  artists  are  deprived  (not  paid  or  honored)  is  a 
reflection  of  the  values  that  pervade  our  entire  society. 

EH:  What  do  you  mean  by  "spiritual  values"? 

JC:  I  don't  mean  God.  I  mean  there  are  more  important  things  than  making  a 
dollar.  There's  the  quality  of  human  life.  But,  I'll  tell  you  something  about  the 
church:  it  was  a  refuge  for  women  before  it  became  oppressive  to  them. 

EH:  How  did  you  decide  who  the  39  women  invited  to  sit  at  the  table  would 
be?  For  instance,  why  is  Emma  Goldman  on  the  floor  and  Virginia  Woolf  at  the 
table? 

JC:  There  were  several  criteria.  First,  there  were  periods  of  western  civilization 
that  we  wanted  to  mark.  I  was  looking,  for  instance,  for  a  Byzantine  woman. 
There  is  no  history  of  the  human  race  because  history  has  been  written  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  male  ruling  classes.  The  information  is  simply  not  avail- 
able. So  first,  I  tried  to  find  the  most  outstanding  women  of  the  period,  and 
then  to  represent  different  strands  of  women's  experience.  If  I  had  a  woman  in 
politics  represented,  I  looked  for  a  different  aspect  of  women's  experience. 
There  were  women  who  were  in  great  contention,  like  Emma  Goldman.  I  had  to 
represent  what  were,  for  me,  the  two  major  steps  in  breaking  the  silence  of  wom- 
en's experience,  and  that  was  Virginia  Woolf  in  literature  and  Georgia  O'Kecfe 
in  art. 

EH:  What  was  the  dispute  around  Emma  Goldman? 

|C:  Emma  Goldman  was  very  anti-feminist  in  many  ways.  She  was  against  the 
vote,  so  I  just  couldn't  put  her  at  the  table. 

EH:  There  are  women  represented  who  may  have  been  pro-women  but  who 


20/Quest 


were  also  aggressively  anti-left.  Rebecca  West,  for  instance. 
JC:  Well,  she's  on  the  floor. 
EH:  So,  it  didn't  matter? 

JC:  Well,  we're  talking  about  the  table  now.  The  floor  is  another  thing.  I 
couldn't  have  Susan  B.  Anthony,  the  queen  of  the  table,  who  had  struggled  for 
50  years,  sitting  with  Emma  Goldman,  who  had  openly  gone  against  the  vote. 
Goldman  was  not  a  role  model  for  the  future,  as  much  as  I  respect  her,  and 
every  woman  had  to  be  a  role  model  for  the  future. 

EH:  What  was  the  criteria  for  the  floor? 

JC:  Well,  put  it  like  this:  just  to  find  a  woman  who  lived  in  Wales  from  the  9th 
century  —  I  didn't  care  if  she  only  picked  her  nose,  she  was  going  to  be  on  the 
floor  just  to  preserve  her  name. 

EH:  If  history  is  recorded  as  a  history  of  great  men,  hasn't  your  reversal  of  this 
myth  just  added  to  the  problem.  You  have  removed  all  of  these  women  from 
their  historical  context. 

JC:  Of  course  there  is  a  context! 

EH:  Only  the  art  context  of  "The  Dinner  Party." 

JC:  There  are  also  the  stages  of  western  civilization. 

EH:  What  I 'm  getting  at  is  how  you  think  history  is  made.  How  do  you  think 
change  comes  about?  Do  you  think  history  is  propelled  forward  by  great  lead- 
ers? 

JC:  This  is  the  same  discussion  I  had  with  Adrienne  Rich!  Before  we  can  devel- 
op new  forms,  we  have  to  look  at  history  as  seen  through  women. 

EH:  You  called  the  structure  of  "The  Dinner  Party"  a  "benevolent  hierarchy." 
I'm  sure  there  must  have  been  a  great  deal  of  discussion  about  how  to  structure 
the  project,  whether  to  work  as  a  collective  or  — 

JC:  No!  No!  I  organized  this  exactly  the  same  way  I  organized  everything 


Media  &  Culture/21 


else  I've  done.  It's  the  basic  feminist  structure.  It's  built  using  the  small  group 
process  techniques,  consciousness  raising,  acknowledging  the  work  of  everyone, 
going  around  the  circle,  while  simultaneously  providing  leadership  and  a  role 
model  for  achievement. 

EH:  Have  you  ever  been  part  of  a  collective. 

JC:  No,  there  aren't  many  in  California. 

EH:  They  are  quite  popular  on  the  East  Coast. 

JC:  Oh,  I  know.  They  are  not  popular  on  the  West  Coast  because  I  started 
most  of  the  feminist  organizations  there.  Leadership  has  more  to  say  than  one 
would  think,  provided  that  leadership  is  humane. 

EH:  In  a  collective  structure  you  still  have  leadership. 

JC:  But  it  is  unacknowledged. 

EH:  Actually,  it's  extremely  overt,  but  it  is  always  fluid.  It  has  become  clear 
that  if  people  don't  take  responsibility  and  leadership  nothing  gets  accomplished. 

JC:   Leadership  was  fluid  in  the  studio,  too,  but  there  were  ultimate  points 
where  it  stopped.  We  didn't  pretend  everyone  was  the  same.  In  a  structure 
where  everyone  is  the  same  you  can  have  a  collective.  But,  if  everyone  is  not  the 
same  in  terms  of  vision,  experience  ...  1  can't  pretend.  I 'm  not  good  at  pre- 
tending. 

EH:  Do  you  think  your  work  is  propaganda? 

JC:  No.  Art  is  never  propaganda.  I'm  totally  opposed  to  propaganda  because  it 
degrades  art.  Art,  for  me,  serves  the  human  spirit  and  transcends  particular  po- 
litical fads  or  periods. 

EH:  I  don't  think  propaganda  has  to  be  trendy.  Obviously  advertising  corpora- 
tions are  producing  trendy  images  for  their  purposes.  But  all  art  has  its  own  dis- 
tinct ideological  message,  whether  it  is  an  outright  reactionary  one  or  a  feminist 
one. 

JC:  But  the  degree  to  which  it  is  really  good  art  is  the  degree  to  which  it  tran- 


22/Quest 


scends  that  particular  ideology.  "The  Dinner  Party"  is  not  good  because  it  is  a 
piece  of  feminist  work.  What  makes  it  good  is  that  it  transcends  its  origins  and 
speaks  to  people  whether  they  are  feminists  or  not. 

EH:    Do  you  want  to  separate  the  political  impetus  for  the  piece  from  the 
product  itself? 

JC:  I  didn't  make  the  piece  as  a  political  statement.  I  never  think  about  politics 
like  that.  I  made  the  piece  as  a  work  of  art.  It  is  my  hope  in  art  that  the  piece 
contains.  It  is  not  about  politics,  but  there  are  political  implications.  Just  like 
"Guernica"  has  political  implications. 

EH:  I  Ve  read  that  you're  offended  when  your  butterfly  images  are  referred  to 
as  vaginas. 

JC:  This  is  a  sticky  issue  for  me  at  the  moment.  There  are  two  issues  here. 
First,  my  images  can  be  seen  as  sophisticated,  transformed  abstract  images  of 
art.  Second,  they  can  be  seen  on  a  more  primitive  level  in  which  my  images 
affirm  women  because  they  speak  about  female  sexuality  unabashedly  and  use 
that  sexuality  as  part  of  the  image.  I  have  confused  a  lot  of  women  by  denying 
that  they  are  vaginas.  These  women  are  not  looking  at  my  work  as  art,  because 
they  are  so  hungry  for  images  that  affirm  them  personally.  They  are  not  inter- 
ested in  how  images  are  transformed,  which  I  am  because  I  am  an  artist. 

EH:  What  does  feminism  mean  to  you? 

JC:  A  particular  historical  analysis  that  the  original  class  distinction  was  be- 
tween male  and  female,  and  that  this  class  distinction  predates  all  others  and 
provides  the  basic  underpinnings  for  the  hierarchy  on  this  planet. 

EH:  Have  you  ever  been  involved  with  the  Great  Goddess  movement? 

JC:  Not  directly,  although  I  do  have  Goddess  imagery  in  "The  Dinner  Party." 
The  thrust  to  make  the  feminine  holy  is  basic  to  my  work  and  to  the  Goddess 
movement. 

EH:  What  many  people  think  of  as  traditionally  "feminine"  is  also  traditional- 
ly oppressive.  The  advertising  companies,  for  instance,  have  a  clear  idea  about 
what  is  feminine. 


Media  &  Culture/23 


JC:  I  don't  mean  their  idea  of  feminine.  I  mean  all  that  has  been  associated 
with  feminine:  vulnerability,  emotionalism,  softness,  compassion,  weakness  — 
all  these  values. 

EH:  The  ad  companies  would  still  agree  with  you.  Why  should  these  things  be 
"holy"? 

JC:  Because  the  world  needs  to  be  infused  with  them. 

Elisabeth  Hess  is  an  editor  at  Seven  Days  and  a  member  of  the  Heresies  collective. 


Last  November  several  Quest  staff  members  attended  a  benefit  showing  of  the 
film,  "Northern  Lights,  "directed  by  John  Hanson.  We  went  in  support  of  the 
D.C.  City  wide  Housing  Coalition  and  because  many  of  us  are  movie  fans  and 
were  excited  at  the  prospect  of  a  good  movie  with  good  politics.  Our  excite- 
ment was  soon  deflated  when  it  became  apparent  that  "Northern  Lights"  is 
another  male  vision  of  history  that  ignores  and  misrepresents  women.  Our  ini- 
tial responses  were  feelings  ofdej'a  vu  (Oh,  God,  here  we  are  back  in  1969  faced 
with  the  same  old  struggle  with  leftist  men  about  their  anti-woman  politics), 
and  sinking  stomachs  which  gave  way  to  rising  anger.  A  discussion  period  with 
the  director  followed  the  film.  He  approached  the  podium  amid  enthusiastic 
applause  from  many  in  the  audience.  Dutifully  one  of  us  raised  her  hand  and 
said,  "But  what  about  the  portrayal  of  women  in  the  film?"  The  usual  debate 
ensued.  John  Hanson  was  defensive  and  evasive,  we  were  angry  and  confrontative. 
The  audience  was  extremely  uncomfortable,  embarrassed  by  the  bunch  of  ag- 
gressive feminists  asking  those  tiresome  questions.  For  one  of  us,  our  anger  was 
framed  by  the  questions:   "How  dare  the  director  presume  to  bill  his  art  as 
progressive  when  it  violates  women 's  history  and  perpetuates  stereotypes  identi- 
cal to  those  of  any  sexist  Hollywood  film?  What's  political  about  this  movie, 
anyway?  Why  do  we  have  to  fight  over  and  over  the  same  battles  with  male 
leftists?" 

it  seems  incredible  to  us  that  in  1980  a  movie  could  be  advertised  as  political- 
ly progressive  which  distorts  the  history  of  peoples'  struggles  in  this  country  and 
ignores  feminism.  What  we  ultimately  got  out  of  the  experience  is  a  sad  recogni- 
tion that  we  cannot  assume  that  art  produced  by  men  who  call  themselves  pro- 
gressive will  be  pro-woman,  in  content  or  construction.  Nevertheless,  we  must 
be  relentless  in  our  demand  that  men,  whether  they  are  leftists  or  regular  popu- 
lar culture  creators,  not  be  allowed  to  peddle  dishonest,  stereotypical  images  of 
our  lives.  It  is  clearer  than  ever  to  us  that  women  have  to  research  and  write  our 


24/Quest 


own  history  if  it  is  to  be  accurate,  and  ttiat  images  of  film  and  all  art  have  to  be 
drawn  by  women  if  they  are  to  be  affirming  of  our  lives,  past  and  present. 

Thus,  we  are  pleased  to  present  the  following  review  essay  of  "Northern 
Lights"  by  Ann  Markusen  which  provides  an  insightful  and  knowledgeable 
critique  of  the  film.  Her  essay  details  the  problems  in  the  movie  and  speaks  to 
the  real  history  of  women  in  rural  America.   S.B.  &  A.R. 

Who  Were  Your  Grandmothers, 
John  Hanson? 

A  Review  of  Northern  Lights  by  ANN  MARKUSEN 

Marc,  my  friend  from  Chicago,  got  us  the  free  tickets.  It  was  a  sneak,  almost 
unadvertised  preview  of  Northern  Lights.  As  I  settled  in  a  front  row  seat  in 
Berkeley's  intimate  Pacific  Film  Archives,  I  saw  a  man  with  a  Northern  Lights 
teeshirt  stride  across  the  floor.  1  squeezed  Marc's  hand.  "I  want  one,"  I  said. 
Eager  and  already  moved  nearly  to  tears,  I  waited  for  the  first  political  film  of 
my  own  heritage  to  begin. 

The  film  introduces  Mr.  Martinson,  a  very  alive  89  year  old  survivor  of  the 
film's  subject  —  the  anti-corporate  radicalism  among  farmers  in  the  upper  Mid- 
west, 1 91  5-1 91 6.  Martinson  is  a  portly  version  of  my  own  grandfather,  Marinus 
Markusen,  who  we  call  Renus,  and  who  at  93  is  still  living  on  his  farm  in  Crom- 
well, northern  Minnesota.  Like  Renus,  Martinson  lives  in  a  spare  room  with  an 
old  metal  bed  stand  and  glass  curtains  at  the  window.  And  like  Renus,  he  is 
sharp  of  memory,  plays  music,  exercises,  and  is  still  rambunctious.  He  sits  down 
at  his  typewriter  to  share  with  us  his  history.  My  eyes  fill  with  tears  of  joy. 

Martinson  opens  a  diary  that  he  says  he  has  recently  found,  which  belonged 
to  his  old  organizing  buddy,  Ray  Sorenson.  The  film  moves  away  from  Martin- 
son, in  1978,  to  the  Sorenson  farmstead,  North  Dakota,  1915.  And  the  story 
begins  to  unfold.  In  my  own  uncritical  way,  I  have  already  decided  I  love  the 
film.  Fiercely  partisan  to  the  roots  I  return  to  every  summer,  and  with  longing 
for  my  family  in  Cromwell,  I  am  grateful  to  the  filmmakers  John  Hanson  and 
Rob  Nilsson,  for  struggling  to  put  my  family's  story  on  film. 

While  Ray  Sorenson's  story  is  about  hard  times  on  the  farm,  under  increasing 
monopolization  by  middlemen  and  financial  power  of  bankers,  it  is  also  about 
family  life  and  relationships  between  men  and  women.  I  am  drawn  in  by  the  ini- 
tial, playful  love  scene,  in  which  Ray  asks  his  neighbor  Inga  to  marry  him.  I 
tolerate  a  scene  of  industrious  women  cooking  and  serving  meals,  in  which  the 


Media  &  Culture/25 


new  fiancee  is  told  that  she  will  soon  be  doing  the  same.  When  Ray  fails  to  re- 
turn to  supper  on  time  because  he  is  hard  drinking  with  the  men  in  the  back 
room  granary  bar,  Ray's  mother  tells  Inga  to  get  used  to  it,  that  men  are  like 
that  and  cannot  be  changed.  Then,  the  tardy  Ray  is  toasted  by  the  men  of  his 
family  at  the  dinner  table.  The  toasts  are  bawdy,  the  women  look  embarrassed, 
eyes  downcast,  the  men  laugh  gustily.  Ray's  father  makes  a  toast,  saying  to  Ray, 
"You  must  make  love  like  a  Viking'Marauder."  My  anticipation  turns  to  rage. 
An  electric  current  begins  to  run  through  my  body. 

The  portrayal  of  women  worsens.  The  depiction  of  women's  activity  on  the 
farm  is  limited  to  serving  meals.  Inga  and  the  other  women  look  on  with  sensi- 
tive horror  as  the  men  slaughter  a  pet  pig.  Only  men  participate  in  the  beautiful- 
ly filmed  blizzard-encumbered  wheat  harvest,  while  the  women  wait  to  put  soup 
on  the  table,  inga  apparently  cannot  even  ride  a  horse.  When  she  comes  to  tell 
her  fiance  that  her  family's  farm  is  being  repossessed,  she  is  delivered  by  a 
shrouded  male  figure  on  horseback  and  returned  by  the  fiance  in  an  old  family 
Ford. 

As  I  sit  receiving  this  image,  I  think  of  my  friend,  Sheryll  Patterson-Black. 
Sheryll  grew  up  on  a  northwestern  Nebraska  farm,  migrated  to  the  cities  to  go  to 
school  and  to  work  as  a  secretary,  trying  to  write  on  the  side,  raising  three  kids, 
in  large  part  alone.  For  years  she  would  make  forays  back  to  Crawford,  deep  in 
the  ravines  and  tanglewood  of  the  only  hilly  part  of  Nebraska.  In  the  process 
she  researched  women  homesteaders. ^   She  found  that  in  some  areas  of  the 
Plains,  as  many  as  one  in  five  homesteaders  filing  claims  were  women  fleeing 
from  unhappy  marriages,  widowed  mothers  with  children  in  tow,  or  young  un- 
married women,  often  sisters,  who  found  in  homesteading  a  possibility  for  eco- 
nomic independence  not  available  elsewhere  in  American  society.  Many  women 
thrived  on  and  loved  farm  life  on  the  prairies. 

Sheryll's  work  led  her  to  suspect  the  "reluctant  pioneer"  image  painted  by 
literally  every  male  author  writing  fiction  or  fact  about  the  West.  Whether  wom- 
en were  accompanied  by  husbands  or  not,  they  built  sod  houses,  dug  wells, 
cleared  stones  from  the  fields,  cared  for  livestock  and  made  hay.  And  women 
were  successful  farmers.  Sheryll's  research  shows  that  women's  success  rates 
in  "proving  up"  (lasting  the  five  years  required  to  secure  title)  on  homesteads 
were  higher  than  men's.  Willa  Gather,  a  prominent  Plains  author,  documents 
how  Alexandra  in  O  Pioneers  remains  single  for  many  years  and  succeeds  as  a 
farmer  far  better  than  her  brothers  or  her  neighbors:   "Anyone  thereabouts 
would  have  told  you  that  this  was  one  of  the  richest  farms  on  the  divide,  and 
that  the  farmer  was  a  woman,  Alexandra  Bergson." 

Yet  the  women  I  am  viewing  in  this  film  seem  incapable  and  uninterested 
in  farming.  After  her  husband  has  drunk  himself  to  death  with  solitary  worry 


26/Quest 


over  the  wheat  crop,  Ray's  widowed  mother  feels  compelled  to  leave  the  farm 
and  retreat  to  her  sister's  in  Ohio.  Implication:  there  is  just  no  point  to  staying 
on  the  farm  without  him  —  she  was  not  a  "real"  farmer. 

Sheryll,  I'm  saying  to  myself,  we've  been  wronged.  Everything  I  know  about 
women's  roles  in  the  farm  West  I've  learned  from  Sheryll,  who  is  the  first  woman 
researcher  to  survey  and  annotate  the  vast  fictional  and  historical  literature  that 
touches  on  women's  Western  farm  experience.  But  everything  I've  learned  from 
Sheryll  jibes  with  my  own  family's  experience,  which  I've  learned  through  seven 
years  of  informal  oral  history  contributed  by  my  grandfather  Renus,  a  Dane  who 
settled  with  his  family  in  Minnesota.  My  great-grandmother  Jenny  helped  build 
the  three  farm  structures,  milked  cows  daily,  and  brought  in  the  hay.  When 
great-grandfather  Hans  migrated  to  Minneapolis  to  work  at  carpentering,  Jenny 
ran  the  farm  for  years.  Women's  farmwork  frequently  included  sole  responsibili- 
ty for  chicken  and  dairy  farming  in  addition  to  responsibilities  shared  with  men. 
Money  income  earned  by  women  through  the  sale  of  eggs  and  homemade  butter 
often  provided  the  capital  for  purchase  of  farm  machinery,  windmills,  seed  and 
household  furnishings. 

The  women  in  Northern  Lights  hold  no  such  central  position  in  the  North  Da- 
kota family.  Apparently,  their  role  is  to  prepare  meals,  to  marry  and  serve  as  the 
butt  of  sexist  jokes,  and  to  suffer  the  neglect  and  willfulness  of  their  men.  There 
are  few  children  in  the  movie,  and  their  relationships  with  adults  are  not  portray- 
ed at  all.  Inga,  I  am  realizing  as  my  anger  builds,  is  presented  as  a  young  woman 
who  neither  knows  nor  cares  much  about  the  techniques  of  farming,  farm  fi- 
nance or  farm  politics.  Yet  in  real  life,  farm  women  were,  and  are,  co-partners 
with  their  men  as  managers  and  operators  of  farms.  While  a  division  of  labor 
did  exist,  it  was  by  no  means  as  severe  as  it  appears  in  the  film. 

Then  Inga's  family  loses  the  farm.  Finally,  I  pray,  we  will  see  women's 
strength.  I  cheer  when  Inga  moves  to  slap  the  smug  banker  who  is  matter-of- 
factly  supervising  the  dispossession.  But  this  is  disciplined  as  a  child's  gesture, 
restrained  by  the  adult  Ray.  The  film  proceeds  to  oversimplify  the  family  re- 
sponse to  the  ruination  of  small  farms.  It  shows  Inga's  family  moving  abruptly 
from  farm  to  city  in  one  dramatic  scene.  In  reality  adaptation  was  far  more 
complex.  When  times  began  to  be  hard,  men  migrated  to  the  cities  to  find  wage 
work.  Both  my  great-grandfather  and  his  son  Marinus  were  forced  to  seek  car- 
pentry work  in  Minneapolis  in  this  era,  unable  to  make  a  livelihood  from  the 
farm  alone.  In  men's  absence,  women  and  children  ran  the  farm.  Women,  too, 
both  wives  and  daughters  like  inga,  worked  as  teachers,  seamstresses,  hired  girls 
and  prostitutes  in  nearby  cities  and  towns  to  provide  extra  cash  for  the  farm. 
Bertha  Markusen,  my  grandfather's  sister,  worked  as  a  rural  school  teacher  (al- 
though she  had  only  six  grades  herself)  and  then  as  a  factory  worker  in  Minnea- 


Media  &  Culture/27 


polis,  sewing  hats  and,  later,  pants.  She  sent  home  whatever  she  could  spare. 

The  encounters  with  urban  life  gradually  changed  the  cultural  and  occupa- 
tional orientation  of  family  members.  My  grandfather  recalls  that  he  and  his 
sister  quarrelled  with  their  father  over  going  into  debt  to  stave  off  failure  of  the 
farm.  The  two  of  them  preferred  city  wage  work  to  a  future  of  indebtedness  on 
the  farm  and  left  their  father  for  Minneapolis.  Their  sister,  Sophie,  disappeared 
into  a  brothel  in  the  same  city,  never  to  be  heard  from  again. 

In  this  transition,  women's  fates  were  often  independent  of  men's.  But  on 
the  screen  I  am  watching  Inga  read  a  letter  from  her  mother,  who  has  accom- 
panied her  father  to  the  distant  city.  She  writes  that  he  is  at  loose  ends  and 
dispirited,  but  does  not  mention  her  own  adjustment  problems.  The  implica- 
tion, again,  is  that  the  transition  for  her  is  not  traumatic,  because  her  sole  role  is 
to  care  for  her  husband,  regardless  of  where  he  lives.  And,  of  course,  she  writes 
the  letters.  I  think  of  the  wealth  of  old  letters  from  both  my  grandfather,  my 
grandmother,  and  her  father,  that  I  read  on  rainy  cold  summer  evenings  in 
Cromwell.  Both  express  the  troubles  and  satisfactions  with  everyday  life,  from 
elderly  hens  trying  to  retire,  to  the  beehive  swarming  at  an  inopportune  mo- 
ment. And  the  letters  exchanged  with  city  kin,  men  and  women  alike,  are  full  of 
reportage  and  yearnings. 

Ray  seems  tough,  energetic,  politically  aware  and  heroic,  turning  to  Inga  for 
tenderness  and  fun.  Inga,  on  the  other  hand,  appears  fragile,  confused  by  poli- 
tics, and  beautifully  untouched  by  the  hard  life  of  the  prairies.  At  one  point, 
she  strokes  Ray's  face  and  warns  him  that  his  skin  is  getting  tough,  apparently 
the  result  of  too  much  exposure  from  organizing.  Anyone  who  knows  the 
consistent  winds  of  the  prairies,  the  relentless  sun,  and  the  relatively  dry  air 
would  protest  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  anyone's  skin  to  be  moist  and 
unweathered,  unless,  of  course,  you  believe  that  women  stay  inside  of  the 
house  all  the  time. 

Finally,  after  waiting  interminably  for  Ray  to  show  up  to  a  "first"  romantic 
supper  alone,  Inga  launches  into  an  impassioned  speech  which  reproaches  Ray 
by  recounting  her  father's  long  absences  from  the  farm  during  the  winters  (he 
supplemented  the  family  income  by  selling  books).  Who  will  mend  the  roof, 
she  asks,  and  perform  the  thousand  other  tasks  of  household  maintenance?  I 
think  of  the  snapshots  we  have  of  Cromwell  women  plastering,  fishing,  pitching 
hay,  forking  up  the  potatoes  at  harvest  time. 

The  film  seems  to  say  that  since  women  aren't  productive  farm  members  only 
men  have  power  and  women  must  adapt  to  their  ways.  Ray's  stonefaced  mother 
counseling  her  daughter-in-law  to  learn  to  adjust  to  men's  heedlessness  —  "you 
can't  change  him,  Inga."  I  remember  the  delight  I  registered  when  Renus  first 
told  me  (after  several  years  of  more  guarded  versions)  that  his  mother  jenny  had 


28/Quest 


struck  out  after  a  new  life  somewhere  on  the  frontier.  She  had  been  left  alone 
on  the  farm  and  had  begun  to  suspect  that  husband  Hans  was  not  sending  her 
back  enough  money.  Renus  now  thinks  he  might  have  been  drinking  it  up. 
After  several  years  of  unheeded  complaints  and  long  winter  nights'  loneliness, 
Jenny  picked  up  with  a  neighboring  bachelor.  Six  months  more  and  they  disap- 
peared together.  That,  I  said  silently  to  the  young  Inga,  was  my  grandmother's 
response  to  the  man  who  would  not  change! 

The  screening  room  becomes  my  forum  for  spontaneous,  inarticulate  de- 
fense of  my  history.  After  the  film,  director  Rob  Nilsson,  actors  Robert  Beh- 
ling  (Ray)  and  Susan  Lynch  (Inga)  come  to  the  fore  to  respond  to  questions 
about  the  film.  I'm  in  the  front  row  and  already  sitting  on  my  feet  to  be  recog- 
nized. I  say,  "1  'd  like  to  protest  the  portrayal  of  women  in  the  film.  .  .  ."  And 
then  it  all  tumbles  out  —  references  to  Sheryll's  work,  allusions  to  my  grand- 
mother, all  parenthetical,  piled  on  one  another.  Nilsson  gets  restless.  I  realize 
I  have  to  pull  out  of  it  so  I  end  on  the  criticism  of  women's  roles. 

Nilsson  looks  relieved  that  I've  finished.  He  responds  gently,  says  he  really 
feels  he  can't  defend  the  film  on  this  count,  that  it  may  really  be  a  problem. 
He  asks  the  actors  if  they  would  like  to  respond.  Behling  takes  an  antagonistic 
line.  He  argues  that  it  might  not  be  attractive  but  that  was  how  women  were. 
He  has  a  story  about  it.  At  a  recent  showing  of  the  film  in  North  Dakota,  a 
farm  woman  approached  him  afterward,  saying  "Thanks  so  much  for  your  film, 
that's  exactly  how  I  feel  when  my  husband  (an  organizer  for  the  American  Ag- 
ricultural Movement  )goes  on  the  road."  "And  that,"  he  concludes  dramatical- 
ly, "is  real." 

Now  I  am  really  in  combat.  "Well,"  I  reply,  "I  have  a  story,  too.  In  the  last 
three  years,  two  new  all-women's  national  farm  organizations  have  formed: 
Women  Involved  in  Farm  Economics  (don't  use  the  acronym)  and  American 
Agricultural  Women.  They  deal  primarily  with  farm  policy.  The  first  new  na- 
tional organizations  in  40  years,  they  grew  from  the  frustrations  of  farm  women 
trying  to  work  in  men's  farm  organizations,  including  the  Farmer's  Union,  the 
National  Farmer's  Organization,  and  the  American  Farm  Movement.  Women, 
for  instance,  did  a  lot  of  the  behind-the-scenes  organizing  for  the  Washington 
demonstration  two  years  ago,  but  the  men  'got  to  drive  the  tractors.'  While 
they  downplay  feminist  ideology,  these  organizations  are  feminist  in  practice, 
restricted  to  women  members,  actively  organizing  women  farmers  and  struggling 
internally  around  issues  like  farmerworker  rights  and  price  support  policies.  And 
that,"  I  try  to  match  his  professional  emphasis,  "is  real  too. "2 

Nilsson  calls  on  someone  else  and  looks  relieved  that  this  battle  is  stalemated 
for  the  moment. 

Marc  raises  his  hand.  Is  the  movie  based  on  historical  fact?  Was  Ray  Soren- 


Media  &  Culture/29 


son's  diary  real?  I  see  what  he  is  getting  at;  he  will  gently  defend  the  film  if  it  is 
a  true  family  history.  No,  they  say.  It's  not  a  real  story.  It's  the  fabrication  of 
John  Hanson,  the  other  director.  Marc  pursues,  "How,  then,  did  you  do  the  his- 
torical research?"  A  vague  response  —  reading,  consultation  with  oral  history  re- 
searchers, talking  to  survivors.  Another  woman  raises  her  hand.  Weren't  there 
any  woman  involved  in  the  political  organization?  Nilsson  responds,  "Yes,  there 
was  a  women's  auxiliary  to  the  Non-Partisan  League."  Nilssen  doesn't  explain 
why  the  film  didn't  choose  to  portray  the  auxiliary.  Yet  it  undoubtedly  did  im- 
portant political  work  in  raising  consciousness  about  issues,  debating  policy,  and 
providing  material  to  the  organizing  effort. 

After  the  film  several  women  thank  me  for  the  defense.  They  say  that  it 
didn't  ring  true  to  them,  but  that  they  don't  know  farm  life.  Even  Susan  Lynch, 
the  actress  who  portrays  Inga,  encourages  me  to  write  up  my  objections. 

It  turns  out  that  Northern  Lights  became  the  most  talked  about  political 
event  of  the  fall  in  my  circle.  Many  people  urged  me  to  see  it  and  then  listened 
with  surprise  to  my  hostile  diatribes.  I  carefully  studied  all  the  reviews. 3  Some 
said  that  Ray  and  Inga's  romantic  story  didn't  hold  together,  faltered,  distracted. 
None  challenged  the  characterization  of  women's  roles  socially  or  politically. 
Many  raved  about  the  film. 

I  began  to  think  about  what  wasn't  in  the  film.  The  omissions  were  perhaps 
worse  than  the  content.  The  depiction  of  women  as  hostile  to,  or  at  best  unin- 
terested in  farm  politics,  rewrites  political  history.  Rather  than  portraying  the 
women's  auxiliary  to  the  Non-Partisan  League,  Inga  is  shown  in  one  confusing 
scene  printing  leaflets  for  distribution,  a  task  she  evidently  performs  because  of 
her  bent  to  serve  —  "there's  lots  of  work  to  be  done,  Ray."  But  since  this  ac- 
tivity precedes  her  outburst  on  the  futility  of  politics  and  its  toll  on  her  person- 
al life,  it  apparently  is  undertaken  without  any  political  consciousness.  When 
Berkeley  Barb  critic  Marina  Hirsch  asked  Northern  Lights  co-producer  Rob 
Nilsson  why  Inga  wasn't  involved  in  politics  herself,  Nilsson  replied,  "The  wom- 
en who  travelled  on  the  road  were  rare;  they  couldn't  organize  other  women  to 
get  out  the  vote,  because  you'll  remember,  women  then  didn't  have  the  right  to 
vote. "4  This  attitude  betrays  a  fundamental  misinterpretation  of  the  real  nature 
of  the  development  of  consciousness  and  political  organizing,  one  which  pro- 
foundly misunderstands  women's  active  role.  Organizing  entails  much  more 
than  an  occasional  visit  from  a  hardy  young  travelling  activist  (as  characterized 
by  Ray  Sorenson),  who  extolls  the  virtues  of  the  League  and  is  willing  to  wrestle 
as  a  means  of  joining  up  fellow  farmers.  Organizing  involves  long  years  of  debate 
about  farm  problems,  debates  in  which  farm  folk  share  their  experiences,  probe 
the  nature  of  farm  problems,  and  explore  possible  solutions.  While  Northern 
Lights'  male  organizers  frequently  mention  the  villains  —  the  middlemen,  the 
banks,  the  railroads  —  they  confine  their  political  work  to  calls  to  other  men 


30/Quest 


Media  &  Culture/31 


farmers  to  sign  cards  for  the  Party  and  to  vote  for  their  candidate.  "I  ne  concrete 
means  for  arriving  at  a  better  deal  for  the  farmer  such  as  the  producers'  co-ops, 
the  State  Bank  and  Grain  Elevator, ^  the  laws  against  corporate  farming,  which 
were  in  fact  the  products  of  this  era,  are  not  debated  in  the  film  nor  presented  as 
part  of  the  very  strategy  of  organizing  and  building  an  organization.  The  film 
implicitly  suggests  that  political  adherents  were  gained  through  male  camaraderie 
rather  than  through  the  long,  considered,  bitter,  educational  debates  that  took 
place  in  the  press,  in  local  social  institutions  and  in  families.  And,  this  version 
of  organizing  omits  the  role  that  women  played. 

Perhaps  even  worse,  the  institutions  which  actually  shaped  political  con- 
sciousness are  missing  from  the  film.  The  only  social  institution  outside  of  the 
household  portrayed  in  Northern  Lights  is  the  backroom  drinking  quarters  in 
the  local  grain  elevator.  Only  men  patronize  it.  The  film  suggests  that  this  is 
the  only  forum  for  political  discussion  among  the  leaders  of  the  movement.  The 
film  omits  any  other  community  institution  or  activity  —  no  church  scenes,  no 
town  street  scenes,  no  community  gatherings  (a  dance  is  advertised  but  we 
never  see  it),  no  meetings  of  political  or  agricultural  clubs.  The  film  implies 
that  politicking  in  farm  communities  is  accomplished  either  around  the  card 
table,  oiled  with  liquor,  or  on  the  organizer's  trail.  In  fact,  the  community 
unity  forged  around  farm  politics  arose  from  struggle  and  consensus  reached 
in  continual  associations  among  farm  people  in  their  neighboring  towns.  It 
is  inconceivable  that  women  were  not  well-integrated  into  the  day-to-day  po- 
litical debates  and  organization-building  through  the  Populist  and  Progressive 
eras  —  and  not  just  as  helpmates.  The  famous  phrase,  "What  farmers  need  is 
to  raise  less  corn  and  more  hell,"  was  coined  by  Mary  Elizabeth  Lease,  an  im- 
migrant who,  with  her  husband,  lost  her  farm  to  mortgage  foreclosure.  She 
moved  to  town,  took  in  washing,  studied  law  and  became  active  in  the  Far- 
mer's Alliance.  In  1  890,  years  before  the  events  depicted  in  Northern  Lights, 
she  made  numerous  political  speeches  to  farm  communities. 

In  Northern  Lights,  politics  are  reserved  for  farmyard  conversations  and 
drinking  scenes  among  men.  The  dinner  table  scene  could  easily  have  included 
political  debate  among  men  and  women.  Many  of  my  grandfather's  wittiest 
stories  about  politics  and  morality  are  set  in  the  living  room  or  around  the  din- 
ner table,  conversations  including  his  wife  and  two  boys  hashing  over  issues 
like  farm  economics  and  temperance.  Grandma  Ruth,  Renus's  wife,  ran  for  the 
school  board  and  later  went  to  work  as  the  local  English  teacher  after  he  was 
stricken  with  tuberculosis.  She  never  bothered  to  retire.  Her  farmtable  conver- 
sations were  controversial  and  sometimes  full  of  political  intrigue. 

Nor  were  women's  political  activities  in  this  era  solely  devoted  to  farm  poli- 
tics. Feminist  issues  were  raised  as  well.^  Alice  Nelson  Page,  a  North  Dakotan, 


32/Quest 


began  a  career  at  20  as  a  reporter  for  the  Larimore  County  Pioneer  and  went  on 
to  become  the  co-editor  of  the  Devil's  Lake  Inter-Ocean ,  the  head  of  a  printing 
firm  in  Grand  Forks,  and  publisher  of  the  Grand  Forks  Independent  in  1 91 5. 
She  consistently  championed  feminist  causes.  Other  women  were  journalists 
or  ran  newspapers  in  which  they  supported  both  progressive  farm  and  feminist 
politics  in  the  Dakota  territories.  The  low  budget  nature  of  the  film  does  not 
excuse  the  failure  to  portray  these  institutions  and  women's  roles  in  them.  A 
church  scene,  or  a  scene  in  a  dry  goods  store  might  easily  have  afforded  the 
directors  a  chance  to  deal  with  the  informal  collective  community  discussion 
including  both  men  and  women,  out  of  which  politics  is  really  born. 

Encouraged  by  Marc,  I  wrote  down  my  battery  of  criticisms.  I  went  to  see 
the  film  again,  afraid  I'd  overstated  the  case.  This  time  I  found  even  more  to 
object  to.  The  jist  of  the  film  became  clearer. 

Northern  Lights  is  a  male  buddy  film  in  the  image  of  the  1 960's  standard 
Hollywood  flick.  Inga  is  the  obligatory  sidekick  required  in  a  commercial  film 
lest  the  audience  think  the  message  is  gay.  Director  and  screenplay  writer  Han- 
son does  not  know  how  to  deal  with  women  in  the  farm  world  he  portrays. 
Basically  the  message  is  that  farm  life  could  do  without  them,  and  especially 
in  a  political  farm  world,  women  are  a  drag.  After  Ray's  father  dies,  his  mother 
conveniently  leaves,  and  for  some  unexplained  reason  Inga  cannot  join  him  on 
the  farm.  That  leaves  Ray  and  his  brother  to  run  the  farm  and  have  heavy 
political  debates.  Other  farms  appear  to  be  populated  only  by  men.  Women 
aren't  needed  for  any  real  work,  they  don't  understand  or  contribute  to  political 
struggles,  and  children  are  unimportant.  The  final  scene  shows  a  group  of  20  to 
35-year  old  men  jumping  up  and  down  in  the  streets  victorious,  with  the  token 
Inga  in  their  midst. 

I  continually  tried  to  argue  myself  out  of  this  "extreme"  conclusion.  After 
all,  the  film  is  fictional,  I  said  to  myself,  and  deserves  a  degree  of  poetic  license, 
even  if  it  misleads  the  viewer  a  bit  about  its  nondocumentary  nature.  But  then 
I  read  in  the  reviews  that  the  authors  intended  "to  make  a  progressive  film  for  a 
progressive  audience."^  Filmmaker  Nilsson  stated  in  one  account  that  "what  we 
were  trying  to  look  at,  both  in  the  men  and  women,  was  the  average  person. 
If  so,  it  is  ironic  that  there  are  many  different  styles  and  types  of  male  political 
attitudes  portrayed  in  the  film,  but  only  one  consistent  stance  for  women.  The 
film  has  far  too  few  women  in  it,  and  the  three  speaking  female  roles  all  deliver 
the  same  message  —  that  women's  place  is  to  accommodate  passively  to  male 
leadership  at  home  and  in  politics.  If  the  filmmakers  had  really  wished  to  por- 
tray the  variation  in  women's  attitudes  as  well  as  men's,  they  could  easily  have 
done  so  with  these  three  women  characters.  They  chose  not  to. 

In  addition  to  reflecting  the  filmmakers'  sexism,  the  film  may  be  reading  back 


Media  &  Culture/33 


into  history  the  deteriorated  status  of  women  in  American  society  today,  both 
on  and  off  the  farm.  My  friend  Barbara,  seated  at  our  brunch  table,  posed  the 
ultimate  question  to  me.  "Surely,  you  are  not  trying  to  argue  that  farm  life 
was  not  burdened  by  sexism?"  No.  I  wouldn't  argue  that  women  didn't  cook 
the  meals,  only  that  they  did  a  lot  more  than  just  that.  I  wouldn't  argue  that 
they  were  coequal  with  men  as  leaders  of  political  movements,  only  that  they 
were  far  more  important  in  the  formation  of  political  consciousness  than  the 
film  purports.  And  I  wouldn't  argue  that  farm  men  of  that  era  were  not  sexist. 

But  I  do  think  that  women's  status  on  the  farm  —  in  farm  partnership,  in 
external  political  and  social  activity,  and  in  self-determination  has  deteriorated 
since  the  early  part  of  the  century.  In  part,  it  reflects  the  general  penetration  of 
an  ideology  about  women's  roles  that  has  arisen  in  advanced  urban,  industrializ- 
ed settings,  where  home  and  workplace  have  become  separated.  In  part,  it  re- 
flects the  loss  of  status  of  the  family  farm,  its  increasing  resemblance  to  a  work- 
shop in  a  corporate  chain,  supplied  by  fertilizer  and  farm  machinery  oligopolies 
on  the  one  side  and  by  multi-national  grain  and  produce  dealers  or  packing 
houses  on  the  other.  Women  can't  prove  up  on  a  farmstead  by  dint  of  their  own 
labor  and  determination  the  way  they  could  eighty  years  ago.  New  options  for 
self-sufficiency  on  the  land  are  almost  nonexistent.  The  deterioration  of  wom- 
en's position  in  farm  politics  also  has  roots  in  national  politics.  As  farm  politics 
have  necessarily  moved  into  the  national  arena,  farm  organizations  such  as  the 
Farmer's  Union  have  become  consolidated  and  centralized.  Since  national  poli- 
tics in  general  are  male  dominated,  it  is  not  surprising  that  farm  organizations 
competing  in  that  realm  have  copied  the  male  style  and  become  more  sexist. 

In  response  to  these  events,  women  farmers  for  the  first  time  in  history 
have  finally  felt  compelled  to  organize.  It  was  a  feminist  issue  that  fired  the 
movement  for  separate  women's  farm  organizations.  For  years,  farm  women 
were  forced  to  sell  their  farms  when  husbands  died  in  order  to  pay  inheritance 
taxes.  They  had  to  inherit  the  farm  from  their  mates,  regardless  of  the  fact  that 
they  had  been  co-workers  and  co-operators  for  a  lifetime.  Women  who  wanted 
to  stay  on  the  farm  and  run  it  themselves,  encouraged  by  the  general  demands 
raised  by  the  women's  movement,  began  to  link  up  and  push  for  legal  changes. 

The  second  time  I  saw  Northern  Lights,  it  struck  me  as  significant  that  Han- 
son had  dedicated  the  film  to  his  grandfather.  Northern  Lights  makes  a  real 
effort  to  show  men's  participation  in  the  Non-Partisan  League,  but  it  ignores 
the  involvement  of  women.  It  attempts  to  probe,  in  some  detail,  men's  daily 
lives  in  that  era,  but  fails  to  accurately  portray  the  daily  life  of  women.  So  I  am 
compelled  to  ask,  who,  John  Hanson,  were  your  grandmothers?  And  why  were 
mine  left  out  of  the  film? 


34/Quest 


FOOTNOTES 


^Sheryll  Patterson-Black,  "Women  Homesteaders  on  the  Great  Plains  Frontier,"  Frontiers: 
A  Journal  of  Women's  Studies,  Vol.  1 ,  No.  2,  (Summer  1976). 

^Frances  Hill,  "Women  and  Farm  Politics  —  National  Level,"  and  Norma  Jane  Skjold, 
"Nebraska  Women  and  Farm  Politics,"  New  Land  Review,  (Summer  1979).  (Walthill, 
Nebraska:  Center  for  Rural  Affairs,  P.O.  Box  405,  68067). 

3Pat  Aufderheide,  "Love  and  Politics  in  1915,"  In  These  Times,  November  29,  1979; 
Vincent  Canby,  "Film:  'Northern  Lights'  Story  of  Early  Labor  Wars,"  New  York  Times, 
September  25,  1979;  Robert  DiMatteo,  "  'Northern  Lights':  A  Progressive  Film  with 
Popular  Appeal,"  777e  Bay  Guardian  Day  and  Night,  September  27,  1979;  Marina  Hirsch, 
"Prairie  Fire,"  Berkeley  Barb,  October  4,  1979;  Zena  Jones,  "  'Northern  Lights'  With 
Reservations,"  Bay  Guardian  Day  and  Night,  October  4,  1979. 

^Quoted  in  Hirsch. 

^For  an  historical  account  of  these  institutions,  see  John  D.  Hicks,  The  Populist  Revolt: 
A  History  of  the  Farmer's  Alliance  and  the  People's  Party;  Herbert  E.  Gaston,  The  Non- 
Partisan  League  (New  York:  Harcourt  Brace  and  Howe,  1920);  Andrew  Bruce,  777e 
Non-Partisan  League,  (New  York:  MacMillan,  1921).    For  more  recent  references, 
see  James  Rowen,  ed.,  "Public  Capital"  and  Lee  Webb,  ed.,  "Agriculture"  in  New  Direc- 
tions in  State  and  Local  Public  Policy,  (Washington,  DC:  Conference  on  Alternative  State 
and  Local  Public  Policies,  June  1977.) 

6The  content  of  such  issues  focussed  on  women's  rights  to  vote  and  work.  See  Sheryll  and 
Gene  Patterson-Black,  "From  Pack  Trains  to  Publishing:  Women's  Work  in  the  Frontier 
West,"  pp.  7-9,  in  volume  by  authors  entitled  Western  Women ,  1978,  a  2,300  word  anno- 
tated bibliography  of  journals,  memoirs,  novels  and  historical  works  on  women  in  the  West, 
available  from  Cottonwood  Press,  P.O.  Drawer  112,  Crawford,  Nebraska,  69339,  for  $6.00. 

^Quoted  in  DiMatteo. 

^Quoted  in  Hirsch. 

Ann  Mar ku sen  is  a  Minnesotan  with  a  Danisli  and  rural  lieritage.  She  currently 
teaches  regional  economics  and  planning  at  the  University  of  California^  Berke- 
ley, and  has  written  from  a  socialist-feminist  perspective  on  women,  economics 
and  city  structure  in  The  Review  of  Radical  Political  Economics,  Frontiers,  c?/?^/ 
Signs. 


Media  &  Culture/35 


photographs  by  Eleanor  Self 


36/Quest,  vol.  V  no.  2 


Moving  Toward  Autocracy: 

Power  Brokerage  &  Single 
Issue  Politics  in  NOW 


by  KAY  WHITLOCK 

If  feminism  is,  as  one  theorist  has 
suggested,  a  "mode  of  analysis,  a 
method  of  approaching  life  and  poli- 
tics, a  way  of  asking  questions  and 
searching  for  answers,"^  then  commit- 
ment to  feminist  change  is  reflected  as 
much  in  the  way  we  approach  our 
movement  work,  as  much  in  our  or- 
ganizational dynamics,  as  in  our  politi- 
cal, social  and  economic  demands. 
There  are  rich  lessons  —  historical, 
strategic,  political  —  to  be  learned 
/  from  an  exploration  of  personal  exper- 
ience within  the  institutions  that 
organize  and  channel  our  movement 
activity. 

The  National  Organization  for 
Women  (NOW),  the  largest  women's 
rights  organization  currently  in  exis- 
tence, has  for  over  a  decade  provided 
thousands  of  activist  members  with  a 
focus  and  structure  for  political  en- 
ergies and  feminist  commitment. 
Because  of  its  size  (over  100,000  mem- 
bers), because  of  its  spectacular  rise  in 
influence  in  the  women's  rights  arena, 
and  because  of  its  clear  intention  to 

Power 


become  a  political  power-broker  in  its 
own  right,  the  organization  has  in- 
trigued vast  numbers  of  NOW-watch- 
ers.  For  over  ten  years,  NOW  pro- 
grams and  practices  have  elicited  wide- 
spread comment  and  discussion.  Both 
within  and  without  NOW,  there  is  no 
dearth  of  controversy  —  controversy 
over  contradictions  between  NOW 
philosophy  and  practice,  about  NOW 
programs,  about  NOW's  fierce  internal 
power  struggles  and  occasional  internal 
bloodletting,  and  about  NOW's  pre- 
dominantly reformist  approach  to 
change. 

Regardless  of  whether  we  belong  to 
NOW,  all  of  us  who  are  feminist  activ- 
ists are  affected  by  NOW's  participa- 
tion in  the  political  arena.  As  a  result, 
the  feminist  movement  has  a  legiti- 
mate interest  in  scrutinizing  NOW's 
internal  workings. 

Political  theorist  Nancy  Hartsock 
has  noted  that  analysis  of  organiza- 
tional experience  allows  us  the  possi- 
bility of  perceiving  the  concept  of 
organization  in  new  ways.  "We  need," 
she  says,  "to  use  our  organizations  as 
places  where  we  begin  to  redefine 
Brokerage  and  Single  Issue  Politics  in  NOW/S? 


social  relations  and  to  create  new  ways 
of  working  wiiich  do  not  follow  the 
patterns  of  domination  and  hierarchy 
set  by  the  mode  of  production  as  a 
whole. 

I  suggest  that  if  we  look  closely  at 
National  NOW, 3  we  find  a  powerful 
and  influential  organization  which  in- 
ternally reproduces  the  same  form  of 
power  relations  and  hierarchical  dom- 
ination that  characterizes  a  patriarchal 
society.  Many  may  be  reluctant  to  ac- 
knowledge that  the  women's  move- 
ment can  and  does  reproduce  power 
relations  inherited  from  a  society  bas- 
ed on  racism,  sexism,  heterosexism 
and  class  oppression.  When  it  does 
happen,  it  must  be  challenged  from 
within  and  without  the  organization. 

I  suggest  in  these  pages  some  of  the 
ways  in  which  patriarchal  power  rela- 
tions and  practices  are  reproduced  by 
National  NOW.  I  suggest  that  these 
38/Quest 


power  relations  themselves  influence 
not  only  NOW  programs  and  priorities, 
but  help  determine  the  manner  in 
which  and  the  extent  to  which  certain 
issues  are  addressed.  Finally,  I  con- 
tend that  NOW's  internal  reproduction 
of  patriarchal  power  relations  betrays 
the  long-term  interests  of  NOW  mem- 
bers themselves  in  a  feminist  future  in 
which  power  relations  —  and  power  it- 
self —  have  of  necessity  been  redefined. 

This  exploration  of  NOW  draws  on 
the  experience  of  many  women,  in- 
cluding myself,  who  have  been  active 
in  NOW  for  years  at  local,  state  and 
national  levels.  Some  of  these  women 
remain  in  NOW,  attempting  to  change 
from  within.  Others  of  us  have  chosen 
to  leave.  I  do  not  pretend  to  speak  for 
all  or  even  most  of  the  rank  and  file 
NOW  members.  That  does  not,  how- 
ever, invalidate  these  observations. 

I  have  undertaken  this  exploration 


not  to  play  "most  revolutionary  femi- 
nist of  them  all"  games,  nor  to  suggest 
that  NOW  be  measured  against  some 
mythical  standard  of  movement  per- 
fection. Rather,  this  effort  is  an  at- 
tempt to  contribute  to  our  under- 
standing of  how  we  who  call  ourselves 
feminists  can  become  active  partici- 
pants in  the  oppression  of  our  sisters 
and  ourselves  —  quite  without  intend- 
ing to. 

I. 


You  have  a  democratic  constitution 
for  your  Federation;  we  do  not  agree 
wit  In  til  at.  ...  You  have  your  own 
ideas.  We  do  not  want  that;  we  want 
all  our  women  to  take  instructions  and 
walk  in  step  like  an  army.^ 

Christabel  Pankhurst  on  the  occasion 
of  the  East  End  Federation's  expul- 
sion from  the  Women's  Social  and 
Political  Union  (WSPU). 

Feminists  are  concerned  with  the 
processes  of  feminist  politics  as  well  as 
with  program.  We  know  that  although 
we  have  no  commonly-agreed  upon 
blueprint  for  feminist  Utopia,  hints  of 
what  might  be  possible  are  revealed  as 
we  struggle  to  incorporate  our  feminist 
philosophy  into  our  organizational 
processes. 

If  National  NOW's  internal  prac- 
tices reveal  a  glimpse  of  a  feminist  fu- 
ture, that  vision  is  disturbing.  From 
its  modest  beginnings  as  a  liberal  re- 
form organization  seeking  equality  "in 
the  mainstream  of  American  socie- 
ty,"5   NOW   has  become,  in  many 


ways,  a  mirror-image  of  institutions 
which  oppress  women  in  the  larger  so- 
ciety. Former  NOW  members  Del 
Martin  and  Phyllis  Lyon,  charge  that 
NOW's  "hierarchical  leadership  and 
bureaucratic  power  structure"  are  "the 
antithesis  of  feminism. "6 

Hierarchical  leadership  and  tightly 
controlled  power  structures  are  not 
new  to  the  women's  movement.  His- 
torically, we  need  only  to  look  at  Eng- 
land's Women's  Social  and  Political 
Union  (WSPU)  or  to  the  National 
American  Woman  Suffrage  Association 
(NAWSA)  under  the  leadership  of  Car- 
rie Chapman  Catt  to  realize  that  au- 
thoritarianism is  familiar  to  the  wom- 
en's movement.  It  does,  after  all,  pro- 
vide for  a  certain  amount  of  organi- 
zational efficiency  when  power  and 
decisionmaking  authority  rests  in  the 
hands  of  a  few  people  —  or,  on  oc- 
casion, with  a  single  person. 

it  should  not  surprise  us  that  wom- 
en's rights  groups  sometimes  turn  to 
military  structural  models  (top/down 
control,  with  the  few  issuing  orders  to 
the  many)  in  order  to  utilize  limited 
resources  for  the  perceived  greatest 
benefit.  Such  a  model  works,  too,  to 
minimize  opportunities  for  internal 
debate  and  dissent  and  to  enforce 
standards  of  conformity. 

In  1 91  2,  for  example,  militant  Brit- 
ist  suffragist  Emmeline  Pankhurst, 
speaking  as  a  WSPU  founder,  noted: 

One  thing  is  essential  to  an  army 
and  that  thing  is  made  up  of  a  two- 
fold requirement.  In  an  army  you 
need  unity  of  purpose.  In  an  army, 
you  also  need  unity  of  policy. ~l 

Continued  on  page  42 
Power  Brokerage/39 


In  search  of 


If  you  like  what  you  see  in  this  issue  of  Quest,  look  over  our  list  of 
back  issues.  You'll  find  that  Quest  offers  a  host  of  salient  articles  written 
by  some  of  the  women  who  made  the  movement  happen. 

Spend  the  summer  catching  up  on  your  history. 


FIRST  YEAR 

1  1  Processes  of  Change  (a  feminist 
classic,  $5.00) 

Rita  Mae  Brown,  'The  Good  Fairy" 

Charlotte  Bunch,  "The  Reform 
Tool  Kit" 

Nancy  Hartsock,  "Two  Perspectives 
on  Power" 

1-2  Money,  Fame  &  Power  ($v3.35) 

Vicki  Gabriner,  "ERA,  The  Year  of 
the  Rabble" 

Coletta  Reid,  "Taking  Care  of  Busi- 
ness" 

Alice  Quinn,  "Insanity  and  Con- 
trol: A  Class  Trap" 
13    The  Selfhood  of  Women 

($3.35) 

Rita  Mae  Brown,  "It's  All  Dixie 

Cups  to  Me" 
Lucia  Valeska,  "If  All  Else  Fails, 

I'm  Still  a  Mother" 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Self  Definition 

and  Political  Survival" 

1-  4   Women  and  Spirituality  (a 

feminist  classic,  $5.00) 
Mary  Daly,  "The  Qualitative  Leap 

Beyond  Patriarchal  Religion" 
Peggy  Cleveland  and  Sally  Gearhart, 

"On  the  Prevalence  of  Stilps" 
Dorothy  Riddle,  "New  Visions  of 

Spiritual  Power" 
SECOND  YEAR 

2-  1  Future  Visions  and  Fantasies 

($3.35) 

Janice  Raymond,  "The  Illusion  of 

Androgyny" 
Z.  Budapest,  "Witch  is  to  Womonas 

Womb  is  to  Birth" 
Cynthia  Washington,  "  Concrete 

Playgrounds  on  my  Mind" 


of 


2-2   Theories  of  Revolution 

feminist  classic,  $5.00) 
Lucia  Valeska,  "The  Future 

Female  Separatism" 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Not  for  Lesbians 

Only" 

Nancy  Hartsock,  "Fundamental 

Feminism" 
2-3    Organizations  &  Strategies 

($3.35) 

Feminism  in  Ac- 


iias. 


'Use  and  Misuse  of 


Karen  Ko 

tion" 
Sandra  Flowers, 

Coalitions" 
Jean  Elshtain,  "Alternatives  to 
Individualism" 

2-  4        Leadership  ($3.35) 
Bertha  Harris,  "The  Lesbian:  The 

Workmaker,  the  Leader" 
Jackie  St.  Joan,  "Who  Was  Rem- 
brandt's Mother?" 
Lorraine   Masterson,  "Feminist 

Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water" 
THIRD  YEAR 

3-  1  Kaleidoscope  I  ($3.35) 
Charlotte  Bunch,  "Beyond  Either/ 

Or:  Feminist  Options" 
Hope  Landrine,  "The  Club" 
June  Arnold,  "Feminist  Presses 

and  Feminist  Politics" 
3-2  Communication  and  Control 

($3.35) 

Deb  Friedman  &  Lois  Yankowski, 
"Snuffing  Sexual  Violence" 
Chris  Murphey,  "The  Shadow  Box" 
Sheri  Maeda  and  Jill  Shapiro,  "Put 
Another  Nickel  In" 


est  back  issues? 


3-3  Work,  Work,  Work  ($3.35) 
Nancy  Hartsock,  "Staying  Alive" 
Dierdre  Silverman,  "Sexual  Harass- 
ment: Working  Women's  Di- 
lemma" 

Marilyn  Frye,  "Who  Wants  a  Piece 
of  the  Pie?" 

3-  4  Race,  Class  &  Culture  ($3.35) 
Brenda  Eichelberger,  "Voices  on 

Black  Feminism" 
Michelle  Russell,  "An  Open  Letter 

to  the  Academy" 
Mary  McKenney,  "Class  Attitudes 

and  Professionalism" 
FOURTH  YEAR 

4-  1  Kaleidoscope  II  ($3.35) 
Barbara  Deming,  "Remembering 

Who  We  Are- 
Red  Apple  Collective,  "Women's 
Unions  and  Socialist  Fem- 
inism" 

Jackie  MacMillan,  "Prostitution  as 
Sexual  Politics" 


4-2  International  Feminism  ($3.35) 
Stephanie  Urdang,  "Women  in  the 
Guinea-Bisseau  Revolution" 
Elizabeth  Reid,  "Women,  Econom- 
ic Development,  and  the  UN" 
Anja  Meulenbelt,  "On  the  Political 

Economy  of  Domestic  Labor" 
4-3  Body  Politic  ($3.35) 
Polly  Joan,  "Manipulation  of  the 
Breast" 

Hallie  Iglehart,  "Unnatural  Divorce 
of  Spirituality  &  Politics" 

Ellen  Hall,  "Who  Gets  Sick  & 
Why?" 

4-4  Women  in  Their  Communities 

($3.35) 
JEB,  Photo  Essay 

Dorothy  Allison,  "Weaving  the  Web 

of  Community" 
Jo  Delaplaine,  "Women  in  the  Latin 

Community" 


Send  order  to:  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly.  Dept.  A 

P.O.  Box  8843 

Washington,  DC  20003 

I  have  enclosed  $  

I  would  like  to  order  the  following  back  issues: 

 $  

 $  

 _$  

□  Please  send  me  all  four  numbers  from  the  First  Year,  for  only 
$1 5.00  (binder  box  included) 

□  Please  send  me  all  four  numbers  from  the  Second  Year,  for 
only  $1 3.50  (binder  box  included) 

□  Please  send  me  all  four  numbers  from  the  Third  Year,  for  only 
$10.00 

□  Please  send  me  all  four  numbers  from  the  Fourth  Year,  for 
only  $10.00 

□  Please  send  me  all  back  numbers,  for  only  $45.00 
(Please  allow  six  to  eight  weeks  for  delivery) 


Continued  from  page  39 

Standing  as  models  of  feminist  per- 
severance and  determination,  Emme- 
line  and  her  daughter  Christabel  also 
served  as  model  autocrats.  Criticism 
of  WSPU  policy  v^as  not  tolerated 
within  the  ranks.  She  who  did  not  toe 
the  party  line  was  ejected.  In  1914, 
for  instance,  Sylvia  Pankhurst  and  the 
East  End  (London)  Federation  —  a 
group  of  working-class  women  —  were 
purged  from  the  ranks  in  a  schism  re- 
sulting from  class  divisions  and  dis- 
agreements over  organizing  policy. 

American  suffrage  history  has  its 
own  examples.  In  1 91 6,  the  executive 
council  of  NAWSA  met  in  a  closed- 
door,  secret  emergency  session  in  At- 
lantic City  where  NAWSA  President 
Carrie  Chapman  Catt  unveiled  her 
"winning  plan"  for  a  federal  suffrage 
amendment.  Calling  for  an  efficient 
use  of  resources  and  expertise,  and  an 
end  to  internal  dissension  which  had 
plagued  NAWSA,  she  spoke  of  the 
need  to  have  "a  mobilization  of  at 
least  thirty-six  state  armies,  and  these 
armies  should  move  under  the  direc- 
tion of  the  national  officers.  They 
should  be  disciplined  and  obedient  to 
the  national  officers  in  all  matters  con- 
cerning the  national  campaign.  .  .  ."^ 

Carrie  Chapman  Catt  repeatedly  ex- 
pressed profound  impatience  with  — 
and  some  contempt  for  —  what  she  re- 
garded as  ineffective  and  disorganized 
efforts  of  local  and  state  activists  di- 
recting their  own  campaigns.^ 

It  is  tempting  to  generalize  from 
these  small  bits  of  history,  but  one 
runs  the  risk  of  inaccurately  general- 
izing from  facts  taken  out  of  context. 

42/Quest 


We  can,  however,  note  the  phenome- 
non of  the  contemporary  women's 
rights  movement's  utilization  of  typi- 
cally male  models  of  organization, 
look  at  our  own  experience  in  groups 
using  such  models  and  analyze  that  ex- 
perience. We  can  learn  to  think  criti- 
cally and  constructively  about  the  in- 
terplay of  our  programs  and  processes 
of  organization. 

NOW  provides  an  interesting  con- 
temporary example  of  how  a  tradi- 
tional, hierarchical,  dominant  model 


of  operation  becomes  thoroughly  as- 
similated into  daily  organizational 
activity.  NOW  has  always  had  a  tra- 
ditional and  well-defined  hierarchy. 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a 
considerable  and  successful  effort  to 
consolidate  virtually  all  organizational 
decisionmaking  and  authority  in  the 
hands  of  a  few  at  the  national  level. 
Delegates  to  national  conferences  may 
set  policy,  but  the  executive  commit- 
tee controls  the  manner  and  extent  to 
which  all  issues  are  addressed.  Though 
the  NOW  chapter  network  is  recogniz- 
ed as  a  major  source  of  organizational 
strength,  national  has,  over  the  years, 
become  more  authoritarian,  believing 
concerted  and  efficient  action  involv- 
ing local  and  state  NOW  networks  re- 
quires direction  from  national  officers 
and  staff.  Increasingly,  national  serves 
as  command  headquarters,  and  the 
chapters  shelter  the  troops  in  the  field. 
This  model  is  not  always  an  evil  in  and 
of  itself.  It  can  prove  extremely  useful 
in  a  tactical  sense.  For  example,  utiliz- 
ing this  model,  NOW  was  able  to 
quickly  and  efficiently  mobilize  mem- 
bers for  the  ERA  extension  campaign. 

I  do  not  criticize  NOW  simply  for 
its  lack  of  structural  imagination  but 
rather  for  the  reproduction  within 
NOW  of  an  oppressive  and  manipula- 
tive "old  boys  political  network"  trav- 
eling in  high  women's  rights  drag.  Po- 
litical style  and,  increasingly,  the  struc- 
ture and  operation  of  NOW  itself  re- 
flect nothing  in  terms  of  feminist  in- 
novation; much  in  terms  of  the  cloning 
of  a  corporate/military  model.  Even 
as  it  fights  in  the  external  political 
arena  for  greater  female  representation 


and  participation  in  social  institutions 
of  power,  NOW  itself  has  through  the 
years  toyed  dangerously  with  the  ero- 
sion of  internal  democracy. 

Since  its  founding  in  1966,  NOW 
has  periodically  disgraced  itself  with 
some  form  of  anti-democratic  practice 
or  heavy-handed  suppression  of  un- 
popular voices  within  its  ranks.  NOW 
is  not,  and  never  has  been,  particularly 
comfortable  with  the  presence  of  di- 
versity in  its  midst.  One  might  recall 
the  notorious  lesbian  purges  (through 
1969-70)  during  the  Friedan  admini- 
stration as  one  example  of  NOW's 
troubled  history 0 

Women  of  color  in  NOW  who  have 
insisted  the  organization  confront  its 
own  racism  have  experienced  signifi- 
cant resistance.  Throughout  NOW's 
history,  women  of  color  have  been 
largely  absent  from  positions  of  au- 
thority and  power,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  Aileen  Hernandez  who  held 
the  NOW  presidency  in  1970-71. 
One  way  NOW  has  tried  to  protect  it- 
self against  criticism  of  internal  racism 
is  to  give  a  great  deal  of  visibility  to 
those  few  women  of  color  who  have 
occupied  NOW  middle-management 
positions.  But  visibility  does  not 
equate  with  power.  Moreover,  the  visi- 
bility factor  does  not  address  deeper 
questions  about  institutional  racism 
which  are  as  relevant  to  the  women's 
movement  as  they  are  to  American  so- 
ciety as  a  whole. 

NOW  claims  to  fight  racial  discrim- 
ination as  vigorously  as  it  attacks  sex 
discrimination.  Yet  at  a  1979  NOW 
conference  candidate  forum,  President 
Eleanor  Smeal  responded  to  a  question 

Power  Brokerage /43 


about  her  all-white  slate  by  alleging 
that  no  qualified  women  of  color  had 
been  found  to  run  for  office  on  her 
slate.  She  claimed  that  deliberate  in- 
clusion of  a  woman  of  color  on  her 
slate  would  have  been  tokenism. 

In  November  1979,  former  NOW 
president  Aileen  Hernandez,  a  con- 
sultant in  affirmative  action  and  equal 
opportunity,  noted  that  for  the  second 
consecutive  time,  NOW  had  elected  an 
all-white  set  of  salaried  officers.  In  a 
resolution  brought  before  —and  passed 
by  —  a  California  meeting  of  the 
Black  American  Political  Association, 
she  called  upon  black  people  to  refuse 
to  join  NOW  or  to  discontinue  mem- 
bership until  NOW  began  to  confront 
racism  internally  and  externally  in  a 
significant  way. 

Political  violence  is  part  of  NOW's 
internal  history.  Ethical  standards  of 
fairness  and  justice  demanded  by  NOW 

44/Quest 


for  women  in  the  larger  society  are 
sometimes  sacrificed  internally. 
Among  those  who  have  experienced 
infringement  of  basic  principles  of  due 
process  are  staff  members,  volunteer 
issue-oriented  committee  activists,  and 
a  former  president  of  NOW.^  ^ 

In  1974-75,  a  split  between  factions 
on  the  NOW  National  Board  of  Direc- 
tors reproduced  itself  in  the  member- 
ship, leading  to  vicious  in-fighting 
and  a  bitter  electoral  campaign  at  the 
1975  National  NOW  Conference  in 
Philadelphia.  Preceding  that  cam- 
paign, a  minority  of  the  board  mem- 
bers sued  the  weak  board  majority  for 
violations  of  national  by-laws.  Those 
violations  could  have  resulted  in  the 
establishment  of  a  highly  unrepre- 
sentative delegate  system.  12 

in  order  to  combat  actions  viewed 
as  contrary  to  NOW  by-laws  and  prin- 
ciples, and  in  order  to  formulate  and 


put  forward  a  more  progressive  pro- 
gram of  feminism  in  the  campaign,  a 
group  called  the  Majority  Caucus  was 
formed,  selecting  its  name  because  it 
believed  that  it,  and  not  the  majority 
on  the  board  of  directors,  more  accur- 
ately represented  membership  needs 
and  concerns.  Comprised  of  several 
national  NOW  officers  and  board 
members,  committee  activists,  and 
grass-roots  members  from  regions  and 
states,  the  Majority  Caucus  inspired 
and  encouraged  internal  resistance  to 
what  it  charged  were  a  series  of  il- 
legal actions  by  the  board  majority. 
As  the  1975  Philadelphia  conference 
drew  near,  thousands  of  NOW  mem- 
bers placed  their  membership  dues  in 
escrow  accounts,  claiming  they  were 
using  legal  means  to  protest  violation 
of  democratic  procedures  in  NOW.^3 
The  Majority  Caucus  won  the  major 
offices  in  1975,  and  caucus  members 
captured  a  majority  of  board  seats. 
Yet  the  dissolution  of  the  caucus 
seemed  built  into  its  victory.  The  cau- 
cus ceased  to  exist  within  a  year.  Why 
this  happened  is  a  source  of  debate. 
Some  contend  that  NOW  emerged 
from  the  1975  conference  with  a 
sharply  divided  membership  and  for 
this  reason  continued  caucus  exist- 
ence would  have  proved  divisive. 
Others  believed  the  caucus  was  com- 
posed of  both  idealists  and  opportun- 
ists; that  such  a  group  could  not  con- 
tinue to  function  collectively  once  in 
power.  Whatever  the  definitive  an- 
swer, one  thing  is  certain:  disagree- 
ments, power  struggles  and  hostilities 
among  caucus  members  began  to  sur- 
face following  the  election.  No  longer 


finding  unity  in  confronting  an  organi- 
zational opponent,  the  caucus  did  not 
continue  as  a  cohesive  force. 

The  present  NOW  administration, 
some  of  them  former  members  of  the 
Majority  Caucus,  gained  power  through 
the  most  traditional  kind  of  well- 
greased  machine  politics.  NOW  leader- 
ship under  President  Ellie  Smeal  has 
established  an  effective  political  pa- 
tronage system  which  rewards  loyalists 
and  punishes  defectors.  Loyalists,  for 
example,  are  given  machine  assistance 
in  winning  elections  to  the  National 
Board  or  to  state  and  regional  office; 
they  ,may  be  offered  jobs  at  the  Na- 
tional Action  Center;  and  they  may  re- 
ceive desirable  appointments  to  par- 
ticular Board  committees.  An  "if- 
you're-not-with-us-you're-against-us" 
mentality  pervades  the  Smeal  political 
machine.  1  recall,  with  a  mixture  of 
astonishment  and  dismay,  the  cry  of: 
"These  are  all  enemies  of  NOW!" 
uttered  by  a  member  of  the  Smeal  en- 
tourage at  the  1979  National  Confer- 
ence in  Los  Angeles  as  she  looked  at 
a  leaflet  favoring  Arlie  Scott's  re-elec- 
tion as  NOW  Action  Vice  President. 
The  leaflet  contained  the  names  of  en- 
dorsers ranging  from  local  NOW  activ- 
ists to  well-known  feminist  leaders. 

Absolute  loyalty  to  the  decisions 
and  actions  of  the  administration  is  de- 
manded, not  only  of  paid  staff,  but 
also  of  volunteer  activists.  In  order  to 
survive  and  retain  any  degree  of  effec- 
tiveness at  the  national  level,  one  must 
accommodate  herself  to  such  de- 
mands, never  criticizing,  seldom  ques- 
tioning, independent  stands  are  not 
only  discouraged,  but  despised.  One 

Power  Brokerage/45 


can  easily  become  an  internal  NOW 
"enemy"  simply  by  supporting,  once 
too  often,  a  stand  on  an  issue  or  a 
candidate  for  NOW  office  unaccept- 
able to  the  NOW  power  elite.  Criti- 
cism of  internal  inconsistencies,  prac- 
tices or  procedures  is  an  anathema. 
Those  not  obedient  enough,  those  not 
compliant  enough,  do  not  last  long  - 
not,  that  is,  unless  they  have  an  inde- 
pendent power  base  sufficient  to  com- 
mand Smeal's  attention  and  respect. 
Generally,  the  NOW  activist  at  the  na- 
tional level  who  is  not  willing  to  ac- 
cept the  rules  of  the  game,  who  does 
not  have  the  "proper"  perspective  on 
issues,  strategies  and  candidates,  is 
singled  out  as  an  enemy. 

The  treatment  of  an  internal  "en- 
emy" can  vary,  but  the  phenomenon 
has  been  well-noted.  In  an  open  letter 
to  NOW  colleagues  and  supporters  fol- 
lowing her  unsuccessful  bid  for  elec- 
tion as  Secretary  of  NOW  in  1979, 
Sharon  Parker,  former  chair  of  the 
NOW  Minority  Women's  Committee, 
spoke  of  the  current  trend  to  eliminate 
dissent  and  debate  within  NOW.  She 
pointed  out: 

Long-standing  feminists  wtio  criticize 
(even  constructively)  are  repiaced  and 
sometimes  disgraced .  .  .  Qualifications 
for  any  leadership  position  are  defined 
according  to  loyalty  and  willingness  to 
cooperate  with  current  leaders.  1 4 

Where  possible,  independent  board 
members  or  non-board  action  commit- 
tee activists,  who  do  not  retain  the 
NOW  administrative  stamp  of  approval 
are  simply  eliminated  —  harassed  out 
of  office,  never  appointed  again,  made 
special  targets  for  electoral  defeat  or 


publicly  humiliated.  An  activist  at  the 
national  level  is  totally  dependent  on 
the  president  and  her  inner  circle  to 
provide  access  to  resources  necessary 
to  get  a  job  done.  The  president  con- 
trols everything;  Martin  and  Lyon 
minced  no  words  when  they  com- 
mented: 

Those  of  us  who  have  been  members 
of  NOW  for  any  length  of  time  (we 
have  been  members  since  1967)  know 
how  easily  resolutions  are  passed  at  a 
convention  and  how  difficult  it  is  to 
implement  them  in  the  interim  be- 
tween conventions.  Lesbian  members 
have  little  control  or  input  in  NOW's 
National  Lesbian  Rights  Committee. 
Smeal  .  .  .  hand  picks  all  of  its  mem- 
bers and  therefore  has  a  lot  of  control 
over  the  direction  of  the  Committee.^  ^ 

Certainly,  she  who  falls  from  presi- 
dential favor  finds  access  to  necessary 
resources  obstructed.  As  one  of  those 
who  long  ago  incurred  the  presidential 
ire,  I  recall  attempting,  as  chair  of  the 
Lesbian  Rights  Committee,  to  forward 
through  the  proper  channels  to  the 
president  the  names  of  Del  Martin  and 
Phyllis  Lyon  for  appointment  to  the 
Lesbian  Rights  Committee.  The  presi- 
dent did  not  forward  their  names  to 
the  board  for  appointment  and  she  did 
not  so  much  as  acknowledge  their 
nomination.  My  attempts  to  obtain 
an  explanation  of  this  were  futile  —  as 
were  my  attempts  to  have  one  or  two 
board  members  force  the  issue.  They 
were  afraid  to. 

These  examples  may  be  easily  dis- 
missed by  those  contending  that  it  is 
political  naivete  to  suggest  that  rewards 
be  given  to  political  opponents.  How- 


46/Quest 


ever,  there  is  a  considerable  difference 
between  not  rewarding  political  op- 
ponents and  systennatically  eradicating 
organizational  dissent.  There  is  a  con- 
siderable difference  between  establish- 
ing functional  structures  and  lines  of 
accountability  and  institutionalizing 
autocratic  leadership. 

Implicit  in  rigid,  hierarchical  mod- 
els of  organization  is  the  notion  that 
the  "they"  at  the  top  know  what  is 
best  for  the  "we"  at  the  bottom.  This 
reveals  an  underlying  lack  of  respect 
for,  and  faith  in,  the  strength  and  abil- 
ity of  the  membership  itself.  In  the 
name  of  efficiency,  it  sacrifices  the 
possibility  of  creating  new  modes  of 
organization  and  of  social  relations. 

We  resist  admitting  how  much  of 
the  oppressor's  ideology  and  practice 
we  can  internalize  —  individually  and 
organizationally.  I  do  not  suggest,  by 
saying  this  that  we  are,  as  the  old  sex- 


ist saw  would  have  it,  "our  own  worst 
enemy."  That  is  nonsense.  I  do  mean 
to  suggest  that  we  often  find  endless 
ways  of  excusing  and  rationalizing  at- 
tudes  and  practices  in  ourselves  that 
we  find  intolerable  in  others.  Worse, 
many  of  us  simply  refuse  to  see  or  care 
about  the  frequency  and  intensity 
with  which  we  act  out  —  or  accept 
without  protest  —  mini-versions  of  op- 
pressive behaviors. 

II. 

My  question  is:  'Does  NOW  pose  a 
threat  to  tfie  status  quo?'  And  my 
perception  is  tfiat  it  does  not. 

from  an  interview  with  a  Third 
World  woman  activist,  Philadelphia, 
Pa.  February  27,  1980. 

The  power  elite  at  National  NOW 
is  not  white,  heterosexual  and  ideo- 


Power  Brokerage/47 


logically  homogenized  by  coinci- 
dence. The  irony  that  this  is  so 
in  an  organization  which  claims  to  be 
"the  cutting  edge  of  the  feminist 
movement"  is  not  lost  on  many.  It  is 
difficult,  at  best,  to  understand  how 
NOW  can  reflect  and  represent  the  in- 
terests of  diverse  segments  of  women 
in  society  when,  in  fact,  that  diversity 
is  excluded  from  the  highest  levels  of 
decisionmaking. 

Throughout  the  years,  NOW  has 
been  pressured  from  within  by  some 
to  its  own  membership  to  hold  itself 
accountable  on  issues  of  racism, 
heterosexism  and  class  oppressions. 
Pressures,  too,  have  come  from  inno- 
vative and  progressive  feminist  groups 
outside  of  NOW.  Such  pressures  have 
provided  NOW  with  intriguing  oppor- 
tunities to  meet  important  challenges: 
the  challenge  to  incorporate  class  con- 
sciousness into  its  ongoing  work  by 
analyzing  NOW  members'  own  experi- 
ences with  class  in  society;  the  chal- 
lenge to  embrace  a  lesbian  feminist 
consciousness  by  learning  from  the  ex- 
perience of  its  members  the  political 
dimensions  of  heterosexuality  and 
lesbianism  in  a  male-dominated  world; 
the  challenge  to  combat  societal  ra- 
cism by  confronting  its  own.  There 
has  been  progress,  surely.  But  in  spite 
of  NOW's  rhetoric  —  racism,  hetero- 
sexism and  class  oppression  are  alive 
and  well  in  NOW. 

NOW  is,  for  instance,  noted  in  the 
mainstream  feminist  movement  for  its 
progressive  stand  on  lesbian  rights. 
NOW  has  played  a  significant  role  in 
furthering  mainstream  acceptance  of 
lesbian  rights  as  a  legitimate  feminist 


issue.  But  the  oppression  of  lesbians 
within  the  organization  has  not  halted. 
Lesbian  visibility  of  any  sort  was  once 
not  tolerated.  Now  it  is  tolerated,  but 
it  is  also  controlled.  The  lesbian  ghet- 
to many  of  us  had  warned  about  since 
1975  exists  within  NOW.  Charlotte 
Bunch  has  provided  an  apt  description 
of  how  the  lesbian  ghetto  functions: 

The  NOW  actions  [at  the  1979  con- 
ference] reflect  a  trend  in  parts  of  the 
women's  movement  to  accept  the  gay 
rights  issue  while  ghetto izing  and  con- 
taining lesbians.  All  of  us  who  have 
worked  to  put  gay  rights  on  the  agen- 
da of  feminism  are  glad  to  see  that  is- 
sue progress.  But  we  must  also  recog- 
nize how  it  can  be  used.  Particularly, 
we  must  oppose  the  tendency  to  ac- 
cept open  lesbian  leadership  only  on 
that  issue  and  to  confine  our  visibility 
in  other  areas.  Lesbians  today  often 
face  a  new  form  of  the  closet  choice: 
either  work  openly  as  a  lesbian  on  gay 
rights  or  work  on  other  issues  but 
downplay  if  not  publicly  deny  your 
lesbianism.  Our  struggle  for  gay  rights 
includes  the  right  to  work  openly  in 
every  political  arena,  including  highly 
visible  positions  such  as  Vice-Presi- 
dent, or  even  President  of  NOW.  In- 
deed, that  A  rile  Scott  might  become 
the  first  open  lesbian  president  of 
NOW  in  1981  if  she  was  re-elected  in 
this  election  was  used  against  her.  The 
innuendos  and  fears  raised  around  this 
prospect  told  us  that  lesbians  still 
face  a  'you  can  go  only  so  far'  barrier 
within  the  women 's  movement.  ^  ^ 

Lesbians  have  become  a  valued 
voting  bloc  within  NOW.  At  national 
conferences  we   have   been  courted 


48/Quest 


with  resolutions,  candidate  assurances, 
and  ringing  declarations  of  sisterhood. 
The  candidate  enthusiasm  for  lesbian 
rights  activism  is  often  seen  only  at 
campaign  time.  Between  conferences, 
while  NOW  rhetoric  pours  forth  at  gay 
rights  rallies,  lesbians  within  NOW 
have  always  had  to  struggle  fiercely  to 
advance  program  and  practice.  The 
advances  have  not  been  automatic, 
and  they  have  not  been  easy. 

There  are  contradictions  between 
NOW  lesbian  rights  principles  and  its 
practice;  they  are  evident  to  many  in 
NOW.  That  lesbian  feminism  is  not 
well  understood  by  NOW  officers  is 
clear. 

Through  its  actions,  NOW  has 
consistently  indicated  that  it  believes 
issues  of  racism,  of  class  oppression, 
and  of  heterosexism  are  really  second- 
ary to  the  achievement  of  women's 
rights.  (NOW  does  not  actually 
speak  of  class  oppression,  but  of 
"women  in  poverty";  nor  does  it 
speak  of  institutionalized  heterosex- 
ism, but  of  homophobia,  which  is  a 
"bad  attitude.")  NOW  has  consistent- 
ly demonstrated  that  it  believes  white, 
middle-class,  heterosexual  women  can 
adequately  speak  for  all  women.  In 
doing  so,  it  often  acts  as  though  it  be- 
lieves in  the  fallacy  historian  Gerda 
Lerner  warns  against  —  the  belief  that 
"what  is  true  for  middle-class  women 
is  true  for  all  women."  In  a  1971  es- 
say on  "Women's  Rights  and  Ameri- 
can Feminism,"  Lerner  noted  that  a 
limited  agenda  of  women's  rights  re- 
form might  have  little  meaning  to 
members  of  the  working  class  or 
poor.1  7 


Critics  of  NOW  have  sometimes 
charged  that  NOW's  program  of  action 
will  result  only  in  a  few  more  privi- 
leges for  already  privileged  women  in 
society.  This  need  not  necessarily 
prove  true.  But  it  will,  if  current 
trends  in  NOW  continue. 

NOW  remains  true  to  its  liberal  re- 
form origins,  though  it  is  fond  of 
claiming  that  the  attainment  of  equali- 
ty for  women  within  the  mainstream 
of  American  society  would  be  revolu- 
tionary in  itself.  Such  a  condition, 
the  equality  of  women,  NOW  argues, 
has  never  existed.  That  may  be  so, 
but  assimilation  of  a  previously  power- 
less group  into  the  mainstream  does 
not  a  revolution  make,  it  merely  al- 
ters slightly  the  appearance  of  the 
mainstream,  leaving  oppressive  ideolo- 
gies and  institutions  intact,  if  some- 
what modified.  Personal  experience 
in  NOW  and  the  larger  mainstream 
women's  movement  teaches  us  that 
when  a  privileged  woman  gains  access 
to  more  privilege,  she  does  not  neces- 
sarily use  her  position  to  challenge  sys- 
temic inequality.  If  we  have  learned 
this  lesson  within  the  movement  itself, 
it  seems  logical  that  we  are  skeptical  of 
"trust  us"  messages,  even  coming  from 
sisters  who  swear  they  will  represent 
our  interests  once  they  gain  more  pow- 
er within  institutions. 

Our  lack  of  willingness  to  trust 
others  to  accurately  articulate  and  ad- 
vocate our  needs,  concerns  and  aspira- 
tions does  not  lead  us  to  reject  reform 
strategies  out  of  hand.  We  are  realists, 
and  we  know  the  amelioration  of  daily 
hardship  and  suffering  through  certain 
reforms  is  important.   We  may,  how- 


Power  Brokerage/49 


ever,  legitimately  ask  whether  we  view 
the  reforms  as  an  end  in  themselves, 
or  whether  we  view  them  strategically 
as  building  blocks  to  further  change. 
Which  reforms  we  select,  how  we  pri- 
oritize them,  and  how  we  approach  our 
work  on  them  are  important  consider- 
ations for  any  group  seeking  to  devel- 
op short-range  goals  that  can  further 
long-range  visions. 

Charlotte  Bunch's  "The  Reform 
Tool  Kit"  still  provides  one  of  the 
finest  discussions  available  of  "criter- 
ia for  evaluating  which  reforms  are 
most  useful,  and  conditions  necessary 
for  feminists  to  work  on  reforms."^ ^ 
Particularly,  Bunch  reminds  us  of  the 
lecessity  of  working  on  issues  which 
■'aid  as  many  women  as  possible  and 
.  .  .  particularly  seek  to  redistribute 
income  and  status  so  that  the  class, 
race  and  heterosexual  privileges  that 
divide  women  are  eliminated. "19 


NOW  has  selected  its  priority, 
though  it  maintains  the  illusion  of 
being  a  multi-issue  organization.  Many 
of  us  from  society's  traditional  out- 
groups  are  disturbed  by  NOW's  de- 
cision to  designate  ERA  as  the  priori- 
ty. We  remain  skeptical  that  focus  on 
this  issue  above  all  others  is  strategical- 
ly wise.  We  have  always  been,  most  of 
us,  willing  to  accept  ERA  diS  one  prior- 
ity. We  have,  after  all,  given  years  of 
our  lives  towards  its  ratification  and 
will  give  more.  But  we  are  angered  by 
its  selection  as  the  single  most  impor- 
tant issue  by  NOW.  Our  concern  is: 
For  whom  is  it  strategically  the  wisest 
decision? 

Few  feminists  question  the  impor- 
tance, symbolic  and  actual,  of  ERA  ra- 
tification. But  NOW  has  yet  to  ac- 
knowledge that  the  ERA  will  not  af- 
fect all  women  in  the  same  way  —  par- 
ticularly women  of  different  social 


50/Quest 


classes.  To  contend  that  ERA  has  the 
same  meaning  for  all  groups  of  women 
—  as  NOW  does  —  is  an  exercise  in 
sophistry. 

Nevertheless,  NOW's  declaration  of 
the  ERA  State  of  Emergency  in  1978 
provided  the  mechanism  by  which 
most  resources  of  NOW  were  channel- 
ed into  the  ratification  effort,  includ- 
ing the  resources,  constituencies  and 
networks  of  other  issue-oriented 
committees.  The  continuing  prioriti- 
zation of  ERA  above  all  other  issues 
means  that  NOW  has  finally  achieved 
organizational  unity  of  purpose,  unity 
of  policy,  and  unity  of  priority. 

Years  before,  some  of  the  same  ac- 
tivists who  orchestrated  the  ERA  State 
of  Emergency  in  NOW  had  warned  of 
the  dangers  of  becoming  a  single-issue 
reform  organization. 20  When  the  dec- 
laration came,  they  assured  us  that  the 
diversion  of  NOW  resources  from  oth- 


er areas  was  temporary.  In  1979,  that 
"temporary"  sole  prioritization  was 
still  intact.  Delegates  to  the  1979  Na- 
tional Conference  voted  in  elections  in 
which  the  ERA  was  symbolically  held 
hostage  by  President  Eleanor  Smeal. 
Smeal's  campaigning  for  her  hand- 
picked  slate  of  candidates  for  national 
office  amounted  to  a  curious  form  of 
blackmail.  She  hinted  darkly  that  if 
she  were  not  granted  the  team  she 
wanted,  the  ERA  itself  was  endanger- 
ed. This  was  a  disturbing  confusion  of 
the  issue  and  the  personality  behind 
that  issue  —  but  it  proved  to  be  a  use- 
ful and  successful  campaign  tactic. 

"We  are  the  mainstream,"  the 
President  of  NOW  declared,  to  thun- 
derous applause  of  NOW  delegates  at- 
tending the  1979  conference. 

And  damn  if  it  didn't  feel  just  that 
way . 


Power  Brokerage/51 


III. 

To  get  the  vote  in  1920,  the  Suffrage 
Movement  sold  out  the  immigrant 
question  and  blacf^s.  The  women  said, 
'Let  us  vote  and  we  'II  counter  the  vote 
of  the  foreign  men  and  black  men.' 
What's  happening  now  is  —  give  us  the 
ERA  at  any  price.  NO  W  is  becoming 
respectable  and  paying  the  price  of 
sisterhood. 

NOW    Member     Marilyn  Murphy, 

Los  Angeles,  National  NOW  Con- 
ference, 1979  21 

Mussolini  did  make  the  trains  run  on 
time.  But  I  don't  want  efficiency.  I 
want  feminism. 

NOW  Member  Harriet  Perl,  Los 
Angeles,  National  NOW  Conference, 
1979  22 

We  may  achieve  many  legal  reforms 
in  the  course  of  our  work  on  women's 
rights;  we  may  even  become  political 
power  brokers,  able  to  influence  this 
one's  presidential  candidacy,  or  that 
one's  credibility  with  women's  rights 
advocates.  But  if,  in  the  course  of  our 
work,  we  reproduce  rather  than  chal- 
lenge the  structures  and  practices  of 
patriarchy,  we  will  further  reinforce 
institutionalized  sexism.  And  if  we  do 
not  vociferously  challenge  the  struc- 
tures and  practices  that  maintain  capi- 
talism, white  skin  privilege,  and  ideo- 
logical heterosexism,  we  will  have  be- 
trayed our  own  interest  in  creating  a 
society  devoid  of  the  need  to  wield 
power  over  others. 

Our  strategies,  our  issues,  our 
structures,  our  processes  require  on- 
going analysis.  We  are  instructed  by 
52/Quest 


that  analysis,  if  only  we  have  the  cour- 
age and  the  willingness  to  learn  from 
it.  In  an  earlier  issue  of  Quest,  Jo  Del- 
aplaine  wrote: 

The  human  meaning  and  purpose 
of  politics:  that  the  ends  don 't  always 
justify  the  means,  that  the  way  you 
interact,  the  way  you  structure  your 
individual  relationships  and  political 
groups,  and  the  values  by  which  you 
live  are  going  to  determine  the  kind  of 
society  you  can  ultimately  ere  ate. '^^ 

Like  thousands  of  other  women,  I 
owe  much  to  the  National  Organiza- 
tion for  Women.  My  years  in  the  or- 
ganization taught  me  skills,  brought 
me  in  contact  with  competent  women, 
increased  my  awareness  of  the  nature 
and  extent  of  sexist  oppression.  Just 
as  I  have  gained  much  from  NOW,  1 
have  given  it  years  of  service. 

Within  the  past  three  years,  how- 
ever, I  began  to  deplore  what  I  was 
becoming  in  NOW  as  I  adjusted  to  and 
participated  in  the  power  games,  the 
political  maneuvering,  the  closed-door 
strategizing,  the  sometimes  brutal 
politicking.  It  also  became  increasing- 
ly difficult  for  me  to  live  with  the  con- 
tradiction of  witnessing  ongoing  les- 
bian oppression  in  NOW,  yet  appearing 
publicly  as  NOW's  chief  lesbian  cheer- 
leader. 

The  world  1  see  being  created  in  the 
structure  and  hierarchy  of  National 
NOW  is  one  which  has  no  relevance  to 
my  own  feminist  principles  or  beliefs. 
I  believe  this  is  true  for  many  present 
and  former  members  of  NOW.  In 
concert  with  its  authoritarian  prac- 
tices, NOW  has  become  increasingly 
arrogant,  thereby  alienating  some  of 


its  own  membership,  some  of  its  move- 
ment colleagues  and  allies. 

The  membership,  of  course,  retains 
the  right,  and  the  power,  to  demand 
from  its  leadership  a  different  mode  of 
organization.  Whether  it  will  is  an 
open  question.  Nevertheless,  even  the 
process  of  exploring  and  attempting 
change  in  NOW  may  prove  important 
for  many  who  remain. 

We  are  fortunate  that  the  forces 
of  feminist  change  are  dominated  by 
no  one  organization,  no  one  group  of 
people,  no  one  perfectly  "correct" 
agenda.  Our  differences,  our  diversity, 
our  struggle  to  resolve  conflicts  with 
one  another  may  seem  overwhelming 
at  times.  But  the  process  of  coming  to 
terms  with  contradictions  is  as  much  a 
part  of  the  feminist  revolution  as  any 
specific  legal,  political,  social  or  eco- 
nomic demand  we  envision. 


FOOTNOTES 

^Eisenstein,  Zillah,ed.  Cap  i  talis  t  Pa  triarch  y 
and  the  Case  for  Socialist  Feminism. 
(New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press, 
1979).  Pages  58-59.  See  also:  Nancy 
Hartsock,  "Fundamental  Fenninism: 
Process  and  Perspective,"  Quest:  a  fem- 
inist quarterly  11:2  (Fall,  1975),  Page  72. 

2Hartsock.  Page  72. 

^The  ternn  "National  NOW"  is  specifically 
used  to  describe  the  national  administra- 
tive superstructure,  consisting  of  the  na- 
tional officers,  board,  and  mechanisms 
of  power  available  to  and  utilized  by 
that  superstructure.  I  make  no  generali- 
zation about  NOW  subunits  (state,  re- 
gional, chapter  units)  simply  because  no 
one  generalization  would  apply. 

■^Mckenzie,  Midge,  Shoulder  to  Shoulder. 
(New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  Inc., 
1975).  Page  215. 

Snow  statement  of  Purpose,  adopted  at 
the  organizing  conference  in  Washington, 
D.C.,  October  29,  1966. 

^Martin,  Del  and  Lyon,  Phyllis.  Letter  to 
Gay  Community  News  (October  31, 
1979). 

"^Mackenzie.  Pages  268-270. 

^Catt,  Carrie  Chapman.  "Report  to  the  Ex- 
ecutive Council  of  the  National  Ameri- 
can Woman  Suffrage  Association."  At- 
lantic City  Emergency  Convention,  Sep- 
tember 1916.  National  American  Wom- 
an Suffrage  Association  Collection,  Li- 
brary of  Congress  Manuscript  Division, 
Box  82.  See  also:  Carrie  Chapman  Catt, 
Open  Letter  on  "The  Winning  Policy," 
1916.  NAWSA  Collection,  Library  of 
Congress  Manuscript  Division,  Box  82. 

^The  Carrie  Chapman  Catt  Report  to  the 
Executive  Council,  cited  above,  is  a  typ- 
ed script,  containing  handwritten  nota- 
Power  Brokerage/53 


tions  and  marginal  entries.  A  complete 
reading  of  the  document  reveals  much  of 
Mrs.  Catt's  frustration  with  what  she  re- 
fers to  as  the  "stupid  inability"  of  local 
organizers. 

^^For  accounts  of  early  lesbian  experi- 
ence in  NOW,  including  information 
about  the  NOW  purges,  see  Abbot,  Sid- 
ney and  Love,  Barbara.  Sappho  Was  A 
Right-On  Woman:  A  Liberated  View  of 
Lesbianism .  (New  York:  Stein  and  Day, 
1973).  Pages  107-134.  See  also:  Sidney 
Abbot,  "Lesbians  and  the  Women's 
Movement,"  Our  Right  to  Love:  A  Les- 
bian Resource  Boo/<,  Ginny  Vida,  ed, 
(New  Jersey:  Prentice-Hall,  1978).  See 
also:  Rita  Mae  Brown,  "Take  a  Lesbian 
to  Lunch,"  >4  Plain  Brown  Rapper.  (Bal- 
timore: Diana  Press,  1976).  Pages  79-95. 
See  also:  Del  Martin  and  Phyllis  Lyon, 
Lesbian /Woman .  (New  York:  Bantam 
Books,  1972).  Pages  280-302. 

llSee  The  Electric  Circle  1:1  (August, 
1975)  newspaper  published  by  the  NOW 


Majority  Caucus  which  details  President 
Karen  DeCrow's  forceful  protest  against 
violation  of  due  process  to  her  and  other 
concerned  parties  during  a  factional 
controversy  on  the  board  involving  a 
personnel  dispute.  DeCrow,  an  ardent 
defender  of  internal  democracy,  walked 
out  of  national  board  proceedings  in 
New  Orleans  on  December  7,  1975, 
rather  than  endure  a  "kangaroo  court" 
atmosphere  in  the  board  meeting. 
She  was  followed  by  12  other  board 
members.  See  also  Abbott  and  Love, 
pages  107-134  for  an  account  of  denial 
of  due  process  to  the  NOW  Executive 
Director,  dismissed  at  the  height  of  the 
NOW  lesbian  purge.  Additionally,  in 
1977,  I  was  denied  the  right  to  defend 
myself  against  allegations  made  about 
me  and  my  fitness  for  chair  of  the 
Lesbian  Rights  Committee  in  NOW 
during  closed-door  meetings  of  the  NOW 
executive  committee  and  board.  Though 
I  was  finally  exonerated  and  reappoint- 
ed, I  was  never  allowed  to  speak  directly 
to  the  board  or  the  President  about  the 


■hhI  I  1 

1  "Si  ■  Hf^f  j 

54/Quest 


accusations.  I  was  allowed  only  the  right 
to  respond  in  writing  to  a  grievance 
committee  to  a  series  of  general  ques- 
tions relating  to  a  multi-issue  grievance 
filed  by  a  local  NOW  chapter  against 
several  of  its  former  members,  including 
myself.  The  question  of  my  fitness  for 
NOW  office  was  addressed  directly  by 
the  board  and  I  was  never  allowed  to 
address  the  board.  This  process  contin- 
ued over  a  period  of  several  months  and 
was  one  of  the  most  painful  and  demean- 
ing I  have  ever  experienced. 

I^r/je  Electric  Circle  1:1.  See  also:  "Why 
Members- In-Trust  Are  Members  of 
NOW."  This  broadside  was  prepared  and 
circulated  in  October  1975  by  the 
California  Majority  Caucus. 

3"Why  Members-In-Trust  Are  Members  of 
NOW."  The  dues  in  escrow  were  subse- 
quently released  after  the  1975  NOW 
elections. 

^Parker,  Sharon.  Letter  to  sisters,  friends, 
and  supporters.  (November  5,  1979). 

^Martin  and  Lyon.  Letter  to  Gay  Commu- 
nity News. 

^Bunch,  Charlotte.  Letter  to  Gay  Com- 
munity News  (November  31,  1979). 

^Lerner,  Gerda.  "Women's  Rights  and 
American  Feminism,"  The  Majority 
Finds  Its  Past  (New  York:  Oxford  Uni- 
versity Press,  1979).  Page  56.  Lerner 
did  not  mean  that  feminist  change  was 
irrelevant  to  working  class  and  poor 
women.  She  distinguished  between  lib- 
eral "civil  rights"  reform,  a  narrow 
"women's  rights"  agenda  which  accepts 
a  modified  status  quo,  and  the  broader 
concept  of  women's  emancipation  which 
addresses  itself  to  a  more  comprehensive 
approach  to  social  change.  In  pointing 
out  that  civil  rights  were  needed,  but 
that  they  did  not  always  address  the 
needs  of  women  without  status  or  privi- 


lege, Lerner  noted  that,  for  example, 
"In  the  absence  of  property,  inheritance 
and  other  property  rights  are  irrele- 
vant. ..." 

"•^Bunch,  Charlotte.  "The  Reform  Tool 
Kit."  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  1:1 
(Summer  1974),  Page  37. 

IQBunch.  Page  46. 

20south  Hills  NOW  Majority  Caucus  Plat- 
form and  Candidate  Booklet.  (October 
1975).  Part  of  the  platform  notes  read: 
"When  we  fail  to  articulate  some  of  our 
goals  we  tend  to  drop  them  not  only 
from  our  immediate  demands  but  from 
our  long  term  vision.  It  does  not  take 
much  anxiety  and  circumspection  to 
turn  a  multi-issued  revolution  into  a 
one  issue  reform.  We  are  a  multi-issue 
organization." 

2lLobel,  Kerry  and  Cordova,  Jeanne. 
"NOW  Convention:  Out  of  the  Revo- 
lution/Into the  Mainstream."  The 
Lesbian  Tide.  (November/December 
1979),  Page  21. 

22Lobel  and  Cordova.  Page  21. 

23Delaplaine,  Jo.  "Mujeres  y  La  Comuni- 
dad  Latina/Women  and  the  Latin  Com- 
munity." Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly 
IV:4  (Fall,  1978),  Page  8. 


Kay  Whitlock  writes  and  lectures 
on  a  variety  of  feminist  and  lesbian- 
feminist  concerns.  She  was  a  NOW  ac- 
tivist at  local,  state  and  national  levels 
between  1973  and  1979,  serving  as  co- 
chair  of  the  National  NOW  Task  Force 
on  Sexuality  and  Lesbianism,  and 
chair  of  the  NOW  Lesbian  Rights  Com- 
mittee. Her  current  focus  is  women's 
health. 


Power  Brokerage/55 


art  by  Carol  Stannard 


56/Quest 


Rape:  The  Power  of  Consciousness.   By  Susan  Griffin.  San  Francisco;  Harper 
and  Row.  (paperback),  1 34  pp.  $3.95. 
Review  by  CAROLINE  SPARKS 

Susan  Griffin  combines  three  essays  on  rape  into  a  short  primer  on  the  ef- 
fects of  rape  on  women's  psyches  and  the  breakthrough  in  our  thought  brought 
about  by  the  women's  movement.  The  first  essay,  a  reprint  of  Griffin's  1 971  ar- 
ticle, "Rape:  The  All  American  Crime,"  is  still  one  of  the  best  statements  of  the 
restrictive  effects  of  the  fear  of  rape  on  women's  lives.  In  this  article,  already  a 
feminist  classic,  Griffin  developed  two  themes,  the  effects  of  fear  and  the  link 
between  rape  and  patriarchy.  It  should  be  read  by  any  woman  beginning  to 
examine  violence  against  women.  My  own  group  has  used  it  in  reprint  form 
for  community  education  for  years,  and  i  am  glad  that  it  is  again  readily  avail- 
able to  general  audiences. 

In  the  second  and  third  essays,  Griffin  pursues  her  analysis  of  the  myriad  ef- 
fects of  constant  fear  on  women's  development,  our  behavior,  and  our  thought 
patterns.  Her  concern  in  these  essays  is  not  with  the  physical  or  economic  re- 
strictions on  women's  lives,  but  with  the  restrictions  on  our  psychic  and  spiritual 
development  that  result  from  living  with  a  danger  accepted  as  simply  part  of  the 
natural  order:  men  prey  on  women.  Continued  on  page  63 


The  Curious  Courtship  of  Women's  Liberation  and  Socialism.  By  Batya  Weinbaum. 
Boston;  South  End  Press.  $4.00 

Review  by  ALEXA  FREEMAN  and  JAYNE  LOADER 

In  The  Curious  Courtshiip  of  Women's  Liberation  and  Socialism,  Batya  Wein- 
baum expresses  serious  doubts  that  socialism  and  feminism  can  ever  be  recon- 
ciled. This  has  serious  implications  for  current  feminist  theory;  Weinbaum  at- 
tempts to  throw  a  monkey  wrench  into  the  gears  propelling  many  women  to- 
ward a  politics  that  is  open  both  to  other  issues  besides  traditional  women's  is- 
sues and  other  styles  of  organization  aside  from  separatism.  We  believe  this  is  a 
positive  step  for  the  women's  movement,  though  one  not  lacking  an  element  of 
risk,  while  Weinbaum  sees  it  as  little  more  than  a  headlong  dive  into  a  pit  full  of 
vipers.  In  order  to  move  feminist  theory  forward  and  to  fully  appreciate  the 
theoretical  work  that  other  feminists  have  undertaken^,  it  is  necessary  to  criti- 
cize many  of  Weinbaum's  assertions. 

Weinbaum's  central  thesis  is  stated  in  the  opening  pages  of  her  book:  "Capi- 
talism's subversion  of  patriarchy  for  the  majority  of  fathers  provokes  socialist 
reaction  to  gains  made  by  women."  Her  attempts  to  support  this  provocative 
statement  take  several  forms:  a  rereading  of  Marx's  Capital  to  argue  his  patriar- 
chal bias,  a  discussion  of  revolutions  and  revolutionaries  that  have  failed  to  ad- 
vance the  liberation  of  women,  and  a  Freudian  interpretation  of  revolutionary 

Word  Watch/57 


history  which  attempts  to  show  that  socialist  overtures  to  women  —  and  social- 
ist revolutions  per  se  —  are  provoked  by  the  sexual  jealousy  of  a  dominated  class 
of  men  for  the  greater  power  that  ruling  class  men  have  over  women.  The  "gains 
made  by  women"  in  the  above  formula  seem  to  refer  to  the  entrance  of  women 
into  the  work  force,  which  disrupts  the  balance  of  power  in  the  household  and 
leads  men  to  organize  revolutions  in  order  to  set  this  domestic  imbalance  right. 

In  her  analysis  of  Marx,  Weinbaum  sets  out  to  find  evidence  discrediting 
Marx  and,  not  surprisingly,  finds  exactly  what  she  seeks.  We  agree  that  in  Capi- 
ta/, the  only  work  which  Weinbaum  analyzes,  Marx  writes  in  terms  of  male 
rather  than  female  workers  and  has  scant  understanding  of  women's  oppression 
beyond  the  economic  realm.  However,  Weinbaum  argues  that  because  Marx  is  a 
patriarch  his  theoretical  system  is  thoroughly  tainted  (a  judgement  she  fails  to 
apply  to  Freud,  Erich  Fromm,  or  Norman  O.  Brown  —  patriarchs  all).  Wein- 
baum's  conviction  that  socialism  has  been  used  only  to  coopt  and  oppress  wom- 
en prevents  her  from  finding  anything  of  use  in  Marx.  But,  the  point  of  Marxist 
analysis  should  not  be  to  endlessly  rewrite  Marx,  but  rather  to  find  theoretical 
approaches  in  Marx  that  are  useful  in  understanding  the  role  of  women  in  the 
world  today.  For  example,  his  theory  of  alienation,  his  use  of  dialectics,  and  his 
understanding  of  historical  change  seem  to  parallel  certain  feminist  insights  and 
may  provide  more  fruitful  ground  for  feminist  theory  than  Marx's  explicit  dis- 
cussions of  women  in  Capita/.^ 

Other  Marxist  theorists  are  similarly  rejected  by  Weinbaum.  Engels'  Origins 
of  the  Family  is  dismissed  as  an  attempt  to  buy  off  and  divert  an  autonomous 
feminist  movement  with  promises  of  a  socialist  nirvana.  His  original  contribu- 
tion to  developing  an  analysis  of  the  origins  of  women's  oppression  is  disre- 
garded. Thus,  Weinbaum  situates  all  male  socialist  theorists  somewhere  be- 
tween the  proverbial  rock  and  a  hard  place.  They  are  coopters  if  they  write 
about  women,  patriarchs  if  they  don't. 

Male  activists  face  a  similar  double  bind,  if  they  aid,  or  fail  to  aid,  the  strug- 
gles of  women.  Weinbaum  sees  a  pattern  of  buy-off  and  sell-out  recurring 
throughout  the  history  of  socialist  interaction  with  women,  documenting  an 
attention  to  women's  needs  in  the  beginning  of  revolutionary  movements  fol- 
lowed by  a  retraction  of  pro-woman  positions  and  actions  after  the  revolutions 
have  been  won. 

Though  this  is  a  fairly  harsh  version  of  revolutionary  history,  Weinbaum  of- 
fers persuasive  evidence  for  her  position.  What  is  not  convincing  are  the  conclu- 
sions she  draws  from  this  history  and  the  methodology  she  uses  to  get  them. 
Rather  than  attempting  to  understand  these  patterns  in  terms  of  economic,  poli- 
tical or  historical  motivations  (e.g.,  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  strong  indepen- 
dent women's  movement,  the  democratic  or  non-democratic  structuring  of  post- 
revolutionary  governments)  Weinbaum  chooses  to  explain  everything  through  a 
particularly  mechanistic  application  of  Freud  that  reduces  the  whole  of  human 

58/Quest,  vol.  V  no.  2 


history  to  male  heterosexual  lust,  as  encapsulated  in  the  following  myth:  A 
primitive  primal  horde  is  dominated  by  a  single  patriarch  who  is,  one  day,  set 
upon  by  his  jealous  sons,  who  kill  and  eat  him.  The  sons  take  for  themselves  the 
wives  and  daughters  of  the  tribe,  becoming  co-equal  patriarchs  themselves  and 
absorbing  the  values  of  the  dead  father. 

Weinbaum  takes  this  myth  as  a  literal  model  for  all  revolutions  and  the  patri- 
archal family  as  a  model  for  the  state.  She  argues  that  male  concern  with  the  op- 
pression of  women  under  capitalism  is  "unconscious  appeal  to  the  violation  of 
patriarchal  property  rights  of  the  disenfranchised  fathers"  and  that  the  sexual 
jealousy  men  out  of  power  have  for  men  in  power  is  the  motivating  force  behind 
revolution.  If  feminist  gains  occur  at  the  same  time,  these  gains  are  wiped  out  as 
the  new  group  of  fathers  emerges  and  takes  power  over  "their"  women.  Indeed, 
feminist  gains  which  have  occurred  under  capitalism  (through  entry  into  the 
workforce)  can  motivate  a  socialist  revolution  as  "fathers  of  the  disenfranchised 
class  react  against  that  first  step  (into  production)  taken  by  their  daughters  and 
wives." 

Weinbaum's  position  on  women  entering  the  workforce  and  the  possibility  of 
women's  liberation  under  capitalism  is  extremely  unclear.  She  defines  both 
Marx's  and  Engels'  arguments  that  women  should  go  into  productive  labor  and 
fight  as  members  of  the  working  class  as  socialist  cooptation  and  manipulation. 
Yet,  elsewhere  she  seems  to  see  workforce  participation  in  much  the  same  way 
Marx  did:  as  a  means  of  giving  women  a  basis  for  equality  with  men  through 
work  outside  the  domestic  sphere.  Because  Weinbaum  points  to  male-led  social- 
ist revolutions  after  this  entry  into  the  workforce  has  occurred  as  reactionary 
setbacks  for  women,  it  is  unclear  whether  or  not  she  believes  that  women  could 
progress  under  capitalism  via  material  advancement  to  a  position  of  full  equality. 
Our  knowledge  of  Weinbaum's  political  work  and  writing  makes  us  doubt  that 
liberation  through  capitalism  is  her  goal,  but  it  is  the  lingering  impression  one 
gets  after  reading  the  sections  on  women's  labor  under  capitalism  in  this  book. 

Weinbaum  does  not  acknowledge  that  women  have  been  used  as  cheap  labor 
again  and  again  or  that  necessity  has  forced  many  women  to  work  who  other- 
wise might  have  chosen  not  to,  given  the  appallingly  bad  conditions  and  aliena- 
ting work  they  often  face.  Her  refusal  to  acknowledge  that  women  and  children 
have  been  used  repeatedly  as  levers  to  bring  the  wages  of  all  workers  down 
makes  it  seem  that  any  resistance  by  men  against  this  tactic  (organizing  unions 
and  guilds)  is  simply  anti-woman,  which  it  is  not,  although  we  recognize  that  the 
failure  of  men  to  support  the  unionization  of  women  contributes  to  this  impres- 
sion. But  under  Weinbaum's  scenario,  all  the  blame  falls  on  the  heads  of  work- 
ing class  men;  capitalism,  essentially  sexless,  is  curiously  absolved. 

However,  Weinbaum's  primary  focus  is  psychological  rather  than  economic 
and  we  do  not  underestimate  the  importance  of  her  efforts  to  locate  the  uncon- 
scious roots  of  patriarchy  and  sexism.  Feminists  must  understand  how  the  un- 

Word  Watch/59 


conscious  has  absorbed  sexism  and  explore  the  dialectic  between  conscious  ac- 
tions and  unconscious  motivations;  to  deny  the  unconscious  is  to  doom  our 
struggles  to  failure. 

Yet,  we  must  take  issue  with  Weinbaum's  irresponsible  use  of  Freudian 
theory  and  her  assumption  that  Freud  is  the  only  psychoanalytic  theorist  from 
whom  we  can  understand  how  sexism  and  the  unconscious  function.  Other 
major  psychoanalytic  theorists  operating  both  within  feminism  (Dorothy  Din- 
nerstein,  Nancy  Chodorow,  Jane  Flax)  and  outside  of  it  (R.D.  Laing,  Wilhelm 
Reich,  Jacques  Lacan)  cannot  be  ignored  even  if  we  disagree  with  their  conclu- 
sions. But,  to  her  detriment,  Weinbaum  has  done  so.  By  relying  on  Freud, 
Weinbaum  characterizes  the  unconscious  as  innately  heterosexual.  Furthermore, 
she  ignores  the  unconscious  motivations  of  female  revolutionaries,  making  it  dif- 
ficult to  see  how  they  fit  into  revolutions  at  all.  While  we  admire  her  insistence 
on  the  importance  of  the  unconscious,  we  cannot  settle  for  such  a  cursory  exam- 
ination. The  political  implications  of  Freudian  psychology  must  be  analyzed  as 
rigorously  as  Weinbaum  herself  insists  we  must  analyze  Marxism. 

There  are  other  aspects  of  feminist  theory  which  Weinbaum  has  omitted  from 
her  analysis  or  presented  in  a  wholly  unrecognizable  form.  (1)  She  argues  that 
disillusionment  with  socialism  has  been  the  primary  impetus  for  the  emergence 
of  feminism  throughout  history,  ignoring  the  fact  that  feminists  have  emerged 
in  response  to  social  and  economic  conditions  as  well  as  movements,  and  to 
political  and  cultural  movements  other  than  socialism:  civil  rights,  abolitionism, 
hippies,  gay  liberation,  etc.  (2)  Weinbaum  sees  feminist  theory  totally  in  rela- 
tion to  socialism  and  completely  omits  discussion  of  feminist  theory  in  which 
this  relationship  is  not  easily  discerned:  lesbian  feminist  theory,  black  feminist 
theory,  women's  spirituality,  etc.  (3)  She  discusses  radical  feminism  totally  as  a 
reaction  to  insufficiencies  in  Marxist  theory,  without  acknowledging  that  male 
practice  in  the  Left,  anti-war  movement  and  counterculture  was  at  least  as  im- 
portant as  theory  in  motivating  women  to  form  separate  organizations  and  to 
develop  radical  feminism  as  a  theory  and  a  practice.  (4)  Weinbaum  never  de- 
fines radical  feminism,  even  though  her  arguments  imply  a  radical  feminist  per- 
spective. (5)  She  discusses  socialist  feminism  as  an  offshoot  of  radical  feminism 
without  mention  of  the  fact  that  many  socialist  feminists  were  radical  feminists 
who  left  that  branch  of  the  movement  during  the  gay-straight  split.  Weinbaum 
ignores  this  split  and  the  radical  (lesbian)  critique  of  heterosexuality  that  few 
straight  women  could  accept  at  the  time.  Weinbaum's  characterization  of  social- 
ist feminists  as  "taking"  their  politics  from  radical  feminism  without  having  been 
part  of  that  movement  is  a  distortion.  (6)  Women  who  came  to  socialist  femi- 
nism after  long  participation  in  radical  feminism  often  did  so  due  to  disillusion- 
ment with  separatism  as  an  organizing  strategy.  (This  was  especially  true  of 
Third  World  and  working  class  women.)  That  many  lesbians  are  now  question- 
ing the  political  efficacy  of  separatism  and  arc  working  in  such  diverse  areas  as 


60/Quest 


the  anti-nuclear  movement,  appropriate  technology  and  the  electoral  system  is 
some  evidence  that  separatism  has  grown  less  attractive  as  a  strategy  at  this 
time,  even  to  those  v^omen  most  committed  to  the  building  of  an  autonomous 
vs^omen's  movement. 

Weinbaum's  history  of  the  women's  movement  derives  solely  from  written 
documentation  and  this  documentation  is  totally  insufficient.  That  Weinbaum 
writes  of  the  movement  as  if  she  was  a  historian  from  the  year  3000  trying  to 
chronicle  the  course  of  an  obscure  social  movement  is  inexplicable  given  her  per- 
sonal history  as  an  activist. 

Weinbaum's  final  chapter  on  kinship  may  prove  to  be  her  most  important 
contribution  to  building  usable  feminist  theory.  She  argues  that  both  socialist 
and  feminist  attempts  to  analyze  the  changes  in  women's  roles  after  revolutions 
have  been  inadequate,  and  offers  an  approach  based  on  merging  the  two,  and 
integrating  them  with  kinship  categories.  She  proposes  that  we  compare  women 
then/men  then  with  women  now/men  now  in  order  to  measure  the  differences  in 
male  and  female  gains,  and  to  further  compare  people  based  on  categories  of  age, 
marital  status  and  position  in  the  family.  With  this  model,  Weinbaum  attempts 
to  address  questions  on  the  economic  functions  of  the  household  and  household 
relations,  and  to  provide  a  method  for  examining  these  relations  both  through 
time  and  between  socialist  and  capitalist  countries. 

This  is  a  commendable  effort,  yet  it  fails  to  deal  with  several  key  issues. 
Weinbaum  acknowledges  that  the  individual  household  structure  is  in  flux,  yet 
her  model  assumes  some  continuing  approximation  of  these  households  ("father, 
brother,  wife,  daughter").  How  can  it  be  applied  to  single  parents,  lesbians  and 
gay  men,  non-monogamous  people?  Even  though  Weinbaum  attempts  to  create 
a  model  which  can  be  applied  to  different  historical  periods,  her  model  is  ahis- 
torical.  A  model  for  feudal  societies  would  be  different  than  a  model  for  the 
contemporary  United  States;an  African  tribal  model  would  be  different  from  one 
based  on  India's  family  and  caste  system.  Weinbaum  also  ignores  race.  Simply 
identifying  one  household  as  white  and  another  as  black  and  describing  the  rela- 
tions within  each  doesn't  touch  on  the  differences,  nor  describe  the  unique  func- 
tions of  racism  in  maintaining  the  economy.  Finally,  Weinbaum  omits  from  her 
model  exactly  how  and  by  whom  "gains"  are  to  be  defined  in  comparing  pre- 
and  post-revolutionary  societies.  Weinbaum  clearly  leans  toward  using  American 
feminist  values  to  measure  the  achievements  of  women  in  socialist  countries 
rather  than  looking  at  the  goals  of  the  women  themselves.  It  is  arrogance  to  as- 
sume that  all  women  in  all  countries  share  our  goals  (perhaps  some  would  pre- 
fer the  traditionally  structured  family,  and,  when  given  the  option,  raise  children 
rather  than  work  for  wages).  We  must  respect  the  perceptions  of  the  women 
whose  lives  are  literally  at  stake  before  judging  what  is  and  what  is  not  libera- 
tion. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  Weinbaum  stopped  where  she  did,  for  it  is  possible  that 

Word  Watch/61 


a  variety  of  analytic  models  could  be  constructed  to  reflect  many  contemporary 
historical  household  patterns  which  take  into  account  women's  goals,  yet  still 
provide  a  means  of  comparison.  What  Weinbaum  attempts  to  do  in  bringing  to- 
gether the  yardsticks  of  socialism  and  feminism  is  acknowledge  that  neither, 
alone,  is  sufficient  to  comprehend  the  questions  that  must  be  addressed  today. 

Although  we  disagree  with  Weinbaum's  answers,  the  question  she  raises  is 
critical:  Why  have  women  been  negotiable  in  revolutionary  situations?  Her 
book  thus  serves  as  a  practical  warning  to  feminists  who  are  beginning  to  think 
about  coalition  building  and  working  within  organizations  that  that  road  is  not 
without  its  hazards,  and  as  a  reminder  of  the  depth  of  the  problem,  even  if  her 
analysis  of  it  is  simplistic.  We  must  seek  to  provide  better  answers  to  the  ques- 
tions Weinbaum  raises.  Only  then  will  we  be  able  to  begin  effective  strategies 
for  achieving  both  the  revolution  feminists  want  and  the  immediate  reforms  we 
all  need  to  survive  in  the  interim. 


FOOTNOTES 

See  for  example  Zillah  Eisenstein,  Capitalist  Patriarchy  and  the  Case  for  Socialist  heminism 
(New  York:  Monthly  Review  Press,  1979),  to  be  reviewed  in  an  upcoming  issue  of  Quest. 
2See  Nancy  Hartsock,  "Fundamental  Feminism:  Process  and  Perspective,"  Quest  2:2  (Fall, 
1975),  pp.  67-80. 


Continued  from  page  57 

Her  second  essay  assesses  changes  in  women's  thinking  after  the  women's 
movement  made  rape  a  public  issue.  Griffin  argues  that  in  the  last  eight  years, 
the  women's  movement  has  created  a  culture  for  ourselves  that  validates  wom- 
en's experience,  our  redefinition  of  rape  and  our  vision  of  a  world  without  rape. 
She  traces  the  processes  of  women  telling  our  experiences  to  one  another  and 
forming  an  anti-rape  movement  in  which  as  she  says  we  serve  as  a  body  of 
listeners  and  seers  who  act  as  witnesses  for  other  women's  atrocities,  allowing 
women's  experiences  to  be  heard. 

Griffin  believes  that  in  the  last  eight  years,  we  have  "wrought  a  change  in 
consciousness,  even  though  the  actual  condition  of  rape  continues,"  and,  in 
fact,  as  she  acknowledges,  is  worsening.  She  interprets  the  change  in  conscious- 
ness as  a  feat  "that  heralds  more  to  come."  Her  contention  is  that  once  a 
thinking,  feeling  being  begins  to  trust  herself  and  has  a  taste  for  being  whole, 
of  being  well,  she  will  never  settle  for  the  old  ways  but  will  imagine  more  than 
rape  centers,  new  laws,  rapists  in  prison  —  a  whole  new  world  without  rape.  Her 
conclusion  about  the  transformation  in  our  expectations  is  that  now  we  "know 
there  /5  a  world  without  rape  and  this  world  is  in  our  minds." 

Since  she  believes  this  new  consciousness  is  the  important  development  so 
far  in  the  movement,  she  writes  in  her  third  essay  of  how  violence  has  impinged 
specifically  on  the  development  of  women's  spiritual  life.  As  she  says,  more 
than  rape  itself,  the  fear  of  rape  permeates  our  lives.  She  describes  the  crippling 
effects  of  fear  of  rape  on  women's  solitude,  a  solitude  she  believes  is  essential 
for  spiritual  development.  She  also  describes  the  effects  of  women  having  to 
come  to  terms,  not  just  with  death,  but  with  death  by  murder ...  the  knowledge 
that  someone  wants  you  to  die  violently.  Women's  psychic  scars  and  limited 
vision  are  consequences  of  living  from  day  to  day  with  potential  violence. 

A  last  section  of  the  book,  entitled  "The  Power  of  Consciousness:  A  Col- 
lage," was  probably  designed  to  illustrate  the  development  in  our  consciousness 
about  rape  over  the  last  few  years.  Although  it  is  an  interesting  experiment,  it 
fails  to  achieve  an  impact  since  the  fragments  from  various  women's  movement 
journals  and  other  media  sources  represented  in  the  collage  fail  to  coalesce, 
leaving  the  reader  with  a  sense  of  randomness  and  purposelessness. 

Moreover,  the  list  of  Rape  Crisis  Centers  in  the  appendix  is  out  of  date  and  in- 
accurate. Griffin  apparently  did  not  consult  the  National  Center  for  the  Preven- 
tion and  Control  of  Rape,  which  could  have  provided  an  updated  listing,  nor 
does  she  list  the  Center  as  a  resource  for  readers. 

I  have  mixed  responses  to  this  book.  Griffin  weaves  a  spell  in  words  and  con- 
jures images  that  take  me  along  with  her  as  she  traces  the  subtleties  of  fear.  I 
agree  with  her  that  years  after  the  first  wave  of  recognition  of  rape  and  our  rejec- 
tion of  old  thinking  about  it,  fear  is  still  with  us.  We  know  more  about  it  now  - 
its  depth,  its  pervasiveness,  and  the  difficulty  of  eradicating  it  -  than  we  did 

Word  Watch/63 


eight  years  ago.  As  a  woman  who  has  lived  with  this  fear  for  years,  it  appears  to 
be  part  of  my  cells  and  bones,  though  I  have  been  in  support  groups,  confronta- 
tion squads,  self-defense  and  intensive  karate.  I  have  no  illusions  that  weapons 
training  will  eradicate  it  permanently,  either.  I  want  this  kind  of  damage  to  us 
stopped. 

As  a  feminist  working  on  rape  prevention,  if  I  look  at  Griffin's  handling  of 
her  second  theme,  the  end  of  patriarchy,  I  have  to  shake  off  the  semi-hypnotic 
state  induced  by  her  flow  of  words  and  critically  analyze  where  she's  going. 
There  are  serious  problems  here  that  will  contribute  to  confusion  over  the  direc- 
tion the  anti-rape  movement  can  take.  Although  Griffin  does  not  offer  specific 
strategies  to  stop  rape,  the  implied  strategy  seems  to  be  that  of  altering  reality 
through  alterations  of  our  individual  and  collective  psyches.  Her  message  is: 
live  differently  and  it  will  all  add  up  to  a  different  world.  The  concept  that  al- 
terations of  the  psyche  will  alter  reality,  appealing  as  it  is,  especially  to  women 
who  as  a  group  are  so  hesitant  to  act,  has  serious  limitations  for  an  objectively 
oppressed  people.  The  message,  "Don't  think  of  yourself  as  a  slave  and  you 
won't  be,"  may  serve  as  a  mental  suvival  tactic  for  retaining  or  gaining  some  dig- 
nity, but  it  doesn't  alter  the  fact  that  a  slave  is,  in  fact,  a  slave  —  subjugated  and 
unfree.  Eventually,  objectively,  chains  must  be  broken;  not  just  mental  chains, 
real  ones.  Slaves  must  face  their  situation  and  make  some  plans. 

Most  women  still  refuse  to  look  at  their  situation  in  this  way.  It  is  the  task 
of  the  women's  movement  to  encourage  women  to  do  this  appraisal.  I  wish 
Griffin  had  said,  "Let's  face  it,  it's  going  to  take  us  longer  than  we  ever  thought 
to  get  out  of  this.  If,  in  1 971 ,  we  thought  that  talking  about  rape  would  miracu- 
lously change  our  lives,  we  are  now  more  realistic.  It  has  taken  us  eight  years  to 
get  far  enough  that  a  small  percentage  of  women  thinks  differently  about  rape 
and  a  larger  percentage  is  willing  to  discuss  the  issue  on  any  level.  We  know  now 
that  the  crippling  effects  of  fear  go  deeper  and  that  women  are  more  passive, 
even  those  of  us  in  the  women's  movement,  than  we  thought.  We  know  that  we 
have  to  go  over  and  over  the  same  ground  for  years,  seeking  a  way  to  overcome 
our  training.  We  know  that  if,  as  militants  and  radicals,  we  have  had  such  a  hard 
time  creating  this  mental  space,  it  will  take  long  effort  for  women  as  a  class  to 
break  through  to  a  new  consciousness  .  .  .  and  even  longer  for  women  to  act  as  a 
collective  political  force  to  end  patriarchy!" 

In  1 971 ,  Griffin  concluded  her  article  with  the  point  that  "rape  is  not  an  iso- 
lated act  that  can  be  rooted  out  from  patriarchy  without  ending  patriarchy  it- 
self." Much  of  the  anti-rape  movement  does  not  share  her  vision.  As  an  exam- 
ple, in  August,  1979.  the  organizing  conference  of  the  National  Coalition 
Against  Sexual  Assault^  refused  to  pass  a  resolution  to  work  to  end  patriarchy  — 
culturally  or  structurally,  its  purpose  and  by-laws  never  refer  to  feminism  and 
the  conference  members  only  passed  a  resolution  affirming  a  commitment  to 


64/Quest 


end  sexism  because  some  women  in  the  organization  saw  it  as  a  way  to  protect 
the  men  at  the  conference  from  feminist  discrimination.  The  anti-rape  move- 
ment is  getting  more  conservative,  not  more  radical. 

Griffin's  book  will  do  nothing  to  change  that  because  it  easily  lets  conserva- 
tive women  off  the  hook  through  an  apparent  appeal  for  individual  develop- 
ment. Griffin's  message  should  not  have  been  "woman  be  healer,"  but  "woman 
be  activist,"  not  because  we  should  not  be  healers  but  because  woman's  vision 
has  included  healer  for  centuries  but  has  not  included  activist.  Her  assumption 
that  the  original  change  in  consciousness  heralds  more  to  come  and  that  Rape 
Crisis  Centers  are  tools  for  inducing  thought  and  action  from  which  radical  social 
change  can  grow  will  com.e  to  nothing  if  present  trends  continue.  We  risk  being 
only  listeners  and  seers.  A  change  in  consciousness  must  be  followed  by  acti- 
vism, a  development  that  is  not  automatic  but  that  takes  hard  work  on  political 
theory  and  strategy. 

We  know,  eight  years  of  work  in  rape  prevention  later,  the  tremendous  dif- 
ficulty in  creating  activists.  Collective  political  consciousness  must  include  not 
just  the  recognition  of  oppression  and  the  vision  of  a  new  world,  but  a  collec- 
tive solution  for  the  real  transformation  of  patriarchy.  Our  vision  does  not  yet 
include  this  latter  ingredient  and  we  need  it  badly.  We  must  create  a  new  world 
that  exists  beyond  our  minds. 

Griffin's  most  serious  error  and  disservice  to  the  women's  movement  is  her 
complete  rejection  of  theory.  She  comments  several  times  in  her  essays  on  the 
uselessness  of  theory  and  the  importance  of  experience.  It  was  originally  appro- 
priate for  the  women's  movement  to  reject  theory  that  seemed  incapable  of  ac- 
counting for  women's  experience,  and  to  search  for  new  processes.  Griffin, 
however,  still  uses  the  tired  old  excuse  of  rejecting  Leftist  theory  to  reject 
theory  completely.  Theories  both  define  and  interpret  experience  and  Griffin 
gives  women  no  way  to  realize  our  vision  if  she  will  not  go  on  to  theorize,  con- 
struct explanations  and  build  strategy  to  destroy  patriarchy.  She  retains  the  di- 
chotomy of  experience  and  analysis  that  she  rejected  in  rejecting  the  way  Left- 
ist men  approached  the  world.  Consciousness-raising  can  take  us  just  so  far; 
then  we  need  theory,  strategy,  and  even  statistics,  which  Griffin  refers  to  as 
failings  of  the  heart.  Strategically,  talk  cannot  be  our  only  weapon;  we  need 
action  programs  as  well. 

This  continued  rejection  of  theory  only  reaffirms  women's  tendency  not  to 
master  skills  in  areas  we  have  traditionally  rejected,  been  scared  of,  or  told  we 
could  not  handle.  For  this  reason,  although  the  book  could  be  useful  to  women 
beginning  consciousness-raising  on  violence  against  women,  it  should  be  accom- 
panied by  theoretical  analysis  that  will  direct  them  toward  collective  action. 
The  book  serves  a  function,  not  as  theory  or  strategy,  but  as  a  kind  of  political 
art  that  can  stir  our  spirits  by  reminding  us  of  our  accomplishments.  Griffin 


Word  Watch/65 


tells  the  story  of  our  arrival  —  her  tale  ends  at  our  next  take  off  point.  The  new 
world  exists  in  our  minds  .  .  .  changing  the  way  we  think  is  one  step;  our  next 
step  is  to  act! 

FOOTNOTES 

^Directories  available  from:  The  National  Center  for  the  Prevention  and  Control  of  Rape, 
Room  1 1 A  22,  Parklawn  Building,  NIMH,  5600  Fishers  Lane,  Rockville,  Md.  20857. 

The  organizing  conference  of  the  National  Coalition  Against  Sexual  Assault  was  held 
August  24-26,  1979  at  George  Williams  College,  Williams  Bay,  Wisconsin. 

Caroline  Sparks  is  the  principal  investigator  for  the  Community  Action 
Strategies  to  Stop  Rape  Project,  Women  Against  Rape,  in  Columbus,  Ohio. 


66/Quest 


 ^Tilling  

Common 
 Ground  

Can  feminists  afford  to  ignore  economic  issues  as  tfie  world  en- 
ters a  serious  recession?  Or  ignore  nuclear  technology  in  the  wake  of 
Three  Mile  Island  and  the  Karen  Silkwood  case?  Can  white  feminists 
define  racism  as  a  side  issue  in  the  face  of  the  black  feminist  asser- 
tion that  race,  as  much  as  sex,  is  a  source  of  their  oppression?  Is  it 
in  the  interest  of  feminists  to  develop  an  analysis  of  U.S.  foreign 
policy  when  we  know  the  impact  it  has  had  on  Iran  and  Nicaragua? 
If  we  recognize  that  racism  and  economic  exploitation  oppress  wom- 
en as  deeply  as  sexism  and  heterosexism,  how  can  we  develop  strate- 
gies to  abolish  the  oppression  of  women  without  a  clear  understand- 
ing of  capitalism,  and  without  an  analysis  of  how  economic,  race  and 
gender  oppressions  interact? 

These  and  other  questions  lie  at  the  foundation  of  the  develop- 
ment of  this  feature.  In  the  independent  feminist  movement,  we 
explore,  analyze  and  struggle  for  change  from  the  perspective  of  be- 
ing female  in  a  society  that  systematically  oppresses  women  on  the 
basis  of  gender  —  through  control  of  our  reproduction,  through  rape, 
wife  battering,  sexual  harassment  in  the  workplace,  control  of  our 
sexuality.  These  forms  of  male  domination  are  not  limited  to  a  per- 
sonal, individual  realm  (i.e.,  the  family,  relations  between  men  and 
women);  they  are  reflected  and  enforced  by  all  the  institutions  of 
our  society  and  affect  all  aspects  of  our  lives. 

We  also  live  in  a  society  that  oppresses  people,  including  women, 
on  the  basis  of  race,  class,  sexual  preference  and  national  origin 
(as  well  as  on  the  basis  of  age  and  physical  handicap).  We  need  to 
understand  how  these  oppressions  interact  and  support  each  other  to 
achieve  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  oppression  of  women. 
And  we  need  to  develop  strategies  and  visions  that  reflect  this  under- 
standing. A  woman-identified  perspective  is  more  complex  than  it 
may  first  have  seemed,  and  it  implies  that  politics  reflecting  race- 
identified,  class-identified,  national-identified  experiences  have  deep 
relevance  to  our  work.  Feminism  is  more  than  a  collection  of  issues: 
it  is  a  politics,  an  analysis,  a  perspective  through  which  we  examine 
the  problems  of  our  society  and  an  activist  experience  which  offers 

Tilling  Common  Ground/67 


strategies  to  resolve  some  of  the  contradictions  posed  by  our  society. 

T/ie  feminist  movement  lias  often  been  criticized  for  being  separ- 
atist —  a  criticism  that  stems  from  the  single-gender  makeup  of  our 
organizations.  We  choose  to  work  in  this  context  because  we  seek 
political  support  from,  and  wish  to  work  with,  others  whose  primary 
political  identification  is  as  feminists.  (Most  people  would  think  it 
ludicrous  to  call  a  socialist  organization  separatist  even  though  all 
the  members  see  socialism  as  their  primary  political  commitment.) 
By  articulating  a  position  in  favor  of  exploring  alliances  with  other 
movements,  we  are  reaffirming  the  necessity  of  the  independent 
feminist  movement  while  at  the  same  time  acknowledging  the  value 
of  activist  experience  and  theoretical  analyses  developed  out  of 
other  perspectives.   We  don 't  think  that  any  of  us  has  developed 
the  one  theory  which  describes  and  analyzes  reality,  taking  into 
account  race,  class,  sex  and  sexual  preference  perpsectives;  that  any 
of  us  has  expressed  a  vision  which  resolves  the  host  of  contradictions 
that  exist  in  our  society;  or  that  any  of  us  has  designed  the  only 
strategy  to  achieve  systematic  and  comprehensive  change.  But  we 
each  have  developed  pieces  of  those  from  our  varying  perspectives. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  must  explore  the  barriers  within  the 
feminist  movement  —  our  inability  to  communicate  to  other  move- 
ments that  our  politics  is  not  based  solely  on  gender;  our  organiza- 
tional focus  on  process  which  very  often  gets  in  the  way  of  pursu- 
ing our  goals;  the  energy  mandated  by  the  difficulties  of  holding  our 
own  organizations  together. 

In  using  the  term  "movement,  "  we  must  acknowledge  that  we  are 
not  referring  to  a  set  of  well-defined  entities.  Some  movements  are 
built  on  specific  issues;  others  are  based  on  broad  theoretical  frame- 
works. And  within  each  of  these  movements  there  exists  a  broad 
spectrum  of  politics,  both  progressive  and  regressive  trends  —  those 
who  seek  liberation  and  transformation,  and  others  who  cannot 
abandon  the  solipcism  of  a  narrowly  defined  ideology.  There  are 
homophobic  elements  on  the  left,  and  there  are  gay  rights  activists 
who  seek  only  to  incorporate  gays  into  the  current  economic  and 
political  structures.  Feminism  itself  is  not  a  monolith  —  within  our 
movement  there  are  women  who  see  the  goal  of  feminism  as  a  few 
reforms  to  existing  structures,  and  others  who  think  the  oppression 
of  women  will  end  with  the  creation  of  a  lesbian  nation. 

The  purpose  of  this  feature,  "Tilling  Common  Ground,"  is  to 
explore  and  expand  the  possibility  of  alliances  with  those  progres- 
sive elements  of  each  of  our  movements  which  seek  radical  change 
leading  to  the  liberation  of  all  people.  We  want  to  explore  all  the 


68/Quest 


ways  in  which  these  alliances  can  be  expressed  —  from  a  strategy  as 
apparently  simple  as  supporting  or  cosponsoring  events,  to  forming 
short  term  coalitions  on  a  single  issue,  to  building  organizations  and 
networks  which  involve  long-term  struggle  to  resolve  political  differ- 
ences. Which  strategy  suits  which  situation,  and  why?  What  have 
we  learned  from  past  attempts?  What  is  the  difference  between  "en- 
lightening coalitions"  and  "unholy  alliances"?  Who  can  feminists 
work  with,  when,  and  why?  How  and  when  can  feminists  work 
with  men?  What  strategies  can  we  develop  to  guard  against  our  poli- 
tics being  coopted  in  the  name  of  a  "larger"  or  more  "primary" 
struggle? 

We  also  need  to  examine  the  work  feminists  are  doing  within  oth- 
er movements  and  assess  the  impact  feminism  has  had  on  the  politics 
and  strategies  of  those  movements.  We  must  examine  the  phenom- 
ena of  feminist  groups  emerging  to  deal  with  issues  of  racism,  imperi- 
alism, nuclear  technology  —  issues  which  are  not  solely  gender  relat- 
ed, but  on  which  feminists  are  focusing.  Why  has  this  occurred,  and 
what  do  we  learn  from  this  development?  What  impact  will  this 
have  on  our  movement? 

We  are  looking  for  a  wide  variety  of  articles  —  from  historical  and 
current  analyses  of  broad  questions  of  political  goals  and  visions,  to 
evaluations  of  specif ic  attempts  at  particular  strategies.  We  would 
like  to  have  articles  that  assess  the  successes  and  failures  of  feminists 
working  in  alliance  with  organizations  representing  a  variety  of 
movements. 


Tilling  Common  Ground/69 


Feminists  recognize  tine  necessity  to  reacfi  beyond  our  own  ex- 
perience and  analysis,  but  in  doing  so  we  must  be  mindful  of  our 
goal  in  creating  alliances.   We  must  be  scrupulously  aware  of  the 
problems  that  are  likely  to  emerge,  and  clear  about  what  we  seek  to 
accomplish.  We  must  understand  and  value  what  we  can  learn  from 
the  struggles  others  wage,  and  at  the  same  time  seek  to  share  with 
other  progressives  the  knowledge,  experience  and  analysis  developed 
out  of  our  own  struggles. 

We  chose  the  following  piece  to  inaugurate  this  feature  because  it 
resulted  from  a  specific  attempt  on  the  part  of  feminists  to  develop 
links  with  the  appropriate  technology  community  and  environ- 
mentalists. 

The  author  originally  presented  this  as  part  of  a  workshop  at  the 
Appropriate  Community  Technology  Fair  held  in  Washington,  D.C. 
in  April  1979.  Her  goal  was  to  articulate  theoretical  links  between 
three  separate  movements;  and,  therefore,  it  focuses  on  what  these 
movements  share,  not  on  the  problems  which  separate  us. 

The  author  discusses  the  media  stereotypes  which  create  disunity 
among  various  social  change  movements.   We  think  we  must  also 
look  at  the  internal  politics  of  various  progressive  movements  which 
hamper  the  development  of  coalitions.  When  the  author  says  that 
the  call  for  human  liberation  is  premature,  she  is  alluding  to  the 
dilemma  feminists  face  when  working  with  other  social  change 
movements  —  non feminists  often  do  not  take  the  oppression  of 
women  seriously  and  therefore  attempt  to  subsume  us  for  some 
'  'greater  "  political  priority. 

This  article  is  a  good  beginning.  We  hope  future  pieces  will  fur- 
ther address  the  questions  and  issues  it  raises,  as  well  as  some  of  the 
pro  blems  discussed  a  bo  ve.  A .  R. 

Feminism,  Environmentalism  and 
Appropriate  Technology 

by  SIDNEY  OLIVER 

I  Ve  been  asked  to  outline  the  goals  of  feminism  —  a  hard  job,  be- 
cause there  is  no  one  "feminism,"  and  because  there  are  more  femi- 
nists than  kinds  of  feminist  groups.  Mainly,  it  is  because  the  ques- 
tion implies  that  feminism  has  fixed  political  limits.  While  certain 
parts  of  the  feminist  movement  have  certain  immediate  goals,  radical 
feminism  calls  all  social,  political,  and  economic  structures  into 
question  -  even  language  and  thought  patterns.  Therefore,  it  is  still 

70/Quest,  vol.  V  no.  2 


developing  its  theory  and  evolving  its  particular  goals.  So,  for  now, 
all  I  can  say  accurately  about  radical  feminism  is  that  its  goals  are: 

1 .  To  understand  v^omen's  oppression  as  a  global  force,  and  its 
relation  to  other  oppressions.  (This  includes  how  and  why  it  evolv- 
ed; why  it  persists:  what  interests  it  serves:  and  how  it  relates  to 
other  social,  political,  and  economic  structures.) 

2.  To  overcome  women's  oppression  and,  with  it,  all  other  op- 
pressions. 

As  this  implies,  radical  feminists  assume  that  there  aren't  any 
time,  space  or  ideological  boundaries  on  the  oppression  of  women, 
and  that  ending  woman  oppression  necessitates  ending  all  other 
forms  of  domination  and  exploitation. 

But  written  sources  on  the  experience  and  theory  underlying 
these  feminist  goals  are  amply  available  elsewhere.  In  the  context  of 
exploring  what  it  means  to  build  coalitions,  and  as  a  basis  for  under- 
standing when  and  how  coalitions  are  possible  and  important,  it  is 
more  useful  to  look  at  what  feminism,  appropriate  technology  and 
enviromentalism  have  in  common,  than  to  recount  a  century  of 
feminist  analysis. 

In  my  view  we  hold  three  basic  beliefs  in  common;  these  shared 
beliefs  can  be  part  of  the  grounds  for  building  links  across  move- 
ments, and,  thus,  a  framework  for  beginning  to  evaluate  the  possi- 
bility of  coalition  for  specific  gains  important  to  all  of  us. 

First,  I  want  to  set  out  these  beliefs,  though  i  don't  think  we 
always  stress  them  equally.  Second,  I  want  to  debunk  two  stereo- 
types about  feminists,  because  I  believe  they  affect  public  percep- 
tions about  whether  radical  feminists  can  or  will  form  coalitions 
with  groups  from  other  movements.  And  third,  I  want  to  offer  some 
suggestions  about  how  feminists,  appropriate  technologists  and  en- 
vironmentalists can  identify  particular  common  goals. 

~"  Three  Common  Assumptions 

All  three  movements  struggle  against  oppression  and  exploitation 
—  feminists  within  the  context  of  the  oppression  of  women,  and  ap- 
propriate technologists  and  environmentalists  within  the  context  of 
exploitation  of  the  earth  and  its  resources.  Our  opposition  to  op- 
pression and  exploitation  appears  to  be  built  on  three  common  as- 
sumptions about  what  is  necessary  to  change  the  status  quo. 

First,  radical y  sizeable  segments  of  all  three  movements  assume 
that  people  are  linked  to  each  other  and  to  our  environment  in  a 
delicate,  two-way  balance,  and  that  human  survival  depends  on 
nurturing  that  balance.  We  exist  against  a  culture  more  in  love  with 

Tilling  Common  Ground/71 


death  than  life.  In  her  book,  GynlEcology,    Mary  Daly  notes  that 
the  English  language  has  a  word  for  death-love  -  NECROPHILIA- 
but  none  for  life  love.  She  reconrimends  BIOPHI  LI  A.  Our  move- 
ments each  express  biophilia,  though  in  different  ways  —  fortunate- 
ly, because  we  need  to  attack  the  status  quo  on  many  fronts. 

Second,  we  agree  that  we  must  reverse  the  dominant  ethic  of 
competition.  We  recognize,  perhaps  intuitively  at  this  point,  that  we 
are  taught  to  think  in  terms  of  polar  opposites  —  male/female;  man/ 
environment  [sic] ;  rich/poor;  self/other.  Further,  we  are  taught 
that  one  pole  must  exercise  power  over  the  other.  We  have  begun  to 
sense  that  these  dichotomies  are  misleading  and  destructive,  and  to 
realize  that  they  are  essential  elements  of  exploitation. 

It  is  important  to  state  clearly  that  there  is  an  alternative  to 
domination  and  exploitation.  We've  been  conditioned  to  think  of 
power  in  just  one  way:  as  "power  over,"  where  power  is  a  limited 
commodity,  where  more  for  you  means  less  for  me,  and  where  the 
objective  is  to  control  and  exploit.  "Power  to"  is  an  alternative 
concept.^  It  means  giving  power  as  we  use  it. 

Women,  who  for  centuries  have  practiced  caretaking,  know  that 
the  basic  ingredient  in  nurturing  is  empowerment.  We  also  know 
very  well  that  it  is  hard  even  to  imagine  having  control  over  our  lives 
unless  we  can  affirm  our  relation  to  the  world  —  unless  we  can  re- 
nounce the  idea  that  we  are  in  opposition  to  it  and  to  each  other, 
and  renounce  the  idea  that  we  can  never  act,  but  only  react. 

Appropriate  technologists  value  technologies  that  regenerate  en- 
ergy as  they  employ  it,  and  empower  people  through  fostering  local 
self-reliance.  Environmentalists  emphasize  our  need  to  renew  the 
earth  by  caring  for  her,  and  to  empower  ourselves  by  pooling  our 
energies  rather  than  opposing  them.  Feminists  assert  that  replacing 
the  dominating  and  competitive  idea  of  "power  to,"  is  really  the 
only  viable  political  act. 

Third,  radical  segments  of  our  movements  recognize  that  health 
depends  on  control  over  our  own  lives,  on  reclaiming  our  observa- 
tions, theories  and  actions  and  standing  by  their  validity.  We  under- 
stand the  relationship  between  entitled  self-determination-^  and  the 
individual's  ability  even  to  see  her  connections  to  the  universe.  We 
recognize  that  theft  of  this  control,  of  this  ability  to  define  reality 
for  ourselves,  is  the  single  most  important  reason  why  we  face  global 
annihilation. 

It  is  important  to  recognize  that  these  three  common  beliefs  are 
among  the  building  blocks  on  which  we  can  assess  coalition,  and  on 
which  we  can  begin  to  build  links  among  our  movements. 

72/Quest 


Stereotypes  About  Feminism 

Of  all  the  myths  about  feminism,  I  think  two  in  particular  hurt 
our  efforts  to  build  coalitions:  the  idea  that  feminists  are  interested 
only  in  "women's  issues"  and  the  idea  that  feminists  are  too  fixated 
on  individual  self-determination  to  work  for  the  good  of  "the  com- 
munity." 

Many  people  seem  to  have  a  mental  image  of  feminism  that  looks 
like  a  high  school  anatomy  diagram:  a  one-dimensional  female  form 
with  captions  like  BREAST,  UTERUS,  VAGINA.  Its  political  over- 
lay is  something  like  ABORTION,  DAY-CARE,  RAPE,  and  the  ERA: 
only  an  issue  that  links  directly  to  femaleness  is  a  feminist  issue. 

These  gender-related  issues  continue  to  be  critical  aspects  of  femi- 
nism for  good  reasons,  since  differences  between  women  and  men 
are  the  grounds  on  which  structures  of  oppression  are  built,  and  be- 
cause the  notion  that  feminism  is  relevant  only  to  women  erases  the 
need  for  formulating  analytical  links  among  power  issues.  It  runs 
the  old  power-play  that  the  only  thing  to  take  seriously  about  wom- 
en is  our  bodies,  it  also  encourages  any  woman  to  think  that  she 
knows  what  feminism  means  just  because  she's  female.  "What's  to 
study?"  (How  many  would  assume  that  they  know  all  there  is  to 
know  about  human  history  just  because  they're  alive?)  This  view, 
then,  encourages  criticism  without  information,  and  reliance  on 
somebody  else  to  think  and  evaluate  for  us. 

Controlling  how  we  are  perceived,  whether  we  are  feminists  or 
members  of  other  movements,  is  a  power  tactic  that  limits  our 
ability  to  expand  our  constituencies  and  our  ability  to  explore 
coalitions.  Still,  while  we're  acutely  aware  of  the  media's  cari- 
cature or  blackout  effect  on  our  own  movement,  we  continue  to  be 
duped  by  these  same  media  into  cooperating  with  the  exploitative 
power.  For  example,  those  who  buy  the  idea  that  technology  is 
beyond  average  understanding,  or  that,  from  a  labor  or  quality-of- 
life  perspective,  we  have  to  c  hoose  between  nuclear/fossil  energy  and 
total  breakdown,  are  contributing  to  the  certainty  of  that  future. 
Those  who  buy  the  idea  that  "women's  issues"  are  a  dangerous  di- 
version from  the  "real  problems"  are  excusing  themselves  from  the 
difficult  political  work  of  self-examination  and  of  unravelling  the 
fabric  of  global  oppression.  Our  collusion  lies  in  crediting  media 
myths  when  we  know  better. 

Links  to  Other  Oppressions 

Radical  feminists  began  by  identifying  and  analyzing  social/poli- 
tical structures  connected  with  biological  femaleness.  A  few  exam- 

Tilling  Common  Groun 


pies  show  the  progression  these  analyses  have  undergone  in  forming 
links  between  woman  oppression  and  other  power  issues. 

Employment.  If  we  believed  that  employment  for  women  was 
just  a  matter  of  changing  public  ideas  about  women's  abilities,  we 
found  out  that  no  amount  of  objective  data  brought  that  change 
about.  What,  then?  We  discovered  that  job  ghettoes  resemble  tra- 
ditional divisions  of  labor  in  the  family;  that  capitalism  depends  on 
production/consumption  patterns  that,  in  turn,  depend  on  tradition- 
ally situated  women;  that  class  and  race  oppressions  are  maintained 
by  manipulating  which  jobs  are  given  to  women  and  which  to  men; 
that  so-called  "protective"  policies  and  legislation  can  define  women 
out  of  jobs  or  force  us  to  be  sterilized  in  order  to  work  on  the  basis 
of  a  strangely  unilateral  interpretation  of  reproductive  health. 
(These  same  policies  somehow  overlook  fatherhood.)  We  learned 
that  women  under  other  political  and  economic  systems  are  also 
strapped  by  low-status,  low-paying  jobs;  that  unpaid  labor  and  un- 
employment create  dependencies  that  ensure  our  vulnerability  to 
sexual  violence  and  coercion;  that  by  playing  women  off  against 
class  and  racial  minorities  in  the  job  market,  and  factoring  in  auto- 
mation and  inflation,  industry  can  beat  wage  hikes  by  moving  the 
industrial  sweatshop  from  Pittsburgh  and  Detroit  to  Appalachia, 
Hong  Kong  and  Brazil.^  We  learned  that  key  areas  of  social  con- 
trol —  economic,  science,  energy,  reproductive  and  information 
technologies,  law,  medicine  and  politics  are  off-limits,  impervious  to 
women's  interests  and  thus  can  be,  and  are,  used  against  us,  not  for 
us. 

Rape.  We  began  with  the  knowledge  that  men  rape  women.  We 
examined  myths  about  cause  and  interpreted  them  from  a  feminist 
political  perspective.  It  was  clear  that,  depending  on  race,  class,  cul- 
ture and  other  variables,  rape  carries  different  kinds  of  political  bag- 
gage for  different  women.  It  cuts  two  ways  for  black  women,  for 
example.  It  keeps  both  black  women  and  black  men  in  their  places, 
as  slave  sociology,  lynching  and  statistics  on  racist  punishments  for 
rape  make  clear.^  We  learned  that  rape  is  only  one  form  of  sexual 
violence  and  that  it  does  have  links  to  others,  some  localized,  some 
global  -  witchburning,  Indian  suttee,  Chinese  footbinding,  African 
genital  mutilation  and  infibulation.  Western  Freudian  psychoanalyt- 
ical brutalities,  woman-beating,  frivolous  genital/reproductive  sur- 
geries and  sexual  harassment  in  the  workplace.^  It  is  easy  to  see  that 
the  common  denominator  is  "woman  as  victim." 

Childbirth iChildrearing.  For  centuries  women  attended  ourselves 
during  childbirth.  As  the  transition  to  male-attended  delivery  took 


74/Quest 


place,  midwives  declined  in  status  and  were  subjected  to  suffocating 
legal  constraints.  Present  instutionalized  methods  of  child  delivery 
put  women  on  our  backs,  thereby  ignoring  forces  of  gravity  and  ne- 
cessitating episiotomy  —  the  vaginal  incision  supposed  to  ease  deliv- 
ery. We  have  to  ask  the  obvious!  ^V/7o  benefits,  exactly?  Just  who 
is  "eased"  in  delivery?  Isn't  it  really  a  matter  of  expropriating  both 
our  control  and  our  unity  with  nature,  and  replacing  them  with  de- 
pendencies and  unnecessary  technologies?^  So,  on  to  bottle  form- 
ulae. We  found  that  for  some  Western  women  the  bottle  means 
freedom,  but  for  women  in  the  Third  World,  and  for  women  in 
poverty,  it  means  infanticide;  and  for  all  it  means  some  degree  of 
replacing  self-sufficiency  with  dependency. 

And  there  are  other  connections.  Reproductive  control,  removed 
from  control  of  the  individual  woman,  becomes  a  bartering  tactic  for 
the  subjugation  of  some  women  directly  and  all  women  indirectly, 
it  is  also  an  enormously  profitable  industry  that  runs  dangerous  ex- 
periments on  women,  as  well  as  a  strategy  with  the  potential  to  en- 
sure a  homogenous  global  consumer  class. 

The  point  is  that  the  examination  of  biology-based  issues  has  spi- 
raled  outward,  showing  that  single  issue  politics  is  not  enough,  and 
that  the  oppression  of  women  is  reflected  and  perpetuated  in  a  host 
of  other  oppressions  not  linked  to  gender.  The  point  is  that  women 
cannot  be  separated  from  production,  reproduction,  psychology,  re- 
ligion and  all  that  these  areas  have  to  do  with  the  treatment  of 
people  and  the  treatment  of  the  earth. 

Tilling  Common  Grouncl/75 


Individual  Solutions  v.  Self-Determination 

A  second  deadly  myth  is  that  feminists  are  too  fixated  on  individ- 
ual self-determination  to  work  for  the  good  of  the  community.  The 
emphasis  that  feminism  places  on  the  right  of  the  individual  to 
choose  reflects  both  our  analysis  of  where  power  lies  in  this  society 
and  who  it  benefits,  and  our  experience.  At  once,  we  are  excluded 
from  the  community  of  "man,"  and  we  also  experience  ourselves  as 
leader  and  perceived  leader  in  social  change,  particularly  at  the  com- 
munity level.  In  education,  rural  and  agricultural  issues,  civil  rights, 
and  environmental  issues,  for  example,  women  are  often  the  prime 
movers.  While  we  must  ask  ourselves  why  women  disappear  from 
leadership  as  issues  percolate  upward,  we  must  also  realize  that 
emphasis  on  individual  or  collective  determination  obscures  the  im- 
portance of  stating  clearly  which  issues,  and  what  decision-making 
levels,  we  have  in  mind.  These  variables,  and  not  the  abstracts,  may 
be  at  the  root  of  many  of  our  perceived  conflicts. 

With  this  in  mind,  however,  I  think  we  all  agree  that  the  right  of 
the  individual  to  control  her  life  is  integral  to  a  meaningful  life.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  can  conflict  with  the  right  of  the  majority.  But 
feminists  suggest  that  individual  right  exercised  in  a  spirit  of  domina- 
tion and  exploitation  is  very  different  from  that  right  exercised  in  a 
spirit  of  empowerment  and  reciprocity.  To  date,  the  right  of  the  in- 
dividual to  self-determination  has  been  defined  in  this  country  solely 
on  the  boot-strap  model,  which  pits  each  individual  against  every 
other,  and  defines  power  only  in  competitive  and  dominating  terms. 
Somewhere  along  the  way,  men  exercised  highly-selective  vision  in- 
deed, and  overlooked  the  ecological  dimension  of  natural  survival  in 
favor  of  the  competitive,  survival-of-the-fittest  dimension. 

Given  that  the  boot-strap  ethic  appears  to  govern  our  culture's  as- 
sessment of  how  we  relate  to  each  other,  we  all  must  take  great  care 
to  ensure  that  individual  right  does  not  degenerate  to  the  individual 
solution  to  a  collective  problem.  This  means  struggling  to  change 
the  competitive,  exploitative  world-view,  while  we  struggle  to  find 
new  ways  of  decision-making. 

Feminists  argue  that  the  greater  the  individual's  self-determining 
ability,  the  greater  her  perception  of  belonging  to  the  whole  and 
standing  to  gain  or  lose  as  it  gains  or  loses.  The  less  one's  ability  to 
exercise  self-determination,  the  muddier  one's  relation  to  the  group 
becomes,  and  the  less  interest  one  has,  overall,  in  anything  other 
than  passive  acceptance,  with  occasional  spasms  of  aggression  and 
manipulation. 

Individual  self-determination  can  exist  compatibly  with  the  col- 

76/Quest 


lective  good,  but  while  the  two  coincide  accidentially  in  a  power- 
over  environment,  they  might  coincide  systematically  and  frequent- 
ly in  a  different  ethic.  This  distinction  is  among  the  bases  for  an- 
other model  for  interpreting  "individual  self-determination." 

This  isn't  to  say  that  links  —  let  alone  coalitions  —  between  any 
two  groups  espousing  the  need  for  individual  "self-determination" 
will  not  involve  agonizing  struggles  about  the  decision-making  pro- 
cess, or  that  there  won't  be  compromises.  But  surely  we  can  learn 
to  set  minimal  demands  on  ourselves  for  sticking  through  to  com- 
promise and  respecting  each  other's  hard-won  experience  and  anal- 
ysis. 

A  situation  might  arise  in  which  a  woman's  right  to  control  her 
reproductivity  does  conflict  with  the  collective's  welfare.  Insti- 
tutional population  control  could  be  one  solution  to  that  dilemma. 
However,  since  the  population  problem  cannot  be  separated  from 
our  social  values,  I'm  convinced  that  the  solution  must  look  beyond 
symptoms  to  causes.  And  this  brings  me  back  to  the  dominant  pow- 
er structure  where  males  control  both  the  values  we  inherit  and  the 
technologies  that  enforce  them.  Some  of  the  values  that  contribute 
to  overpopulation  are  economics  that  depend  on  a  massive,  none-too- 
educated  labor  force;  societies  that  define  women  as  bodies  and 
evaluate  our  success  by  what  we  procreate  rather  than  what  we  cre- 
ate; paternal  inheritance  systems  that  demand  "an  heir  and  a  spare" 
—  both  male;  cultures  that  undervalue  age  and  force  its  dependency 
on  youth;  family  models  that  include  only  blood  ties  and  exclude 
all  non-procreative  relationships.  Any  strategy  to  curb  overpopula- 
tion must  change  these  values.  Moreover,  I  would  go  further  and  ask 
whether  it  is  only  accident  that  population  is  defined  as  a  problem 
just  as  industry  reaches  full  automation  and  oppressed  peoples  are 
demanding  self-determination.  These  questions  demand  clear  an- 
swers. 

To  those  who  fear  that  feminists'  demand  for  women's  right  to 
control  our  bodies  conflicts  with  others'  demand  for  population  con- 
trol, I  say  that  the  demand  for  self-determination  is  in  all  our  inter- 
ests, particularly  given  present  power  structures.  Solutions  which 
suggest  that  the  way  to  solve  over-population  is  to  control  the  num- 
ber of  female  children  born  reflects  a  clear  bias.^  Suppose  the  bias 
were  in  favor  of  whiteness,  or  tallness,  or  genius.  Such  biases,  coup- 
led with  the  already  feasible  technologies  for  carrying  them  out, 
could  lead  to  strategies  for  human  quality  control  under  the  guise  of 
population  control.  And  quality  can  have  frightening  definitions 
v/hen  racists,  classist,  sexist  and  heterosexist  values  predominate. 

Tilling  Common  Ground/77 


The  emphasis  on  self-determination,  therefore,  is  a  decision  in  favor 
of  the  collective  good,  given  our  lack  of  control  over  values  and 
power  structure.  Itv^ill  be  even  more  so  under  an  ecological,  empow- 
ering worldview. 

The  Feminism  of  Goals 

A  worldview  is  best  known  by  its  actions.  And  the  one  we  live 
under,  and  which  connects  us  to  the  past  and  to  other  present  cul- 
tures, is  patriarchal  capitalism,  characterized  by  domination  and  ex- 
ploitation. This  heritage  will  not  alter  until  we  find  new  and  positive 
definitions  for  the  fundamental  links  between  women  and  nature, 
and  until  men  are  compelled  to  recognize  and  affirm  their  place  wi- 
thin the  ecological  cycle  and  relinquish  their  cosmic  separatism. 

It  is  tempting  to  see  the  spaceship  as  man's  next-to-last  separatist 
metaphor,  the  final  one  being  meltdown  or  the  neutron  bomb  that 
separates  life  —  ail  life  —  from  the  material  monuments  of  his  true 
values,  until,  like  "Ozymandias,  "  "nothing  beside  remains."^  I 
wonder  whether,  beyond  the  separatism  that  feminists  have  advocat- 
ed periodically  in  order  to  redefine  ourselves,  the  charge  that  femi- 
nists are  only  separatists  isn't  propaganda  that  reverses  reality  in  ex- 
actly the  way  that  the  charge  that  feminists  are  "man-haters"  rever- 
ses an  all  too  objective  fact  of  history. 

I  believe  that  the  business  of  radical  appropriate  technologists,  en- 
vironmentalists and  feminists  is  ultimately  to  change  the  dominant 
world-view.  I  also  believe  that  the  real  business  we  confront  is  not 
to  do  away  with  technology,  but  to  redefine  and  reorient  the  values 
that  shape  it  and  the  uses  to  which  it  is  put.  Our  job  is  not  to  re- 
place one  power-over  political  structure  with  another,  changing  only 
its  gender,  but  to  redefine  in  all  we  do  the  relation  of  people  to 
people  and  people  to  earth. 

How?  At  a  practical  level  our  first  responsibility  must  be  to  ed- 
ucate ourselves  about  each  other,  and  second,  to  evaluate  the  coali- 
tions we  propose  and  the  goals  and  strategies  we  put  forward  accord- 
ing to  criteria  that  reflect  our  world-view.  When  a  given  goal  or  tac- 
tic is  proposed  we  might  consider  it  in  light  of  the  following  ques- 
tions: 

1.  Is  it  biophilial,  life -loving? 

2.  Does  it  resist  the  competitive,  dichotomous  ethic  in  favor  of  the 
ecological? 

3.  Does  it  forward  control  over  our  own  lives  and  empower  us 
while  it  erodes  present  systems  of  control? 

4.  Does  it  evolve  from  our  experience  rather  than  from  propaganda 

78/Quest 


and  doctrinaire  rhetoric? 

5.  Does  it  work  against  oppression  and  tal<e  into  account  its  effects 
on  persons  outside  our  time  and  place? 

6.  Does  it  avoid  playing  into  the  hands  of  the  present  power/values 
structure? 

7.  Does  it  permit  sustaining  gains  along  the  way  to  full  social 
change? 

8.  Is  its  gain  worth  its  cost? 

9.  Is  it  a  justifiable  priority,  or  are  there  other,  more  pressing  needs? 
I  doubt  whether  many  goals  or  strategies  will  meet  all  these  cri- 
teria. Within  them,  I  suspect,  are  more  and  less  vital  priorities,  and 
in  addition  to  them  are  our  respective  movements'  own  particular 
needs.  And  yet,  I  feel  that  if  the  three  common  assumptions  I  out- 
lined earlier  are  credible  —  biophilia,  non-competition,  non-dicho- 
tomization  and  empowerment  —  these  criteria  may  be  useful  in 
structuring  how  we  work  together  to  design  the  future. 

For  me  the  call  for  human  liberation,  as  opposed  to  women's  lib- 
eration, is  grossly  premature  given  that  oppression  based  on  gender 
continues  to  be  acceptable  even  to  many  who  claim  to  struggle  for 
radical  change.  Quite  enough  remains  that  feminists  cannot,  must 
not,  define  ourselves  out  of  existence  by  focusing  only  on  the  links 
between  woman  oppression  and  other  forms  of  domination  and  ex- 
ploitation. There  is  clearly  a  sphere  where  the  priority  is  woman  op- 
pression. 

We  as  feminists  claim  and  must  continue  to  assert  our  right  as  an 
independent  movement  to  remain  independent,  and  to  initiate  inter- 
movements  links  or  begin  building  coalitions.  This  means  where  all 
parties  share  clear  if  limited  goals,  work  toward  mutual  empower- 
ment, and  take  real  steps,  in  honor  and  integrity,  to  renounce  the  as- 
similationist  motive  —  the  exploitative  motive  sometimes  underlying 
"coalition"  —  in  favor  of  the  cooperative,  empowering  motive. 

For  these  and  a  host  of  less  theoretical  overlaps,  your  struggle  in 
its  broad  outlines  is  ours,  and  ours  is  yours.  The  point  is  not  to  elim- 
inate technology,  but  to  realize  it  doesn't  exist  independent  of  spe- 
cific values.  Do  we  dare  forget  that  the  motivation  behind  techno- 
logical development  and  male  supremacy  has  been  power-over  and 
exploitation?  Anthropology  —  defined  as  the  study     man  —  is  pre- 
cisely that,  and  history  reveals  no  valid  distinction  between  the  de- 
velopment of  man  and  the  development  of  technology.  Do  we  dare 
suppress  the  shock  we  feel  as  women,  hearing  the  twin  litany, 
"Mother  Earth/Earth  Mother,"  and  witnessing  our  common  exploi- 
tation and  rape?  Or  ignore  the  meaning  in  the  Greek  origins  of  the 

Tilling  Common  Grou 


words  "ecology"  and  "technology"  -  OIKOS,  meaning  household, 
and  TEKNITOS  or  TEKNIKOS,  meaning  man-made/artificial?  Such 
knowledge,  1  think,  makes  the  connections  among  our  movements  a 
little  clearer. 

FOOTNOTES 

"I  Daly,  Mary.  Gyn/ecology .  (Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1978). 

^Hartsock,  Nancy.  "Political  Change:  Two  Perspectives  on  Power."  In  Quest: 
a  feminist  quarterly  1:1  (Summer,  1974),  pp.  10-25. 

^See  Sidney  Oliver.  "Defining  Our  Territories."  In  Quest:  a  feminist  quarter- 
ly IV:3  (Summer,  1978),  pp.  4-1 1 ,  for  further  discussion  of  the  concept  of 
affirmation  and  entitlement. 

^See  Richard  J.  Barnet  and  Ronald  Muller.  Global  Reach:  The  Power  of  the 
Multinational  Corporations  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1974),  for  an 
introduction,  to  the  politics  of  the  multinationals.  See  also  "Embattled 
America:  The  Struggle  for  Global  Markets."  In  Saturday  Review  (July  7, 
1979). 

^See,  for  example,  Debra  Friedman.  "Rape,  Racism  and  Reality."  In  Quest: 
a  feminist  quarterly  V:4  (1978). 

^Daly,  Mary.  Gyn/ecology.  Passim. 

^See  Laura  Punnett.  "Menstrual  Extraction:  Politics,"  and  Polly  Joan.  "Man- 
ipulation of  the  Breast."  In  Quest:  a  feminist  quarterly  IV:3  (Summer, 
1978). 

^These  "solutions"  are  not  hypothetical.  See,  for  example,  noted  ecologist 
Garrett  Hardin.  Exploring  New  Ethics  for  Survival:  Voyage  of  the  Space- 
ship Beagle  (New  York,  Penguin,  1976  ed.),  pp.  205-215;  and  former 
Republican  Congresswoman,  former  Ambassador  to  Italy  Clare  Booth 
Luce.  "Only  Women  Have  Babies."  In  National  Review  (July  7,  1978). 

9See  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley,  "Ozymandias."  Anthologized  in  Major  British 
Writers  II.  Enlarged  Ed.  (New  York:  Harcourt,  Brace  and  World,  Inc., 
1959),  p.  254. 

"  'My  name  is  Ozymandias,  king  of  kings: 
Look  on  my  works,  ye  Mighty,  and  despair!' 
Nothing  beside  remains.  Round  the  decay 
Of  that  colossal  wreck,  boundless  and  bare, 
The  lone  and  level  sands  stretch  far  away." 

Sidney  O liver,  forme riy  an  Editor  and  now  an  Associate  Editor  of 
Quest,  is  wor/^ing  on  an  analysis  of  tlie  political  structure  of  radical 
feminism  (very  slowly). 

80/Quest 


Non-Profit  Org. 
U.S.  POSTAGE 
PAID 
Permit  45679 
Washington,  D.C. 


Future  Issues 

STRUCTURES  FOR  LIVING 

The  family:  its  health,  possibilities  and  limitations  —  has  become  an  issue 
of  intense  political  dispute.  The  right  blames  feminism  for  the  "decline"  of 
the  family;  Marxists  blame  Capitalism.  Some  suggest  a  "national  family 
policy";  others  that  the  "helping  professions"  should  leave  the  family 
alone.  The  family  is  seen  as  a  haven  from  a  heartless  world,  as  a  suffocating 
neurosis-inducing  cage;  or  as  the  basis  for  women's  oppression  and  the  root 
of  patriarchy.  This  issue  of  Quest  will  focus  on  the  family  and  the  disputes 
surrounding  it. 

MOVEMENT  BUILDING  - 

How  deliberate  and  self-aware  are  you  —  are  all  of  us  —  in  building  a  move- 
ment for  change?  What  have  been  our  most  effective  movement-building 
techniques,  and  why?  What  can  we  learn  from  other  movements?  Quest  in 
this  issue  seeks  to  explore  the  underlying  philosophies,  the  strategies  and  the 
mechanics  of  building  a  movement  —  both  what  we  have  done  and  what  we 
might  be  doing.  We  invite  articles  from  women  inside  and  outside  the  femi- 
nist movement.  Our  search  for  ideas  is  not  confined  to  our  own  history. 

WOMEN  AND  ENERGY 

This  issue  will  examine  why  ecology,  the  environment,  nuclear  power  and 
appropriate  technology  are  feminist  issues.  How  can  women  as  producers, 
as  designers,  as  consumers  influence  new  technologies?  What  are  the  points 
of  access  for  women  for  use,  development  and  control  of  alternate  technolo- 
gies? How  do  we  demythologize  technology  and  move  towards  control  of 
such  technologies?  What  will  an  environmental/feminist  Utopia  look  like?  We 
welcome  articles  from  women  who  are  scientists,  grass-roots  organizers  on 
safe  energy  issues,  womeii  in  government,  in  public  interest  organizations,  in 
environmental  and  energy  education,  researchers,  and  hands-on  appropriate 
technologists  and  futurists. 


