$2.75 


a  feminist  quarterly 


LEADERSHIP 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/questfeministquaOOunse 


Q 

iUEST      ^ 

J 

al 

eminist  quarterly 

B^H^HHSSl 

LEADERSHIP 

b 

I 

■ 

contents 

n! 

WHAT  FUTURE  f<                      5HH 

I 

.  . 

THE 

LESBIAN                                  The  Leader 

staff 

14 

FEW 

!                                                                    P                                                             ,       .       \TCIf 

Editorial  Coordinator   \ 

y  .  ■    ■                Charlotte  Bunch 

J 

jj 

Managing  Eli 

%\ 

Beverly  Firfii                                      j 

Design  Editor 

I     < 

i  ^SJiSw 

NOT 

i  aFEMIN]          '     >N<     [] 

Karen  Kallias                                  B 

»     i  s 

f  81-  3  ■% 

>\V  1    .            PIRIT 

il.-.irl 

>  .2  *   a  %  „  *s 

i 

Nan,     Hartsocfc 

j 1 1  a  || s 

)  WAS  REM  BRAN  I            t 

S'd      •  CAW" 

J    g    jj     fe  '*  .IS'  '3 

;':•'  .  ,;:,!,'  ,.v  n :-  ■ 

G   .     l..i 

a  %• 

S    o 

rrnrnn 


■6  ■'g*  * 


*  £  6  2  -SO  £ 


Quest:    a    feminist:    guar  I  >  in-deptl 

feminist   political  analysis  an         i  ' 

..."     bi  i  i  din g  I     uei  tio  n  1 1 u 

possibly   including  such  concrete   fori        i 
latioriai  conferences,  a  national  org 
1  editors,  are  all  women  who  hav  , 

nt  for  several  years  and  have  re  t  where 

iea        is, l        ion  ,.-  gh  various 

■    ■   "  pli    ies  and  end  up  I 

01     overall  perspective  is  still  not  adequate.  Where  has  tin 
I:  us?  Closet   to  real  econ<  .,<      . 

w    men?  Closer  to  an  e ■..■■'        the  <  •  I    ■  md  violeno 

'     i  t  to  self-determination  for  all  v,    i       i      ' 

.■.ers  ourselves  and  expect  that  fen  inists  a 
i  ")' and  the  world  will  contribute  to  this  prace!.sol>.  -  '  ><■■■ 


graphic  by  Janet  Jenkins 
Copyright  ©1976  by  Janet  Jenkins 


what 
future  for 
leadership 


Charlotte  Bunch 
&  Beverly  Fisher 

graphic  by  Sigrid  Trumpy 

The  following  is  an  edited  transcript 
of  an  interview  with  Charlotte  Bunch 
(CB)  and  Bev  Fisher  (BF)  produced  by 
the  Feminist  Radio  Network  (FRN), 
formerly  Radio  Free  Women,  Washing- 
ton D.C.  The  original  show  was  engi- 
neered by  Laura  Bertran,  edited  by 
Shirl  Smith,  and  moderated  by  Juanita 
Weaver,  former  member  of  FRN;  this 
transcript  was  edited  by  Quest. 

*  Rights  for  the  original  tape  from  which 
this  edited  version  was  made  are  retained 
by  the  Feminist  Radio  Network. 

The  Feminist  Radio  Network  is  a  tax- 
exempt  educational  organization  which 
serves  as  a  national  distribution  service  for 
the  sale  of  a  broad  range  of  woman-oriented 
and  produced  tape  programs.  To  contact 
the  Feminist  Radio  Network  for  further 
information  and  a  free  catalog,  write  FRN, 
P.O.  Box  5537,  Washington  DC  20016. 


2/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  4,  spring,  1976 


FRN:  What  I'd  like  you  to  discuss 
first  is  the  issue  of  leadership  as  you 
saw  it  in  the  beginning  of  the  move- 
ment, in  the  days  of  the  counter- 
culture, when  we  were  reacting  to  the 
left,  and  identifying  male  machismo 
and  all  that  went  with  leadership. 
I'd  like  one  of  you  to  speak  to  what 
the  movement  view  was  like  then,  and 
how  you  think  it  has  changed. 

CB:  Well,  I  think  the  most  impor- 
tant thing  is  that  the  original  groups  in 
women's  liberation  which  were  pri- 
marily small  consciousness  raising 
groups  of  5  to  15  people,  started  in 
reaction  to  both  the  male  Left  and  the 
male  establishment;  the  kinds  of  lead- 
ership, the  kinds  of  elite,  the  kinds  of 
power  of  particular  individuals  that 
went  with  all  that  were  what  we  saw 


as  male  forms,  the  male  structures  of 
leadership.  Our  desire  was  to  avoid 
those  structures,  to  somehow  build  a 
new  kind  of  movement,  a  new  kind  of 
participation,  participatory  democracy- 
whatever  word  you  want  to  call  it.  In 
the  beginning,  people  didn't  see  the 
women's  movement  as  a  large  political 
force  for  the  future.  It  was  seen  prim- 
arily in  personal  terms,  as  a  group  to 
talk  through  certain  problems.  Before 
it  became  a  political  movement,  the 
lack  of  structures  and  leadership  wasn't 
really  a  problem.  But  after  three  or 
four  months  in  a  C-R  type  of  group, 
we  saw  that  in  fact  our  problems  were 
political.  We  weren't  just  a  personal 
group;  as  we  began  to  see  that  the 
movement  was  political,  we  also  began 
to  face  the  question  of  structure  and 
leadership.     We     saw    that    it    wasn't 


What  Future  for  Leadership  ?/3 


going  to  take  a  few  months  of  figuring 
out  how  to  handle  our  relationships  or 
situations  in  a  particular  job,  but  the 
next  50  years  of  our  lives  in  struggle 
against  society's  oppression  of  women. 
We  started  thinking  about  what  ought 
to  be  the  structures,  the  forms  of  orga- 
nization, and  the  leadership  to  guide 
that  struggle. 

BF:  I  think  that  there  were  two 
other  characteristics  that  you  touched 
on  that  I  would  like  to  expand  upon. 
One  was  the  strong  emphasis  in  con- 
sciousness-raising groups  on  the  psych- 
ological oppression  of  women;  and  the 
other  was  the  emphasis  on  the  indiv- 
idual. However,  perhaps  defining  one's 
oppression  on  an  individual  and  psych- 
ological level  is  sometimes  necessary 
to  developing  political  consciousness. 
There  was  very  little  group  identity 
and  that  impeded  seeing  the  women's 
movement  as  a  political  force;  as  a 
movement  that  needed  to  gain  political 
power.  Also  a  lot  of  movement  wom- 
en who  were  leaving  the  Left  and  prior 
political  involvements  were  white  and 
middle  class.  I  think  the  kinds  of 
needs  they  felt  that  were  products  of 
their  class  and  race  positions,  were 
reflected  in  what  the  movement  was 
at  that  time. 

CB:  Even  among  women  who  saw 
the  movement  as  political,  or  saw  it 
as  building  a  political  force,  there  was 
a  very  strong  anarchist  desire.  It  was  a 
good  desire,  but  it  was  an  unrealistic 
one.  We  did  not  want  to  repeat  what 
groups  of  the  Left  had  done,  and  a  lot 


of  the  mistakes  that  we  saw  in  those 
were  identified  as  structure  and  leader- 
ship problems.  For  example,  there 
were  male  Left  superstars  and  women 
didn't  want  to  see  that  happening  to 
us-even  when  we  saw  our  movement 
as  political.  The  result  of  the  positive 
desire  to  eliminate  both  sterile  bureau- 
cratic structures  and  elitist  leadership 
was,  over  time,  immobilization.  Ac- 
tually, three  different  things  resulted: 
one  was  immobilization,  because  peo- 
ple who  did  not  try  to  exert  initiative 
and  take  leadership  were  put  dpwn  for 
doing  so.  Any  strengths  that  began  to 
come  out  were  seen  as  oppressive 
(sometimes  those  strengths  were  op- 
pressive-especially  when  they  were 
class-related);  but  no  distinction  was 
made  between  leadership  that  is  op- 
pressive and  that  which  is  good.  Sec- 
ond, we  had  a  lot  of  hidden  leader- 
ship. Leadership  that's  hidden  is  bad 
for  both  the  leaders  and  the  people 
led:  because  it  isn't  acknowledged,  it 
is  more  subtle  and  manipulative,  and 
because  it  can't  function  openly,  it  is 
frustrated.  Such  leadership  is  not  ac- 
countable to  anybody-if  you're  a 
hidden  leader,  you  have  to  keep  doing 
the  work  of  a  leader,  taking  initiative 
and  keeping  things  going,  but  because 
you  don't  recognize  yourself  as  a 
leader  and  no  one  else  does,  you're 
neither  acknowledged  nor  accountable. 
No  one  can  say,  "You  were  a  leader 
and  you  did  this  well  or  this  poorly," 
so  there's  a  buildup  of  frustration  on 
all  sides.  Whereas  a  movement  that 
acknowledges  certain  leaders  can  also 
put    demands    on  them  and  can  say, 


4/Quest 


"We  acknowledge  your  leadership;  you 
take  the  responsibilities,  and  if  you 
don't  come  through,  then  you're  no 
longer  our  leader."  The  third  result  is 
that  because  we  did  not  build  struc- 
tures that  we  said  were  the  women's 
movement,  and  we  did  not  say,  "These 
are  our  leaders,"  the  media  did  it  for 
us.  The  emergence  of  a  series  of  wom- 
en who  have  become  the  media  stars 
for  women's  liberation  is  not  simply 
the  responsibility  of  those  women.  It's 
the  fault  of  the  movement  as  well  for 
not  taking  responsibility  for  deter- 
mining who  our  leaders  would  be. 
Therefore,  when  the  media  wants  to 
talk  about  women's  liberation,  they're 
able  to  pick  whomever  they  desire-and 
we  have  no  structure,  no  organization 
to  say,  "This  woman  does  not  rep- 
resent us."  We  have  no  way  to  say, 
"These  are  the  women  we  want  to  be 
our  spokespersons." 

BF:  I  think  another  significant  fac- 
tor in  the  early  movement  that  was 
partially  due  to  the  lack  of  structure 
and  leadership,  was  the  very  limited 
ability  of  small  women's  groups  to 
reach  out  to  new  women,  to  go  beyond 
their  original  group.  When  there  is  no 
structure  for  a  new  woman  to  join, 
whom  does  she  talk  to?  Who  is  respon- 
sible for  orienting  new  women?  At 
that  time,  everybody  questioned  whe- 
ther it  was  their  responsibility  to  take 
that  role  on,  and  did  nothing.  As  a 
result,  the  movement  became  very 
internalized.  In  other  words,  it  fed 
upon  the  people  who  were  in  it.  It  had 
no  way  to  reach  out.  You  need  struc- 


tures and  people  who  have  definitive 
responsibilities  for  tasks  such  as  pub- 
licity and  welcoming  new  women  to 
accomplish  that.  Then  we  must  develop 
means  for  them  to  be  accountable  for 
those  tasks.  When  there  are  no  defined 
tasks  and  responsibilities,  usually  things 
just  don't  get  done.  For  instance,  a 
woman  who  has  heard  about  women's 
liberation  may,  after  four  or  five  phone 
calls,  finally  be  able  to  find  somebody 
who  is  in  a  consciousness-raising  group, 
but  that  C-R  group  is  closed.  The  most 
encouraging  words  that  she  can  get  are, 
"Well,  you  could  start  your  own  group." 
And  the  woman  calling  doesn't  even 
know  what  C-R  means!  There  were  no 
specific  entry  mechanisms  for  women 
at  any  level.  I  think  that's  been  de- 
veloped now  because  of  a  recognition 
that  the  same  people  were  around  all 
the  time-the  movement  wasn't  grow- 
ing although  awareness  of  its  existence 
was  growing  in  the  outside  world 
through  media  exposure.  As  a  result, 
there  were  more  and  more  women 
seeking  it  out— but  the  movement  was 
not  able  initially  to  respond. 

CB:  Another  way  that  the  in-group 
thing  developed  is  that  if  you  don't 
have  a  structure,  an  organization  that 
in  some  way  represents  different  in- 
terests of  women's  liberation,  but  you 
do  have  events  and  things  happening, 
somebody  has  to  decide  what's  going 
to  happen.  I  remember  in  the  early 
days  of  D.C.  Women's  Liberation, 
three  or  four  people  would  get  on  the 
phone  and  discuss  "what  should  we  do 
about  this  or  that."  There  was  no  way 


What  Future  for  Leadership ?/5 


to  be  responsible  to  that  amorphous 
body  of  women's  liberation.  Because 
there  was  no  structure  to  determine 
who  approved  of  what  actions,  women 
either  had  to  do  nothing,  which  meant 
immobilization,  or  they  had  to  make  a 
decision  that  was,  in  its  nature,  an  in- 
group  or  elitist  decision.  It's  ironic  that 
lack  of  structures  had  the  opposite 
effect  from  what  was  desired:  women 
desired  no  structure  in  order  for  more 
people  to  participate-but  if  anything, 
it  made  it  more  difficult  for  anyone  to 
participate  because  you  had  to  know 
how  to  get  into  the  right  circles,  you 
had  to  know  who  to  call  and  what  to 
do.  It  also  made  the  movement  more 
middle-class,  since  those  people  who 
could  take  that  kind  of  initiative, 
who  knew  how  to  operate  in  meetings 
and  had  free  time  to  do  so  were  usually 
middle-class.  You  couldn't  be  working 
full-time  at  home  and  on  a  job  and 
keep  up  with  the  movement  when  it 
meant  calling  around  on  the  phone  and 
asking  every  week  what's  happening. 
Women    who    didn't    know    anything 


>*      \J 


y 


about  women's  liberation  and  were 
busy,  didn't  have  time  to  go  through 
all  that  to  find  out  what  women's  lib- 
eration was,  and  how  they  could  fit  in. 


6/Quest 


BF:  It  seemed  as  if  anyone  coming 
into  the  movement  had  to  be  prepared 
to  deal  with  everything  that  was  hap- 
pening. There  was  no  way,  if  a  woman 
had  a  specific  interest  or  need  that  she 
could  limit  her  involvement  to  that 
particular  thing  unless  there  was  some- 
thing that  already  existed  in  that  area. 
At  that  time  the  only  project  group 
that  existed  in  Washington  was  abor- 
tion counseling.  Further,  women  would 
have  to  have  the  political  know-how 
to  jump  into  an  existing  group  that 
had  some  kind  of  intellectual  analysis 
like  anti-imperialism.  Again,  that  was 
a  real  barrier  for  women  who  weren't 
college-educated  and  had  no  prior 
Left  political  experience.  Women  just 
weren't  ready  to  start  with  abstract 
theoretical  analysis  about  women's 
class  oppression. 

FRN:  I'd  like  you  to  discuss  hidden 
leadership,  because  that's  what  we've 
had  to  deal  with. 

BF:  What  usually  happens  in  wom- 
en's meetings  discussing  leadership  is 
that  someone  believes  passionately  that 
we  can  function  without  it.  They  are 
absolutely  certain  that  by  deciding 
not  to  have  leadership,  leaders  are  not 
going  to  happen.  But  they  happen  any- 
way. Leadership  is  a  phenomenon  of 
group  dynamics.  Somebody  takes  init- 
iative in  speaking,  making  suggestions 
for  action,  or  doing  work.  They  func- 
tion as  leaders  in  those  instances.  The 
same  thing  also  happens  when  we're 
talking  about  power.  One  woman  be- 
lieves   that    we    can    eliminate    power 


altogether.  I  think  that  there's  a  much 
more  realistic  appraisal  of  what  power 
and  leadership  are  today.  Women  are 
no  longer  naively  saying  they  don't 
exist.  The  realization  that  we're  going 
to  have  to  deal  with  them  because 
they're  going  to  happen  anyway  is  the 
first  step.  When  we  have  that  consci- 
ousness, then  we  are  faced  with  how  to 
deal  with  them.  One  of  the  important 
factors  is  tor  a  group  to  decide  how  a 
decision  is  going  to  be  made.  Who  is 
our  group?  What  is  our  constituency? 
Who  has  the  authority  and  responsi- 
bility for  making  decisions?  If  we  be- 
lieve in  consensus,  how  do  we  reach 
it?  What  is  the  shared  and  understood 
process  for  arriving  at  it?  If  we  believe 
in  majority  vote,  how  do  we  assure  the 
rights  of  the  minority?  In  the  early 
movement,  there  was  never  any  defi- 
nition of  groups.  They  were  amor- 
phous, "whoever  came  to  a  meeting." 
If  you  hadn't  been  at  a  meeting  for 
weeks  and  showed  up,  you  would  be 
making  decisions  about  something 
when  you  had  no  information,  or  all 
the  previous  discussions  would  have  to 
be  repeated  for  your  benefit.  Leader- 
ship arose  because  people  who  had 
been  at  all  the  meetings  had  the  in- 
formation and  led  the  discussion  and 
where  the  issue  was  going  to  go.  It's 
now  recognized  that  we  have  to  de- 
fine our  constituencies,  our  groups, 
and  who  makes  what  decisions  and 
how  they  are  made.  Consciousness  is 
still  high  about  making  sure  that  every- 
one participates  in  decision-making. 
I  hope  we  never  lose  that  consci- 
ousness. I  have  little  fear  that  women 


What  Future  for  Leadership?/? 


are  going  to  duplicate  the  tyranny  and 
dictatorships  of  patriarchal  systems. 
As  a  result  of  our  oppression,  we're  in 
touch  with  how  v/e've  been  exploited 
by  those  methods. 

CB:  There  is  more  recognition  to- 
day of  the  need  for  leadership;  and 
recognition  that  leadership  and  struc- 
tures go  together.  But  there  are  still  a 
lot  of  problems.  I've  been  in  groups 
where  I've  been  a  hidden  leader,  an 
acknowledged  leader,  or  in  groups 
where  I  wasn't  a  leader-and  in  each  of 
those  cases,  people  are  willing  to  say 
there's  leadership,  but  there's  still  a 
real  fear  of  it.  There's  little  under- 
standing of  how  to  make  leadership 
accountable,  how  to  make  it  responsi- 
ble to  you  as  a  group.  That's  where 
structure  is  so  important.  The  only 
real  way  to  make  leadership  responsi- 
ble is  to  define  who  and  what  a  group 
is,  and  then  to  be  able  to  define  what 
functions  and  power  you  give  to  who 
as  leaders  in  what  areas-and  what 
the  group  expects  in  return. 

Leaders  are  not  just  the  same  few 
people;  different  people  are  leaders  in 
different  situations  and  at  different 
times.  I  think  leadership  is  people 
taking  the  initiative,  carrying  things 
through,  having  the  ideas  and  imagina- 
tion to  get  something  started,  and 
exhibiting  particular  skills  in  different 
areas.  In  a  given  situation,  you  may 
have  four  or  five  different  types  of 
people  exerting  leadership,  both  within 
a  group  and  towards  the  public.  But 
unless  there's  a  discussion  about  how 
each    of  those    is    a  leader  and  what 


each  is  contributing,  there's  still  a  fear 
that  they'll  do  too  much,  or  fuck  you 
over,  if  you  can't  do  the  particular 
thing  that  they're  doing.  Because  of 
our  oppression  as  women,  many  of  us 
still  have  internalized  fear  of  our  own 
strength,  and  when  we  see  someone 
asserting  herself,  being  strong,  we're 
afraid  of  what  she  might  do,  because 
she  challenges  us  to  be  stronger.  Many 
women  also  fear  the  responsibility  of 
leadership.  Women  have  taken  respons- 
ibility in  a  lot  of  areas  of  work,  but 
we've  never  had  responsibility  in  what 
was  defined  as  the  political  world.  To 
be  a  leader  is  in  fact  a  very  big  risk, 
because  you  have  to  try  things  and 
make  mistakes,  and  you  are  responsible 
for  those  mistakes.  Part  of  the  anti- 
leadership  attitude  was  avoiding  that 
responsibility.  If  you  didn't  have  any 
leaders  and  something  went  wrong, 
then  nobody  was  responsible  and  had 
to  take  the  blame.  Women  are  fre- 
quently afraid  of  that  kind  of  respon- 
sibility, afraid  to  decide  between  major 
alternatives  which  have  a  significant 
effect  on  the  world,  because  we're  not 
sure  that  we  are  competent  to  decide. 
So  problems  with  leadership  are  not 
just  being  afraid  of  somebody  else 
fucking  us  over-it's  also  being  afraid 
of  ourselves,  and  of  taking  ourselves 
seriously. 

FRN:  Do  you  both  honestly  believe 
that  there  will  be  a  more  humane 
leadership  because  we  have  been  op- 
pressed? A  lot  of  people  don't  see 
much  difference  between  what  we're 
coming    to    and    what    already    exists. 


8/Quest 


BF:  I  think  that  Charlotte  has  al- 
ready defined  leadership  and  that  our 
definition  of  leadership  is  different 
from  the  beginning.  She  mentioned 
that  there's  a  recognition  among  wom- 
en of  different  skills,  that  we  don't 
have  one  leader  who  is  supposed  to 
represent  everything. 

I  have  some  fears  that  if  we  don't 
confront  the  issue,  there  will  be  a 
repetition  of  the  mistakes  that  hap- 
pened before.  In  the  reformist  wing  of 
the  movement,  for  instance,  in  NOW, 
there  has  been  some  use  of  the  old 
forms-the  kind  of  hierarchical  leader- 
ship that  is  not  responsible  to  the  vast 
membership.  But  I  think  that  that 
leadership  has  been  called  down  also, 
referring  specifically  to  NOW.  There's 
been  a  real  recognition  on  a  local  level, 
by  chapters,  of  being  ignored  by  their 
national  leaders.  The  local  women 
spoke  out  and  tried  to  make  that  lead- 
ership more  responsible.  At  the  same 
time,  within  what  could  be  called  the 
women's  liberation  part  of  the  move- 
ment, changes  have  occured  for  other 
reasons.  The  reformists  started  by 
using  old  models  of  leadership;  the  WL 
section,  because  of  the  Left  influence, 


and  the  reaction  to  bad  leadership 
forms,  started  with  anti-leadership  tac- 
tics. I  think  they've  now  come  to- 
gether at  a  point  where  there's  recog- 
nition by  both  political  segments  of 
the  movement  that  we've  got  to  deal 
with  the  leadership  question  and  with 
structures. 

CB:  I  agree  with  that,  but  I  would 
add  that  there  are  no  guarantees.  Most 
of  the  questions  and  fears  people  have 
about  leadership  are  very  real,  and 
they're  going  to  be  real  throughout  the 
next  fifty  years.  Too  often,  what 
people  want  is  guarantees;  they  want  a 
guarantee  that  we're  going  to  be  better. 
All  I  can  ultimately  say  is,  when  I 
look  at  what  male  supremacist  leader- 
ship has  created,  I'm  willing  to  put  my 
money  on  women.  It  seems  to  me  that 
women  do  have  a  capacity  at  this  time 
to  create  a  better  leadership,  a  better 
kind  of  structure;  and  I'm  willing  to 
risk  it  because  I  don't  think  there's 
any  other  option. 

If  women  don't  risk  dealing  with 
structures  and  leadership,  we  will  es- 
sentially accept  male  supremacist  rule: 
without  assertive  female  leadership, 
men  will  continue  not  only  to  rule  in 
world  power  terms,  but  to  determine, 
as  they  have  been  doing  for  the  last 
few  years,  what  is  the  women's  move- 
ment, what  are  the  movement  struc- 
tures that  get  recognition,  and  who  are 
the  women's  leaders.  I  don't  have 
personal  quarrels  with  the  women  they 
have  set  up,  but  most  of  them  are  not 
women  who  we  as  a  movement  have 
made    leaders.    As    long   as    we    don't 


What  Future  for  Leadership  ?/9 


acknowledge  and  support  our  own 
leaders,  then  the  male  establishment 
will  continue  choosing  our  public  lead- 
ership. And  for  the  vast  majority  of 
women  in  America,  who  they  put 
forward  as  our  leaders  are  our  leaders. 
That  is  all  that  they  ever  see.  The  only 
way  to  fight  media  control  is  to  put 
forward  our  own  people.  To  deal  with 
personality  cults,  we  can  recognize 
more  than  one  leader,  as  Bev  was 
saying.  It's  not  that  we're  going  to  put 
forward  "Ms.  X"  as  the  leader  forever, 
but  that  we  begin  to  support  indiv- 
iduals who  have  shown  leadership  and 
use  the  media  instead  of  being  used  by 
it.  Even  then,  there  are  no  guarantees 
that  we  will  always  make  the  right 
decisions. 


BF:  The  question  of  "guarantees 
and  risk-taking"  made  me  think  about 
another  class-related  attitude.  Women 
from  secure  middle-class  backgrounds 
have  a  basic  faith  that  things  are 
going  to  work  out  for  them.  Very 
often,  it's  middle-class  women  who 
express  fears  about  power;  that  women 
are  going  to  duplicate  the  "power" 
trip  of  males.  They  want  guarantees 
that  it  won't  happen.  With  a  group 
that  includes  women  of  different  class 
backgrounds,  I've  noticed  that  women 
from  lower-and  working-class  families 
don't  ask  for  that  kind  of  guarantee. 
They've  never  had  it;  risk  is  a  constant 
in  their  lives. 

This  question  also  relates  to  group 
identity.  If  a  woman  is  looking  for 
individual  solutions  to  serve  her  needs 
and    make    her    life    better,    then    she 


wants  guarantees  and  no  risk.  But  if 
she  sees  herself  as  part  of  the  larger 
group,  then  her  questions  are  for  more 
than  her  own  stakes.  She  sees  issues  in 
terms  of  other  women  as  well  as  her- 
self; that  leads  to  political  solutions, 
not  personal  ones. 

JW:  I'd  like  to  pick  up  on  something 
you  said,  Bev,  about  individual  solu- 
tions and  forming  your  life  goals 
by  a  larger  identification  with  the 
movement,  and  something  Charlotte 
said  about  how  leaderless  groups  mani- 
fest a  result  of  women's  oppression— 
not  wanting  to  take  responsibility. 
I'd  like  you  to  deal  with  those  ques- 
tions in  terms  of  the  individual  and 
what  is  necessary  for  a  group  of 
individuals  to  deal  with  leadership 
and    class    issues. 


CB:  I'll  touch  on  a  couple  of  aspects 
of  it.  First,  the  individual-group  strug- 
gle is  another  whole  radio  show. 
But  to  begin  here:  I  think  that  the 
only  kind  of  movement  that  will  suc- 
ceed is  a  movement  of  strong  indiv- 
iduals. A  problem  arises  when  women 
seek  only  individual  solutions,  only 
enough  to  get  by  in  their  own  life. 
I'm  sympathetic  to  why  anybody  does 
that-any  oppressed  woman  wants  her 
life  to  improve-and  any  strategy  that 
we  devise  has  to  deal  with  how  to 
make  people's  lives  better.  No  one 
makes  a  revolution  just  for  an  abstract 
ideal:  you  fight  because  your  life  is 
better  and  you  see  that  society  can  be 
changed.  But  the  danger  is  that  as  you 
begin   to   make   your  own  life  a  little 


10/Quest 


better,  then  you  begin  to  try  just  to 
find  your  own  solution.  The  people 
who  can  most  easily  find  their  own 
solution  in  this  society  are  necessarily 
the  most  privileged:  white,  middle-or 
upper-class,  with  education  and  con- 
nections. 

There   is   often   confusion   between 
being  afraid  of  someone  just  trying  to 


, 


'     / 


->,-- 


What  Future  for  Leadership?/!  1 


make  her  career  off  the  movement- 
which  really  does  happen-and  the 
movement's  fear  of  all  leadership. 
Women  who  exploit  the  movement 
just  to  build  their  own  careers  and 
individual  solutions  should  be  criti- 
cized, but  sometimes  it  is  difficult  to 
distinguish  that  exploitation  from  real 
leadership.  We  need  group  structures 
where  this  can  be  talked  through, 
where  each  woman's  life  decisions  are 
accountable.  For  example,  if  you  de- 
cide that  a  particular  woman  should 
get  a  job  in  women's  studies,  it's  not 
just  her  individual  solution  because  a 
lot  of  people  benefit:  her  job  can  be 
used  to  expose  more  people  to  femi- 
nism through  women's  studies,  to  open 
the  resources  of  that  university  to  a 
larger  number  of  women,  her  salary 
can  be  shared-her  individual  solution 
is  women  moving  forward.  Without 
accountability  between  each  individual 
trying  to  build  her  life  and  a  commit- 
ment to  the  whole  movement,  it's  hard 
to  keep  those  things  going.  This  is 
particularly  difficult  because  we  see 
that  every  woman  needs  to  develop 
skills  and  become  economically  in- 
dependent; that  women  do  have  to 
fight  to  get  ahead  at  a  certain  level 
yet  not  become  tokens;  that  we  must 
all  find  better  ways  to  live  without 
pretending    that     is     the    solution . 

A  lot  of  the  problems  of  leadership 
and  of  group-individual  identity  center 
on  our  inability  to  help  each  other 
become  stronger.  The  only  way  that 
women  will  stop  putting  down  women 
who  are  strong  is  if  they  are  strong 
themselves.     And     the     only    way    to 


eliminate  jealousy  and  fear  of  leader- 
ship is  for  each  woman  to  know  her 
own  strengths  and  have  enough  confi- 
dence in  what  she  is  doing  that  she 
doesn't  have  to  be  the  leader  in  a 
given  situation  to  feel  good  about  her- 
self. If  we  can  help  each  woman  build 
her  own  strength,  find  her  own  work 
that  means  something  to  her  individ- 
ually, that  will  be  a  big  step  toward 
dealing  with  leadership.  The  two  go 
together:  structures  are  necessary  to 
help  women  build  their  strengths; 
leaders  today  have  to  figure  out  how 
to  build  those  structures,  and,  in  that 
sense,  it's  a  reinforcing  cycle.  The 
stronger  we  can  make  every  woman, 
the  more  every  woman  will  be  able  to 
recognize  different  leadership  roles  for 
different  people  and  not  be  afraid  of 
them.  Then  she  can  support  leaders 
she  believes  in  and  challenge  them 
when  they're  doing  things  that  she 
considers  wrong.  This  challenge  can 
create  constructive  dialogue  because  it 
is  not  based  on  weakness  or  jealousy, 
but  on  a  common  struggle  to  deter- 
mine what  is  best  for  women. 

Postscript 

This  Interview  was  taped  in  Decem- 
ber of  1972.  In  preparing  copy  for 
this  issue  of  Quest,  we  were  struck  by 
how  much  the  questions  then  raised 
about  leadership  are  still  with  us.  We 
decided  to  print  it  now,  both  for  its 
discussion  of  those  questions  and  be- 
cause the  process  of  listening  to  what 
was  said  three  and  one-half  years  ago 
raised  for  us  another  vital  issue:  How 


12/ Quest 


does  our  movement  pass  on  its  history? 
How  do  we  learn  from  our  past-mis- 
takes and  successes-so  that  each  new 
group  does  not  have  to  begin  at  zero 
but  rather  can  build  upon  and  expand 
the  experiences  of  others?  Putting 
together  a  body  of  knowledge  and 
analysis  of  experience  that  could  in- 
form and  aid  feminists  was  one  of 
Quest's  original  goals.  After  two  years 
of  publication,  we  must  ask  how  much 
have  we  accomplished  and  how  much 
are  feminists  willing  to  listen  to,  and 
learn  from,  one  another?  Unfortun- 
ately, it  seems  nowhere  near  enough. 
We  see  the  same  trashing  of  leaders 
and  glorification  of  structurelessness 
that   existed   five   years  ago.   There   is 


still  resistance  to  working  out  the 
problems  of  class  and  race  conflict,  of 
individual  and  group  accountability. 
We  do,  however,  see  progress  being 
made  on  these  questions.  Many  wom- 
en have  been  thinking  about  their 
experiences  and  about  what  kind  of 
leadership  the  feminist  movement 
needs.  So,  while  some  were  not  yet 
ready  to  write  about  it,  we  have 
gathered  articles  for  this  issue  of  Quest 
which  we  feel  approach  these  ques- 
tions from  a  variety  of  different,  oc- 
sionally  conflicting,  perspectives.  Since 
leadership  is  a  crucial  make  or  break 
issue  for  feminism,  this  diversity  seems 
an  appropriate  beginning  for  what 
must  be  a  continuing  dialogue. 


What  Future  for  Leadership?/13 


THE  LESBIAN 


The  Workmaker,  the  Leader 


by  Bertha  Harris 

graphics  by  Nancy  Myron 

The  following  is  part  of  a  longer 
essay,  which  in  its  first  version  was 
presented  at  the  second  annual  con- 
vention of  the  Gay  Academic  Union, 
November  1974.  A  development  of 
its  thesis,  as  it  particularly  applies  to 
literature,  was  first  presented  under 
the  title  "The  Purification  of  Mon- 
strosity: j  The  Lesbian  As  Literature" 
to  a  Forum  on  Homosexual  Literature 
at  the  Modern  Language  Association 
convention,  December  27,  1974. 


My  everlasting  gratitude  to  Cather- 
ine Nicholson  for  introducing  me  to 
the  work  of  the  great  feminist  scholar, 
Jane  Ellen  Harrison,  and  to  the  several 
meanings  of  the  Dionysian  tradition. 
Catherine  Nicholson  is  presently  pre- 
paring for  publication  Harrison's  femi- 
nist essays,  written  in  1907  and  1913, 
with  an  extensive  introduction  which 
will  show  the  origins  of  Harrison's 
feminism  in  her  anthropological  stud- 
ies, Themis  and  Prolegomena  to  the 
Study  of  the  Greek  Religion. 

14/ Quest,  vol.  II  no.4,  spring,  1976 


"Do  not  bear  us  a  grudge  because 
we  have  killed  you.  You  are  sensible, 
you  see  that  our  children  are  hungry. 
They  love  you,  they  wish  to  put  you 
into  their  body.  Is  it  not  glorious  to 
be  eaten  by  the  sons  of  a  chief?"-the 
Bear  clan  of  the  Ottawas,  offering  a 
part  of  the  bear  they  have  just  killed 
a  piece  of  its  own  flesh.  (Harrison, 
quoting  Frazer's  Totemism  and  Ex- 
ogamy, 111,  p.  6  7. 

The  leader  is  she  who  makes  work, 
who  makes  a  thing  happen,  often  in 
spite  of  the  group  which  has  provided 
the  context  for  her  work.  The  proto- 
type for  the  woman  who  is  the  worker, 
who  makes  work,  is  the  lesbian.  The 
lesbian  is  a  new  creature,  neither  man 
nor  woman,  but  one  who  takes  from 
both  the  father  and  the  mother,  in 
order  to  create  work  that  goes  beyond 
the  limits  of  gender.  The  myth  of 
Dionysus,  reinterpreted  from  a  femi- 
nist perspective,  provides  a  framework 
for  understanding  this  concept  of  the 
leader  in  the  women's  movement  to- 
day. In  this  essay,  I  will  explore  this 
reinterpretation  of  the  Dionysian  myth, 
its  importance  for  feminists,  and  how 
it  relates  to  the  lesbian  as  worker/lead- 
er. 


aaaaBBPYrY^fo^^^nnneee 


^ 


The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader/ 15 


To  be  ignorant  of  the  function  of 
myth  in  one's  life  is  to  doom  oneself 
to  unrelenting  originality;  it  is  to 
regard  the  events  of  both  the  imagina- 
tion and  the  external  world  as  unique- 
ly one's  own  contrivance  and  fate.  To 
be  in  the  midst  of  myth,  yet  be  able 
to  know,  as  well  as  feel,  its  affects 
and  process  is  to  have  the  power  to 
control  its  outcome. 

The  failure  of  the  women's  move- 
ment to  express  itself  coherently, 
and  impress  itself  without  equivo- 
cation around  a  principle  of  leader- 
ship, derives  from  our  failure  to  un- 
derstand ourselves  as  involved  in  a 
ritual  act  over  which  an  explanatory 
story  (the  myth)  is  spoken.1  Once 
we  understand  this,  we  can  realize 
that  it  is  not  a  question  of  whether 
we  should  have  leaders,  or  be  leader- 
less,  but  of  how  to  alter  both  the 
ritual  act  and  the  myth  explaining 
it  to  prevent  disaster  when  the  lead- 
er inevitably  happens.  Ritual  is  the 
outcome  of  a  group  of  people  bond- 
ing together  to  assert  a  sense  of 
self  and  power.  A  ritual  may  be  some- 
thing as  ordinary  as  an  all-American 
family  dinner;  its  mythic  meanings-in 
terms  of  roles,  leadership,  power,  etc.— 
can  be  determined  by  observing  how 
the  group  feels  about  eating  together. 
The  successful  rituals  of  patriarchy  are 
no  more  than  that  assertion  of  group 
power:  male  unity,  exclusion  of  wo- 
man, power  over  both  woman  and 
that  which  the  ritual  identifies  as  fe- 
male. Ritual  is  also  a  dramatic  dis- 
closure of  a  group's  collective  assess- 
ment   of,    and    responses    to,    reality. 


Myth  is  "the  things  said  over  a  ritual 
act.   z 

Our  experience  of  myth  is  usually 
unconscious:  living  it  without  know- 
ing it;  being  in  the  midst  of  it,  be- 
lieving that  we  are  unilaterally  con- 
trolling-thereby  creating-our  destiny. 
The  illusion  of  power  we  experience 
while  in  the  grip  of  the  mythical  pro- 
cess is  our  bondage.  This  illusion 
alone  can  negate  all  possibility  of  lib- 
eration. For  example,  as  long  as  the 
leader  (who  may  be  expressed,  in 
mythology  as  hero,  or  god)  does  not 
expect  to  be  eaten  by  the  group  at  a 
particular  moment  in  the  myth's  de- 
velopment, she  will  be  unable  to  pre- 
vent a  reenactment  of  cannibalism. 
The  group  will  feast,  digest,  rejoice  in 
the  energy  catastrophe  stimulates: 
then  will  reorganize  around  a  new, 
as-yet-uneaten,  leader  to  repeat  the 
ritual.  Only  by  understanding  the 
myth  can  we  alter  its  course. 

The  prime  reality  of  patriarchy 
is  phallic  competition.  Patriarchy's 
response  to  its  reality-its  integral  ri- 
tual act-is  dramatization  of  phallic 
competition.  Such  ritualization  takes 
both  subtle  and  blatant  forms-from, 
for  example,  the  celebration  of  the 
Mass  to  the  institutionalization  of 
eroticism  to  war  to  the  space  race. 
The  myth  of  patriarchy-"the  things 
said  over  a  ritual  act"— is  the  on-going 
story  of  the  defeat  of  woman. 

Patriarchy's  most  dynamic  instance 
(the  thing  said  about  the  thing  done) 
is  the  celebrated  drama  of  Fifth  cen- 
tury B.C.  Athens.  Although  classical 
scholarship  and  modern  pyschoanaly- 


16/Quest 


sis  have  conspired  to  conceal  this 
fact,  the  plays  are  primarily  about  the 
triumph  of  patriarchal  expression  over 
matriarchal  presence-the  triumph  of 
male  "reason"  over  female  "irration- 
ality;" of  father  over  mother,  of 
"civilization"  over  the  primitive.*  Im- 
plicit in  the  enactment  of  the  tri- 
umph are  the  political  results  of  the 
patriarchal  ritual:  the  first,  male  bond- 
ing-responding to  fear  of  the  female; 
and,  the  second,  prohibition  of  female 
bonding-preventing  realization  of  the 
thing  most  feared:  the  emergence  of 
female  leadership  out  of  the  bonded 
group. 

Once  patriarchy  is  identified  as  a 
ritualized  reaction  to  fear  of  woman, 
it  becomes  apparent  that  the  power- 
lessness  of  the  women's  movement 
originates  in  its  assumption  that  we 
are  a  reaction  to  male  control.  A 
study  of  the  Fifth  century  drama, 
especially  the  plays  of  Euripides, 
shows  us  quite  the  opposite:  that  men, 
as  we  know  them,  invented  them- 
selves-and  their  classifying  myths  and 
rituals-as  a  reaction  against  what  they 
perceived  as  our  magical,  annihilating 
power  over  them.  The  second  inven- 
tion of  patriarchy  was  the  man's 
woman:  woman  divested  of  maternal 
knowledge  and  influence,  no  different, 

/  use  "matriarchy"  interchangeably 
with  "pre-patriarchy "-loosely  describing  a 
time  in  Greece  precceding,  at  some  stage, 
the  Fifth  Century  B.C.  "Matriarchy"  in 
fact  is  probably  a  state  of  mind.  I  use 
"patriarchy"  to  refer  to  the  social  fact  of 
male  rule  and  domination;  "Olympus"  and 
the  "Olympians"  are  the  mythology  refer- 
ring to  that  fact. 


except  biologically,  from  men.  For 
example,  the  turning  point  of  the 
Oresteia*  occurs  when  the  man's  wo- 
man-imaged mythically  and  dramat- 
ically as  Athena-explains  that  she 
sides  with  Orestes,  the  Furies-belea- 
gured  male 5,  because  she  never  knew 
a  mother:  myth  as  a  dramatization 
of  political  co-optation.  Another  ex- 
ample of  the  shift  to  patriarchal 
power  can  be  seen  in  Euripides' 
Medea:  correctly  understood,  it  is 
not  the  tale  of  a  woman's  murdurous 
sexual  jealousy  but  of  how  woman- 
and  her  power-is  demolished  through 
sexual  intercourse  with  the  male.  The 
essence  of  Euripides'  tragic  vision  is 
that  woman's  submission  to  man  is 
the  submission  of  ecstacy  to  sexual  ec- 
onomics. It  is  the  submission  of  the 
order  of  nature  to  the  laws  of  industry, 
the  submission  of  reality  to  an  in- 
vented actuality.  It  is  the  rendering  of 
the  all-encompassing  sense  of  ancient 
order  and  justice  that  was  the  goddess 
Themis  into  the  two-dimensional  card- 
board fiction  of  the  Olympians. 

Most  important  in  the  Euripidean 
drama  are  the  distinctions  between 
the  pre-patriarchal  (or  matriarchal) 
and  the  patriarchal.  Woman  (Medea 
is  a  perfect  instance)  is  dramatized  as 
representative  of  an  organic  process 
in  which  the  social,  cultural  and  polit- 
ical-all forms,  both  divine  and  human 
-are  interlocked  and  interdependent 
in  a  life-sustaining  ritual  out  of  which 
grows  the  image  (the  myth)  of  self- 
hood and  selfhood's  sustaining  prin- 
ciple, the  leader,  who  grows  naturally, 
as    a   function   of  the   group.   Woman 


The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader/17 


I 


18/ 'Quest 


corrupted  fagain,  Medea)  is  the  cor- 
ruption of  this  process,  symbolically- 
and  literally-shown  in  her  sexual  al- 
liance with  the  man:  Medea,  the 
"matriarchal"  principle,  is  literally 
fucked-thereby  politically  fucked-over 
-by  the  ascendant  patriarchy.  Athena, 
without  a  mother-therefore  without 
"flesh"-is  woman  as  male  intellectual 
reasoning  would  have  her;  Medea, 
another  prototype  of  the  "man's  wo- 
man," is  divested  of  her  "mother"-- 
her  flesh,  her  culture,  her  history- 
through  heterosexual  intercourse.  Pre- 
Olympian  (or  "matriarchal")  myth  is 
the  story  spoken  over  a  ritual  of  the 
"real, "  i.e.,  the  group's  collective  as- 
sessment and  projection  of  their  reality. 
Olympian  (or  patriarchal)  myth  is  not 
myth  but  propagandists  episodes  fash- 
ioned to  disguise  the  destruction  of  the 
"real"  and  the  rituals  which  are  its 
demonstration  of  reality. 

Dionysus  Re-Interpreted 

A  case  has  been  made  by  psycho- 
logists and  anthropologists  to  show 
that  the  patriarchal  overthrow  of  "wo- 
man" is  an  on-going  human  develop- 
ment essential  to  work-making:  intel- 
lectual endeavor,  artistic  creation,  me- 
chanical invention.  Such  interpretation 
is  based  on  observations  of  "womb-en- 
vy" in  primitive  males.  At  some 
stage,  the  primitive  recognizes  that  it  is 
woman  who  has  ultimate  power  over 

"Primitive"  here  means  as  opposed  to 
"sophisticated"-not  the  opposite  of  "civi- 
lized". A  four-year  old  Twentieth  Century 
New  York  City  male  is  a  "primitive". 


life— she  bleeds  but  does  not  die;  she 
reproduces  herself;  her  body  gives 
food.  The  male's  envy  of  female  pro- 
creation urges  him  to  compensate  by 
becoming  sole  owner  of  the  power  to 
achieve  intellectually.  Thus  the  creative 
process  or  the  work-making  process— 
which  springs  from  the  impulse  to 
make  a  thing  which  is,  in  its  final 
utterance,  both  a  phenomenon  of  the 
self  and  distinct  from  the  self-is  de- 
clared analagous  to  the  generative 
event  in  the  womb.  The  woman  labors 
and  makes  the  child.  The  man  labors 
and  makes  idea,  or  thing.  Since  the 
production  of  children  is  exclusively 
the  province  of  the  female,  the  pro- 
duction of  work  and  thought  must  be 
the  exclusive  (and  jealously  guarded) 
province  of  the  male. 

Not  content  to  divest  women  of 
their  brains,  the  Olympian  Zeus,  patri- 
archy's chief,  must  also  have  their 
wombs.  Total  ownership  of  both  mind 
and  body-and  the  functions  and  pro- 
ducts of  both-accomplishes  an  her- 
metically sealed  power  block.  In  order 
to  get  a  womb  to  go  with  his  brain, 
Zeus  had  to  steal  Dionysus  who  was 
central  to  the  pre-patriarchal  world- 
view,  since  the  god  portrayed  the 
group's  meaning  of  virtue,  potency, 
power,  imagination:  in  short,  Dionysus 
was  the  cornerstone  of  the  ritual  pro- 
jection of  group  identity.  The  massive 
task  of  over-throwing  mother-rule  and 
establishing  father-rule  is  begun  by 
distorting  the  images  and  meaning  of 
Dionysus.  The  effects  of  such  an 
achievement  are  comparable  to  the 
effects    of   a    cerebral    lobotomy;    or, 


The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader/19 


more  recently,  the  effects  of  behav- 
ioral modification  on  personality:  the 
erasure  of  the  original  self  is  all-per- 
vasive. Even  the  memory  of  the  orig- 
inal is  removed-but  if  a  trace  remains, 
it  remains  as  the  "bad,"  the  un- 
adapted  and  therefore  criminal  element 
in  the  new  order.  Thus  the  pre-patri- 
archal  ritual  of  selfhood  is  eliminated 
by  a  self-conscious  political  effort  to 
make  change.  New  "ritual"  and  "myth" 
are  provided  to  explain  the  change  and 
support  the  new  images  of  power. 
What  is  "self  is  redefined;  what  does 
not  conform  to  the  new  definition  is 
outlawed. 

It  is  as  difficult  to  describe  the 
original  meanings  and  impact  of  Dion- 
ysus as  it  is  to  describe  the  culture 
that  created  the  god.  In  brief,  Dion- 
ysus with  the  mother  is  an  image  of 
what  we  might  call  "the  pleasure  prin- 
ciple" -  a  recognition  and  acceptance 
of  the  irrational;  an  idea  of  freedom; 
a  dream  of  liberation:  an  enactment 
of  the  psychic  through  the  flesh.  Our 
difficulty  in  understanding  Dionysian 
meaning-our  fear  of  its  potential-is, 
above  all,  an  index  to  how  much  it 
has  been  excised  from  our  reality. 
Politically  expressed,  pre  -  Olympian 
(or  matriarchal)  myth,  and  the  culture 
it  reflects,  shows  us  the  powerful 
unions  of  what  is  guessed  to  be 
mothers  and  sons  against  the  father.  ° 
Olympian  myth,  referring  to  patri- 
archal origins,  shows  us  the  devasta- 
tion of  the  mother  by  the  father 
especially  through  its  interruption  of 
the  mother-child  alliance. ' 

Commonly,     the     story    goes    that 


Zeus  seduces  and  impregnates  Semele. 
She  bears  a  son-half  divine,  half-mor- 
tal-who  is  Dionysus.  With  his  moth- 
er, Dionysus  grows  into  the  vigorous 
spirit  of  the  young  kouros:  the  in- 
itiate. The  Semele/Dionysus  unity  is 
the  mythic  rendition  of  the  group's 
political  fact-mother/child— one  which 
the  new  Olympian  order  must  destroy 
if  the  rule  of  father/child  is  to  be 
inexorably  established.  Aided  by  Hera, 
his  wife— who  is  another  manifestation 
of  the  new  man's  woman-Zeus  kills 
Semele  and  calls  Dionysus  to  himself, 
to  be  born  again.  Zeus  steals  not  only 
the  sacred  qualities  Dionysus,  with 
Semele,  represents;  he  also  approp- 
riates the  functions  of  the  old  ritual: 
ensurance  of  fertility,  group  continu- 
ance, life-without-end— whose  model  is 
the  birth  of  the  child  from  the  womb. 
"Come,  O  Dithyrambos..."  he  calls; 
"be  born  again  from  this  my  male 
womb. "8  And  Dionysus  is  renamed 
Dithyrambos  and  reshaped  in  the  male 
image:  the  power  of  the  womb  is 
translated  into  the  power  of  the  phal- 
lus. 

The  figure  of  speech  assigned  to 
this  event  is  Mimesis.  Mimesis  means 
an  imitation  of  the  alien;  a  process 
whereby  the  words,  actions,  behavior 
of  another  are  imitated.  Patriarchal 
power  is  fixed  centrally  in  this  mimetic 
event,  the  Second  Birth  of  the  child 
Dionysus  from  the  thigh  of  Zeus:  it 
shows  that  the  first  maternal  birth 
is  inadequate  for  individual  and  group 
survival;  it  shows  that  the  life  of  the 
group  will  henceforth  depend  upon  the 
death  of  the  mother  and  the  uninter- 


20/Quest 


rupted  union  of  father  and  son,  male 
with  male.  Furthermore,  the  Second 
Birth-the  original  mimetic  event-shows 
the  patriarchal  definition  of  how  work 
happens:  to  imitate  is  consciously 
to  make  a  thing,  to  make  something 
happen.  "Dithrambos"  is  the  name 
Zeus  gives  Dionysus  during  the  Second 
Birth-and  Dithyramb >os  is  the  Greek 
name  of  the  first  art  form,  the  name 
of  tragedy."  Thus  we  are  shown  the 
patriarchal  division  between  the  male 
active  agent-the  maker,  doer,  worker 
-and  the  female  nurturer,  who  is  acted 
upon.  The  mother  is  no  longer  even  re- 
sponsible for  the  birth  of  the  child: 
the  myth  shows  that  childbirth  is 
not  a  creative  act  for  woman;  rather 
that  childbirth  is  the  act  of  the  child, 
who  uses  the  mother  as  the  passive 
vehicle  through  which  it  brings  itself  to 
birth,  to  the  ultimate  birth  which  is 
the  union  with  the  father. 

Such  is  the  status  of  womankind  as 
the  myth-and  reality— express  it;  and 
such  is  the  status  of  womankind  as  we 
know  it,  in  the  ritual  slaughters  of  the 
mother  that  patriarchy  continues  to 
devise.  Woman  is  used  as  the  inarticu- 
late receptacle  for  the  projection  of 
the  raw  material.  Man  performs  as  the 
stimulus  for  the  metamorphosis  of 
blind  instinct  into  sighted  intelligence 
and  accomplishment. 

But  to  understand  mimesis  solely 
as  imitation  of  the  alien  is  to  ignore  its 
political  meanings.  The  events  of  the 
Second  Birth  are  more  than  masculine 
imitation  of  a  foreign  process:  the 
Second  Birth  is  also  a  take-over  of  the 
alien-a  political  stratagem  designed  to 


show  the  male  ability  to  assimilate 
nature  into  science,  "soul"  into  mind, 
powerlessness  (barefoot  and  pregnant) 
into  power  (penis  and  womb);  and  in 
so  doing  demonstrate  the  superiority 
of  things  male  over  things  female. 
Observing  the  cultural  magnitude  of 
the  first  birth,  appreciating  its  political 
potential— and,  even  more  significantly, 
recognizing  the  fact  that  delivering  a 
child,  while  it  is  intrinsically  the  most 
important  human  act  is  also  the  hu- 
man act  most  noticeably  devoid  of 
intellectual  choice-man  steals  it  and 
makes  it  his  own:  the  Second  Birth  is 
the  birth  of  intellectual  process,  of 
consciousness,  of  the  ability  to  man- 
ipulate feeling  into  thought. 

The  Lesbian  as  Dionysus 

The  truth  of  the  matter-and  of  the 
myth-is  based  in  the  child  that  is 
born,  not  in  the  childbearers— neither 
of  them.  It  is  the  child,  and  the 
independent  action,  energy  and  pur- 
posefulness  of  the  child— both  as  bio- 
logical fact  and  as  metaphor— who  is 
the  source  of  power.  The  child's  nat- 
ure is  that  of  neither  man  nor  woman, 
but  is  the  nature  of  the  lesbian:  born 
of  woman,  she  consciously  rejects 
being  a  woman-because  she  does  not 
want  to  die:  to  be  unable  to  work  is  to 
be  dead;  the  "man's  woman,"  because 
of  what  has  happened  to  her  below  the 
waist,  is  dead  above  the  neck.  The  les- 
bian -  her  daughter  -  wants  to  make 
something  happen;  choosing  life,  she 
wants  to  make  work.  Although  nursed 
in  the  cradle  of  heterosexual  influence, 


The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader/21 


the  lesbian  wills  her  own  manifestation 
of  independence  from  both  man  and 
woman;  from  both  womb  and  phallus. 

The  human  model  for  work-mak- 
ing, therefore,  should  be  neither  the 
unconsciousness  of  the  father,  but  the 
use  of  both  by  the  child  to  make  first 
herself,  then  the  work.  Thus  it  is 
impossible  for  woman  qua  woman  and 
man  qua  man  to  make  work.  Hetero- 
sexual organization— whether  matriar- 
chal or  patriarchal-is  no  more  than 
the  providing  of  certain  conditions 
in  which  the  work-maker,  the  lesbian, 
can  bring  herself  to  birth. 

The  lesbian  is  neither  woman  nor 
man;  she  is  a  new,  separate  creature,  a 
lesbian.  Women  have  tried  to  dismiss 
the  control  of  the  mimetic  principle 
by  pretending  it  has,  especially  aided 
by  the  Women's  Movement,  lost  its 
potency.  Created  in  Opposition  to  the 
myth,  as  revolt,  the  women's  move- 
ment to  great  extent  seeks  to  rid  it- 
self of  patriarchal  infection  by  attempt- 
ing to  find  a  "womanly"  way  of 
doing  things-e.g.,  attempting  non-struc- 
tured organization,  resisting  leadership, 
resisting  power;  in  extreme  instances 
advancing  separatism  as  an  end-goal  of 
purification.  What  the  movement  has 
not  generally  recognized-but  what 
patriarchy  has  known  all  along-show- 
ing us  its  knowledge  in  the  myth-is 
that  the  more  a  woman  works,  and 
works  to  make  things  happen,  the  less 
"woman"  she  becomes,  the  more  les- 
bian: the  more  like  the  Dionysus 
of  the  Second  Birth— without,  however, 
the  significant  feature  of  the  mimetic 
"father  -  birth"-  male -bonding.   Patri- 


archy, by  inducing  fear  of  the  lesbian, 
induces  fear  of  work  in  all  women. 
Such  terrorization  has  commonly  in- 
duced women  in  the  movement  to 
attempt  to  render  real  the  principle  of 
methexsislO -which  is  the  matriarchal, 
"womanly"  opposite  of  the  patriarchal 
principle  of  mimesis. 

As  the  mimetic  rite  (as  it  is  ordin- 
arily understood)  expresses  the  prin- 
ciples of  patriarchy— the  purification 
of  the  male  of  female  infection,  the 
bonding  of  male  with  male  in  a  do- 
minion of  adult  power— so  methexsis 
is  its  opposite:  the  embodiment  of 
matriarchal  principle;  the  utterance  of 
the  group  instead  of  the  one;  the  pro- 
jection of  emotional  solidarity,  group 
oneness,  a  strong  sense  of  difference 
from  other  groups.  Essentially,  meth- 
exsis describes  a  totemistic  social  or- 
ganization, which  matriarchal  society 
may  have  been.  Inherent  to  such 
group  organization  are  three  great 
fears:  1.)  the  coming  of  differentiated 
thinking  which,  combined  with  passion 
and  intellectual  purpose,  will  lead  to 
unique  self-expression,  and  to  a  piece 
of  work  that  is  of  the  group  but 
brought  into  being  by  a  separate  self- 
assertiveness;  2.)  that,  as  a  result,  the 
felt  continuity  of  the  group  as  a  whole 
will  be  interrupted;  and,  3.)  that  if 
one  member  of  the  group  becomes 
distinct,  the  rest  of  the  group  will  be- 
come obscure.  11 

The  distinction  of  one  person  is 
evidenced  to  the  group  by  the  pro- 
duction of  work  which  is  uniquely  her 
own  creation-no  matter  what  area  it  is 
in:    leadership,    for    example,    is    the 


22/Quest 


The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader/23 


showing  of  distinguish  ably  individual 
work.  The  member  of  the  group  who, 
by  making  work,  begins  to  move  from 
the  felt  to  the  thought  is  no  longer 
permitted  the  emotional  benefits  of 
group  life:  the  member  becomes  out- 
cast. She  has  attempted  imitation  of 
the  alien;  she  has  caused  the  death  of 
the  "mother."  Within  the  context  of 
the  myth,  the  worker,  the  woman-be- 
coming-lesbian through  the  sacred  pas- 
sage of  the  Second  Birth,  operates 
under  a  triple  burden:  in  order  to 
achieve  the  Second  Birth,  mimesis, 
she  must  necessarily  undergo  a  first 
"second  birth:"  her  first  imitation  of 
the  alien  must  be  imitation  of  man, i.e., 
her  "drag"  must  reach  beneath  the 
skin,  must  entail  arduous  psycho- 
logical recostuming.  Then  she  must 
undergo  the  ritual  of  authentication; 
she  must  be  tested  by  those  who  know 
she  is  not  really  one  of  them  (she  may 
be  assuming  power,  but  she  lacks  the 
essential  symbol  of  power,  the  phal- 
lus). Presuming  she  survives  these  tests, 
she  is  alone:  by  making  work  (outside 
the  prescribed  labors  of  the  female 
role),  she  has  ceased  being  a  woman; 
she  has  transgressed  against  the  com- 
munity agreement  not  to  work;  she 
has  declared  the  existence  of  sepa- 
ration between  subject  and  object-she 
has  ceased  being  a  woman,  but  she  is 
not  a  man;  nor  would  she  choose  to 
be  man. 

The  principle  of  methexsis  has 
been  called  into  being  by  the  move- 
ment because,  seemingly,  there  is  no 
other  non-patriarchal  model,  nothing 
to    choose    but    isolation    within    the 


patriarchy  or  smothering  in  the  em- 
brace of  the  community.  For  the  les- 
bian—the woman  who  works,  who 
moves-as  does  the  infant  Dionysus  in 
the  birth  journey— to  a  completion  of 
herself  in  work,  as  work,  the  either/or 
situation-because  it  is  heterosexual 
and  therefore  antithetical  to  work-is 
unbearable.  She  is  not  heterosexual; 
heterosexuality  is  about  a  union  of 
one  man,  the  father,  with  the  "man's 
woman,"  the  mother;  she  is  the  child, 
who  is  the  lesbian.  She  is  full  of  the 
Dionysian  ecstacy  that  comes  from 
her  birth,  her  origin  with  women;  she 
is  full  of  the  necessities  of  the  mind 
from  her  venture  toward  work-making 
-necessities  that  are  described  as  male- 
-but  she  is  neither  totally  the  woman 
nor  the  man. 

Ideally,  the  lesbian,  the  worker,  en- 
acts the  life -long  role  of  the  kouros, 
the  youth-nearly  androgynous  in  its 
ability  to  shift  from  shape  to  shape,! 2 
from  gender-always  engaged,  by  virtue 
of  her  eroticism-that  integrating  link 
between  the  psychic  and  the  sexual-in 
initiation.  She  is  always,  by  virtue  of 
her  eroticism,  refusing  to  participate  in 
the  condition  known  as  womanhood. 
For  womanhood,  as  the  myth  demon- 
strates, is  an  inadequate  vehicle  for 
creativity.  No  wonder,within  the  myth, 
is  the  woman  denied  even  her  bio- 
logically "creative"  status;  even,  like 
Semele,  is  murdered  for  childbearing. 
In  truth,  she  is  only  the  host  on  whom 
the  parasite  feeds,  as  every  honest 
mother  knows.  The  woman,***  she 
who  chooses  to  be  acted  upon,  re- 
fusing  the  erotic  individuation  of  ac- 


24/Quest 


tion  as  work— must  resign  herself  to 
death;  but  she  must  not  take  the 
group-and  self-propelled  power  that  is 
her  daughter  with  her.  And  the  les- 
bian, the  worker,  must  use  and  then 
reject  the  mother-just  as  she  uses  and 
rejects  that  which  is  father.  The  lesbian 
who  attempts  identification  with  the 
general  condition  of  women-at  least  as 
it  is  expressed  as  movement-methexsis 
-is  assuming  that  biological  sameness 
reflects  emotional,  psychic,  and  intel- 
lectual sameness:  as  disastrous  a  mis- 
take as  believing  that  to  give  birth  is 
actively  to  make  something. 

The  women's  movement  turns  a- 
gainst  the  Dionysiac  leader  ("ripoff!" 
"male-identified!  '-although  sometimes 
patriarchal  circumstance  forces  truth 
into  these  accusations)  because  its 
members  cannot  imagine  attempting 
to  be  anything  more  than  woman:  if 
the  group  cannot  go  forward,  then  no 
member  of  the  group,  representing  the 
group,  can  go  forward.  She  who  makes 
the  attempt  is  ritually  slaughtered  for 
expressing  that  stage  of  development 
which  the  group  as  a  whole  either  will 
not  or  cannot  grow  to.  One  of  the 
ways  the  movement  expresses  this  is 
by  maintaining  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  the  "exceptional  woman."  In 
fact,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an  ex- 
ceptional   woman    who    can   live,   un- 

Some  lesbians  whose  psychology  is 
totemistic  rather  than  Dionysian- whose  be- 
havior is  based  in  fear  rather  than  challenge 
of  the  male  belong  to  this  class  of  woman 
or  ''mother;"  others  hope  to  become  the 
"father"— but  without  experiencing  the  Di- 
onysian transition. 


damaged  by  mother  or  father,  move- 
ment or  man,  through  the  hetero- 
sexual enforcement  of  the  myth. 

Woman  is  not  mistaken  when  she 
tries  to  make  a  way  to  bring  herself  to 
birth  as  effectively  as  man  believes  he 
has;  nor  is  she  mistaken  when,  having 
suffered  the  effects  of  the  male  order, 
she  does  not  wish  to  imitate  that 
abortive  birth  passage.  But  she  is  ter- 
ribly mistaken  if,  in  understandably 
returning  to  the  pre-mimetic  organi- 
zation in  revolt  against  her  treatment, 
she  does  not  allow  her  exception,  the 
leader  who  is  of  the  group  but  also 
goes  beyond  it,  a  way  to  make  her 
work. 

A  re-interpretation  of  the  meth- 
ectic/mimetic  dilema  for  women  at 
large-for  the  exceptional,  work-mak- 
ing lesbian,  in  particular— involves  a  re- 
interpretation  of  the  nature  of  Dion- 
ysus—one that  lies  beyond  the  intent 
of  either  the  matriarchal  or  the  patri- 
archal. As  Dionysus,  the  lesbian,  the 
worker,  is  neither  man  nor  woman: 
she  is  a  new  creature  not  to  be  defined 
by  either  gender  or  by  "socializa- 
tion" effects— but  by  the  work  she  is 
and  makes.  By  virtue  of  her  eroticism 
she  does  not  naturally  share  in  the 
common  heterosexual  lot  of  either 
man  or  woman.  Like  Dionysus,  her 
specifics  are  androgynous.  Central  to 
Dionysus  is  the  god's  close  association 
with  the  mother,  Semele-an  associa- 
tion so  close  that  the  male  and  female 
figures  blend,  so  close  that  there  can 
be  seen  as  little  organic  distinction  be- 
tween the  female  mother  and  the 
"male"  child  as  there  can  be  between 


The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader/25 


the  earth  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth. 
Gender  identification  collapses., At  the 
most  profound  level  of  the  matriarchal 
rites,  Semele  is  only  another  guise  for 
Dionysus;  and  Dionysus  another  guise 
for   Semele.    In    this,    the  god's  begin- 
ning,   there    is    a    kind    of  ecstacy   of 
equality  13  similar  to  that  achieved  by 
perfectly   matched  lovers.  A  sense  of 
this    Semele-Dionysus    lover    relation- 
ship,  recaptured,   is   the   hope    of  the 
"mother;"   its   achievement  an  appro- 
priate goal  for  women.  For  the  fact  of 
the     myth     is     unalterable:     Dionysus 
must  go,  change  must  be  made,  a  new 
development    of   woman    representing 
thought   and  work  must  happen.  But 
there    can    be    loss   without    the    detri- 
ment of  loss:    Dionysus  carries  to  the 
thigh  of  Zeus  the  intoxicated  spirit  of 
the  group  sacrament  which  is  woman, 
which  is  mother.  For  women  to  accept 
the  patriarchal  lie  that  Dionysus'  trans- 
ition   to   the  Second  Birth   makes  the 
god   male,   is  fatal;  is  to  agree  to  the 
death  that  Zeus,  that  patriarchy,  wishes 
on    her.  Imagined  by    the   group,   the 
group's  leader  is  the  group  as  inevitably 
as  she  is  her  own  differentiated  self.  As 
long  as  Dionysus-the  leader,  the  daugh- 
ter,   the    work-maker—lives,    the   group 
will    not    die:    the    daughter    freed   to 
work  will  inevitably  express-resurrect— 
the  mother  killed  by  the  father. 

To  prevent  work  is  to  prevent 
freedom-of  both  "mother"  and  daugh- 
ter. It  is  in  the  interests  of  patriarchy 
to  prevent  the  lesbian,  who  has  the  po- 
tential of  freedom  greater  than  wo- 
man's was  or  man's  is-the  freedom  of 
Dionysus:   the  early  reality  of  ecstacy 


the  myth  identifies  as  female;  the  later 
reality  of  intellectual  birth  the  myth 
identifies  as  male— the  ultimate  free- 
dom, as  these  first  two  births  merge 
and  together  make  the  transcendant 
third  birth:  the  birth  of  the  genderless 
work-maker  and  work-giver,  the  les- 
bian; Dionysus. 

For  the  lesbian  to  join  with  the  nur- 
sing spirit  of  the  matriarchy  is  to  col- 
lapse back  into  the  non-productive, 
the  anti-intellectual;  the  cradle  from 
which  thought  will  inevitably-and  dis- 
astrously—be sent  forth  in  male  form. 
To  identify  wholly  with  the  male 
expression  is  to  deny  the  principle  of 
rapture  the  myth  shows  as  undeniably 
female-and  which,  equally  with  the 
intellect,  is  the  wellspring  of  the  work. 
In  Dionysus  are  inextricably  united 
both  mana  and  tabu— both  magic  and 
the  manipulation  of  magic-the  "dou- 
ble-edged sanctity,"  as  Jane  Ellen 
Harrison  remarks  it.  To  this  Diony- 
sian  expression  of  the  better-than-the- 
best-of-both-worlds,  belongs  the  les- 
bian, the  worker,  the  maker,  the  doer- 
to   whom    no  gender  can   be  assigned. 

Like  Dionysus,  the  lesbian,  the 
woman-as-worker,  must  be  permitted 
birth,  must  be  allowed  to  emerge  from 
the  collective  spirit.  And  the  group 
must  realize-as  do  the  Bacchants  and 
Maenads  (the  mothers  and  nurses  of 
Dionysus)-that  their  group  reality  and 
emotion  has  fostered  the  essential  stuff 
from  which  the  leader,  will  happen- 
and  delight  in  their  own  participation 
in  the  founding  of  "things  done."  And 
the  lesbian,  the  worker,  must  never  be 
deceived  that  in  undertaking  the  sacred 


26/Quest 


passage  of  the  Second  Birth  that  she  is 
becoming  male:  that  by  expressing  her- 
self as  work,  a  person  and  a  thing  apart 
from  mother/woman,  she  is  in  contrast 
father/man.  Dionysus  is  never  mature 
in  the  patriarchal  sense.  The  god's  use 
of  the  phallus  does  not  make  the  god 
phallic.  Dionysus  is  entirely  complete 
in  the  full  maturity  of  the  lesbian,  who 
is  the  work  that  was  woman's  intention 
at  last  accomplished. 

Footnotes 

1  Stanley  Edgar  Hyman,  "The  Ritual 
View  of  Myth  and  the  Mythic"  (citing 
Harrison,  Iliemis),  p.  138. 

^Hyman,  p.  138.  The  Greek  definition 
of  myth  (citing  Harrison). 

3lbid. 

4  A  dramatic  trilogy  by  Aeschylus:  Aga- 
memnon, Libation  Bearers,  Eumenides, 
dated  about  458  B.C.,  and  clearly  showing 
the  political  shift  to  patriarchy. 

^Orestes  is  being  pursued  by  the  Furies 
because  he  has  murdered  his  mother,  Cly- 
temnestra,  to  "avenge"  Clytcmnestra's  mur- 
der of  his  father,  Agamemnon.  Agamemnon 
himself  has  begun  the  whole  process  by 
ritually  slaughtering  his  and  Clytcmnestra's 
daughter,  Iphigenia.  Under  matriarchal  jus- 
tice only  Clytemnestra's  revenge  of  her 
daughter's  death  is  lawful.  For  a  full  ac- 
count of  the  the  Furics/Eumcnides'  role, 
see  "The  Furies"  by  Ginny  Berson,  Lesbian- 
ism and  the  Women's  Movement,  Baltimore: 
Diana  Press,  1975,  p.  15. 

°Sarah  B.  Pomeroy,  Goddesses,  Whores, 
Wives,  And  Slaves,  pp.  2-3. 

?As  in  the  comparatively  recent  version 
of  the  patriarchal  restructuring  of  the  myth, 
which  shows  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost  versus  Jesus  (Christ)  and  Mary  (Vir- 
gin). 

"Jane  Ellen  Harrison,  Themis,  pp.  34-35; 
referring   to   the   use   of  the    Dithyramb  in 


The  Bacchae  and  its  reflection  of  initiation 
rites. 

9lbid. 

10Harrison,  pp.  125-129. 

Hlbid. 

12 Youth  is  passion  and  pleasure  in  dis- 
covery; a  development  of  discovery  into 
work;  a  continuous  process  of  initiation: 
"One  secret  of  the  thrill  of  The  Bacchae  is 
that  the  god  is  always  shifting  his  shape. 
Dionysus  is  a  human  youth,  lovely,  with 
curled  hair,  but  in  a  moment  he  [sic]  is  a 
Snake,  a  Lion,  a  Wild  Bull,  a  Burning 
Flame."  (Harrison,  p.  129). 

1-^Zeus  attempts  to  imitate  the  "lover- 
equality"  of  the  original  myth  by  substitu- 
ting the  non-erotic-but  highly  sexual-power 
exchange  of  male-bonding  with  Dionysus 
in  the  Second  Birth. 


References 

Bidney,  David.  "Myth,  Symbolism,  and 
Truth,"  Myth,  A  Symposium,  Thomas  A. 
Sebeok,  cd.  Bloomington:  Indiana  Univer- 
sity Press,   1972. 

Cassirer,  Ernst.  Language  and  Myth, 
New  York:  Dover,  1953. 

Euripides.  The  Bacchae,  Philip  Vella- 
cott,  trans.  Baltimore:  Penguin,  1954. 

.  Medea,    Arthur  S.  Way,  trans. 

Cambridge:  Harvard  University  Press,  1947. 

Graves,  Robert.  The  Greek  Myths:  1. 
Baltimore:  Pelican,  1971. 

Harrison,  Jane  Ellen.  Themis,  A  Study 
of  the  Social  Origins  of  the  Greek  Religion. 
Gloucester,  Mass:  Peter  Smith,  1974.  (First 
published,  1912.) 

Hyman,  Stanley  Edgar.  "The  Ritual 
View  of  Myth  and  the  Mythic,"  Myth,  A 
Symposium,  Thomas  A.  Sebeok,  ed.  Bloom- 
ington: Indiana  University  Press,  1972. 

Jung,  C.G.  and  Kerenyi,  C.  Ussays  on  a 
Science  of  Mythology  (The  Myth  of  the 
Divine  Child  and  the  Mysteries  of  Eleusis). 
Princeton:  Bollingen  Series  XXII,  1971. 

Pomeroy,  Sarah  B.  Goddesses,  Whores, 
Wives,  And  Slaves.  New  York:  Schocken, 
1973. 


The  Lesbian:  The  Workmaker,  The  Leader/27 


Rank,  Otto.  The  Myth  of  the  Birth  of 
the  Hero  (and  other  writings).  Philip  Frcund, 
ed.  New  York:  Vintage  [n.d.  ] 

Slater,  Philip  E.  The  Glory  of  Hera 
(Greek  Mythology  and  the  Greek  Family). 
Boston:  Beacon,  1968. 


Bertha  Harris,  author  of  three  novels, 
Catching  Saradove,  Confessions  of 
Cherubino,  and  Lover  (Daughters,  Inc. 
1976),  is  director  of  Women's  Studies 
at  Richmond  College,  N.  Y.C. 


Don't  be  lea*  astray . . . 
Renew  your  Quest! 


/A^wiwWWy£y\ 


If  your  mailing  label  begins  with  2-4,  your  subscription  expires 
with  this  issue! 

If  you  haven't  sent  in  your  renewal,  please  fill  out  the  flap 
coupon  on  the  title  page  and  return  with  your  $9.00  check  today. 
Renewals  received  too  late  will  miss  the  Kaleidoscope  issue  and 
must  begin  as  a  new  subscription  starting  with  the  next  issue. 


28/Quest 


FEMINIST  LEADERS 


(€an'taHaU0n 


WATER 


There  was  a  time  when  I  knew 
what  a  leader  was,  how  he  acted, 
and  what  he  looked  like.  When  I 
was  six  years  old,  a  leader  was  a  man 
like  Robin  Hood.  He  was  a  leader 
because  he  robbed  from  the  rich  and 
gave  to  the  poor,  led  a  band  of 
merry  men,  lived  in  the  forest,  and 
was  always  very  brave.  And  he  had 
a  girl  friend,  too.  Her  name  was 
Maid  Marion  and  she  wore  long  dresses 
and  stayed  home  taking  care  of  the 
castle.   She  was  very  loyal. 

When    I    was    eight,    I    knew    what 


a  leader  was.  He  was  a  man  like 
Jesus  Christ.  Jesus  was  a  leader 
because  he  was  the  savior  of  mankind, 
and  he  led  a  band  of  not-so-merry 
men.  Christ  lived  in  the  desert,  defied 
a  ruthless  government,  and  was  always 
very  brave.  While  he  didn't  exactly 
have  a  girlfriend,  he  did  have  an  ador- 
ing follower  named  Mary  Magdalen. 
She  was  a  whore  who  washed  his 
feet  with  her  hair. 

As  the  years  went  by,  my  concep- 
tion of  leadership  really  didn't  change 
much.    And  my  concept  of  girlfriends 


by  Lorraine  Masterson 


photographs  by  Sunny  Wood 


Feminist  Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water/29 


remained  virtually  unaltered.  JFK 
and  his  Jacqueline  were  succeeded 
by  Norman  Mailer  and  his  American 
Dream.  The  last  time  I  knew  what 
a  leader  looked  like  was  in  1968.  He 
looked  like  Eugene  McCarthy  and 
he  was  going  to  change  the  shape 
of  US  politics.  McCarthy  had  a  wife. 
I  forget  her  name,  but  I  remember 
that  she  was  "cute,  petite,  blonde  and 
an    inexhaustible    campaign    worker." 

I  think  it  was  just  about  1968  when 
I  suffered  the  first  major  challenge 
to  my  concept  of  what  a  leader  looked 
like.  It  was  seriously  shaken  when  I 
read  The  Second  Sex,  published  for 
the  first  time  when  1  was  only  five 
years  old.  In  it,  I  confronted  an  image 
of  myself  I  had  denied  for  a  lifetime. 
Simone  de  Beauvoir's  book  was  an 
accusation;  the  words  shrieked  off 
every  burning  page.  "You  are  a 
woman  too,"  the  book  told  me,  "not 
just  physiologically,  but  psychologically 
and  spiritually;  in  your  dreams,  in 
your  love  affairs,  you  are  a  woman." 

It  was  not  easy  to  confront  the 
fact  that  not  just  my  breasts  and 
vagina  are  female:  so  is  my  head, 
my  soul,  my  entire  history.  In  retro- 
spect, this  self-revelation  strikes  me  as 
painfully  obvious,  but  at  that  time 
time  in  my  life  it  had  repercussions 
I'm  still  trying  to  deal  with.  One 
of  them  was  the  sudden  recognition 
that  all  those  years  I'd  spent  trudging 
through  the  woods  with  a  bow  and 
arrow,  or  standing  in  the  middle  of 
a  two-inch  deep  stream  with  a  sheet 
wrapped  around  me  pretending  I  was 
walking    on    water,    didn't    mean   any- 


thing at  all.  I  wasn't  Robin  Hood  or 
Jesus  Christ.  And  I  certainly  wasn't 
Norman  Mailer  or  JFK.  I  couldn't 
even  be  one  of  the  merry  men  who 
followed  these  people  around.  Instead, 
I  was  relegated  to  the  role  of  the 
girlfriend,  the  whore,  the  cheerleader, 
or  the  fantasy  lover.  I  was  fated  to 
become  one  of  those  people  I  had, 
until     then,    dismissed    and    despised. 

This  traumatic  discovery  precipita- 
ted the  second  phase  of  my  courtship 
of  the  elusive  image  of  the  leader. 
I  now  had  to  try  to  reconcile  the 
apparently  conflicting  images  of  the 
leader  and  the  female.  I  was  still  pon- 
dering this  question  when  my  under- 
graduate days  drew  to  a  close. 

In  1970,  I  left  Massachusetts  to 
pursue  the  life  of  a  ski  bum  out  in 
Colorado.  I  picked  up  a  job  as  a 
restaurant  manager  and  found  myself 
confusedly  practicing  a  mixed  bag  of 
management  styles  that  seemed  to 
have  little  to  do  with  the  romantic 
vision  of  leadership  that  had  haunted 
my  youth. 

One  of  my  most  dramatic  experi- 
ences with  the  problems  of  leadership, 
particularly  female  leadership,  occurred 
only  a  week  after  I  took  charge.  I 
faced  a  trio  of  angry  chefs  (all  white, 
male  and  older  than  I)  who  demanded 
that  I  stop  taking  the  side  of  the 
waitresses.  What  had  I  done  that 
precipitated  this  crisis?  I  had  sug- 
gested that  the  waitresses  meet  weekly 
with  me  to  discuss  service  problems 
arising  in  the  dining  room.  Then  and 
there  I  developed  my  first  theory  of 
leadership-a    leader    is    someone    who 


30/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  4,  spring,  1976 


can  mediate  in  rough  situations.  But 
my  chefs  were  already  telling  me  that 
as  a  woman  leader  I  was  automatically 
biased  in  favor  of  women. 

Leadership  and  the  Status  Quo 

When  I  returned  to  graduate  school, 
the  first  course  I  signed  up  for  was  a 
course  that  discussed  leadership.  The 
first  thing  1  learned  was  that  the 
images  of  leaders  that  had  carried  me 
through  my  youth  were  all  wet.  Lead- 
ership, I  was  told,  is  dependent  upon 
the  specific  context  in  which  it  arises, 
and  the  style  of  leadership  must  alter 
depending  upon  the  "maturity  level" 
of  the  group.  "Ahah,"  I  thought, 
remembering  images  of  Robin  Hood 
and  realizing  that  he  would  have  looked 
pretty  silly  in  a  tuxedo  holding  Jackie's 
hand     at     a    White    House    reception, 


"of  course  we  need  different  leaders 
for  different  situations!" 

Maturity  in  terms  of  leadership  was 
defined  as:  ".  .  .  achievement  motiva- 
tion, the  willingness  and  ability  to 
take  responsibility,  and  task  relevant 
education  and  experience  of  an  in- 
dividual of  group."  While  I  found 
the  definition  of  maturity  interesting, 
it  failed  to  explain  the  problems  I'd 
had  with  my  chefs  out  in  Colorado. 
Those  indignant  white,  male  chefs  had 
considerable  task  relevant  education 
and  experience;  it  was  their  socio- 
cultural  education,  their  views  ofwom- 
en-that  had  little  or  nothing  to  do 
with  the  task-that  made  leadership 
difficult  for  me. 

I  eagerly  plunged  into  the  numerous 
case  studies  assigned  for  the  course. 
The  studies  discussed  the  problems  of 
male  leaders  in  charge  of  other  males  ; 


Feminist  Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water/31 


in  short,  despite  the  his/her  pronoun 
fashionably  introduced  into  some  of 
the  recent  handouts,  only  one  of  the 
recommended  books  for  the  course 
was  co-authored  by  a  woman;  the 
message  came  through  loud  and  clear 
that  there  were  no  women  in  leader- 
ship positions,  and  damn  few  in  the 
band  of  merry  men. 

Still  hoping  that  me-the-woman  and 
me-the-leader  could  be  reconciled,  I 
turned  to  the  new  courses  on  "Women 
in  Management"  or  "Women  in  Leader- 
ship Roles"  that  were  springing  up 
across  the  country  to  find  a  solu- 
tion to  the  problem  described  by 
Simone  de  Beauvoir: 
It  must  be  said  that  the  independent 
woman  is  justifiably  disturbed  by  the 
idea  that  people  do  not  have  con- 
fidence in  her.  As  a  general  rule, 
the  superior  caste  is  hostile  to  new- 
comers from  the  inferior  caste:  whites 
will  not  consult  a  Negro  physician, 
nor  males  a  woman  doctor;  but  in- 
dividuals of  the  inferior  caste,  imbued 
with  a  sense  of  their  specific  inferiority 
and  often  full  of  resentment  toward 
one  of  their  kind  who  has  risen  above 
their  usual  lot,  will  also  prefer  to 
turn  to  the  masters.  Most  women, 
in  particular,  steeped  in  adoration 
for  man,  eagerly  seek  him  out  in  the 
person  of  the  doctor,  the  lawyer, 
the  office  manager  and  so  on.  Neither 
men  nor  women  like  to  be  under  a 
woman's  orders. 

At  these  workshops  and  confer- 
ences, I  garnered  a  great  many  inter- 
esting and  valuable  tips  for  the  woman 
who  wanted  to  make  it  as  a  leader-at 


least  as  a  leader  in  American  business. 
I  learned  that  in  order  to  get  to  the 
same  job  level  a  man  occupied,  I  had 
to  be  twice  as  smart  as  he,  and  work 
twice  as  hard.  I  learned  that  I  had  to 
tap  into  the  office  gossip  system  and 
keep  track  of  who  was  sleeping  with 
whom  in  the  office.  I  learned  that  I 
should  never  sleep  with  anybody  in 
the  office,  no  matter  how  attracted 
to  her/him  I  was.  I  learned  that 
I  must  dress  "attractively"  without 
being  "sexy";  that  I  must  never  burst 
into  tears  in  front  of  my  male  col- 
leagues; that  I  had  to  learn  more  about 
finances  and  profit  because  that  is 
the  area  where  we  women  seriously 
lack  skills.  I  learned  that  I  should 
stay  away  from  Women's  Liberation- 
ists,  who  "are  the  female  equivalents 
of  bomb-throwingTV  freaks  like  Abbie 
Hoffman.  .  .  .they're  just  the  lunatic 
rnnge. 

Another  book  I  read  in  my  search 
to  find  the  secret  to  successful  leader- 
ship in  the  American  business  world 
urged  me  to  look  for  ways  to  "fem- 
inize" a  job,  and  find  the  "woman's 
angle."  The  idea  of  feminizing  leader- 
ship was  beginning  to  make  more  and 
more  sense  to  me. 

Feminist  Leadership  and 
Positions  of  Power 

During  this  time,  I  was  beginning 
to  discover  different  kinds  of  leaders 
in  different  places.  I  began  to  form 
a  different  image  when  I  used  the  word 
"leader"-an  image  that  looked  noth- 
ing like  that  recalled  from  my  younger 


32/Quest 


days.  I  began  to  think  about  women 
like  Bella  Abzug,  Joanne  Little,  Elaine 
Noble,  Shulamith  Firestone,  Rita  Mae 
Brown,  Simone  de  Beauvoir  and  hun- 
dreds of  others  who  are  leaders  in  a 
sense  different  from  any  I've  ever 
known.  These  women  are  part  of  a 
new  leadership  that  I  have  started  to 
call  feminist  leadership. 

I  think  I  recognized  this  new  fem- 
inist leadership  for  the  first  time  when 
I  read  a  press  release  written  by 
Ti-Grace  Atkinson  describing  her  rea- 
sons for  resigning  the  presidency  of 
the  New  York  chapter  of  NOW: 
We  want  to  destroy  the  positions  of 
power.  To  alter  the  condition  oj 
women  involves  the  shifting  of  over 
half  the  population.  We  complain 
about  the  unequal  power  relationships 
between  mefi  and  women.  To  change 
that  relationship  requires  a  redefinition 
of  humanity,  of  all  the  relationships 
within  humantiy.  We  want  to  get 
rid  of  positions  of  power,  not  get  up 
into  those  positions.  The  fight  against 
unequal  power  relationships  between 
men  and  womeii  yiecessitates  fighting 
unequal  power  everyplace:  between 
men  and  women  (for  feminists  espe- 
cially), but  also  betweoi  men  and  men, 
women  and  women,  between  black 
and  white,  and  rich  and  poor. 

What  kind  of  leadership,  if  we 
can  even  call  it  leadership,  can  be 
found  in  a  world  where  we  have 
"destroyed  the  positions  of  power"? 
Many  of  us  have  learned  from  experi- 
ence that  unstructured  groups  are  not 
an  alternative  to  hierarchical,  leader- 
dominated    groups.      We've    seen    that 


the  lack  of  a  formal  structure  simply 
leads  to  an  informal  structure  that  is 
often  more  manipulative  and  unscru- 
pulous  than  any  overt  form  of  control. 
The  issue  becomes  one  of  determining 
the  best  means  to  encourage  women 
to  stop  being  either  followers  or  lead- 
ers, to  ".  .  .  unlearn  passivity  (to 
eliminate  'followers'),  and  to  share 
special  skills  or  knowledge  (to  avoid 
'leaders')."7 

While  I  see  the  need  to  destroy 
existing  leader/follower  relationships, 
I  think  we  confront  the  problem  of 
encouraging  every  woman  to  under- 
stand that  she  must  be  her  own 
leader,  and  that  in  doing  so,  she  can 
become  an  inspiration  to  other  wom- 
en. A  new  feminst  leadership  can 
provide  all  women  with  the  courage 
and  guidance  needed  in  order  to  grow 
stronger.  1  want  to  do  away  not  with 
leadership,  but  with  a  kind  of  leader- 
ship that  controls  because  it  takes 
its  own  superiority  for  granted. 

One  of  the  special  qualities  that 
distinguishes  feminist  leadership  from 
traditional  leadership  is  its  essentially 
educational  nature.  If  we  as  women 
are  working  to  create  a  world  in 
which  power  and  responsibility  are 
shared  by  all  people,  then  we  must 
understand  the  process  by  which  people 
become  leaders,  and  thereby  lead  our- 
selves and  each  other  toward  that  goal. 

We  know  we  are  most  human  in 
those  moments  when  we  are  taking 
control  of  our  own  lives  and  expressing 
ourselves  freely.  The  chasm  between 
the  personal  and  the  political  begins 
as    a    tiny    crack    the    first    time    we 


Feminist  Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water/33 


decide  not  to  say  something  important 
to  us  because  it  would  "waste  every- 
one's time."  It  isn't  long  before  we 
have  forgotten  the  joy  of  controlling 
our  own  lives. 

This  tendency  to  deny  the  indivi- 
dual-in  ourselves  and  others-creates  a 
world  of  leaders  and  followers.  We 
learn  to  listen  to  "the  little  voice  of 
shame  that  makes  us  wait  for  someone 
else    to  speak  first,  to  get  a  direction 


from  someone  else.  Here  is  where 
.  .  .  power  gets  lost  every  minute  in 
all  our  social  institutions,  in  all  the 
behavioral  roles  we  accept  just  to  live 
from  day  to  day." 

If  the  world  feminists  want  to 
create  is  one  in  which  the  personal 
and  the  political  have  been  united, 
in  which  women,  children  and  men 
can  always  experience  the  freedom  and 
responsibility  of  controlling  their  own 


34/Quest 


lives,  we  must  first  ask  ourselves  what 
is  the  process  an  individual  must  ex- 
perience before  she  even  wants  to 
become  the  only  leader  of  her  life. 
Once  we've  identified  the  process,  we 
can  identify  the  feminist  leader  as  one 
who  helps  an  individual  go  through  it. 

Freire's  Leadership  Model 

Paulo  Freire  is  a  Brazilian  educator 
who  taught  illiterate  peasants  how  to 
read  and  write,  and  in  doing  so, 
helped  them  begin  to  take  control  of 
their    world.  He    believes    that    as 

conscious  human  beings,  we  exist  in  a 
state  of  dynamic  interaction  with  our 
environment.  We  act  on  the  world  and 
transform  it,  and  are  in  turn  affected 
by  our  changed  environment. 

However,  the  experience  of  oppres- 
sion creates  a  situation  in  which  the 
"oppressive  reality  absorbs  those  with- 
in it."  Submerged  in  oppression, 
people  forget  that  social  reality  is 
created  by  human  beings  and  therefore 
can  be  altered  by  human  beings.  The 
crippling  social  reality  created  by  an 
oppressive  system  communicates  to 
people  that  they  are  the  victims  of 
an  unalterable  world  order.  Fatalism, 
apathy,  passivity,  and  despair  are  the 
inevitable  results  reflected  in  phrases 
like,  "It's  always  been  like  this;  it 
can't  be  changed." 

The  fatalism  and  passivity  engen- 
dered by  oppression  also  allow  the 
oppressed  to  internalize  a  self-denig- 
rating image  made  up  of  the  percep- 
tions and  assumptions  of  the  oppressor: 
if  she   weren't   an   inferior   being,   she 


wouldn't  be  in  this  terrible  situation. 

The  tendency  to  adopt  the  oppres- 
sors' values  is  another  characteristic  of 
the  oppressed  individual  at  this  level 
of    consciousness.  It    means    that 

the  oppressed  idolize  not  only  the 
power  of  the  oppressor,  but  also  want 
his  respect  and  admire  his  personality, 
appearance,  and  values.  The  oppressor 
becomes  everyone's  model  of  human- 
ity, and  thus  a  woman  glows  with 
pride  when  she  is  told  that  she  "thinks 
like  a  man."  Thus  though  Freire 
developed  his  theory  of  oppression 
through  working  in  Brazil,  it  fits  the 
attitudes  of  pre-conscious  women  in 
America  very  well. 

The  only  way  to  emerge  from  an 
oppressive  reality  is  through  a  process 
that  Freire  terms  "praxis:  reflection 
and  action  upon  the  world  in  order  to 
transform  it. "12  The  first  step  toward 
praxis  occurs  when  people  begin  to 
understand  that  they  have  been  victims 
of  an  oppressive  social  reality,  and 
cease  to  blame  themselves  for  their 
positions  within  it.  The  oppressed 
individual  begins  to  assert  Her  identity 
in  her  own  terms,  rather  than  simply 
imitating  the  oppressor. 

Consciousness-raising  groups  have 
provided  women  with  the  opportunity 
to  explore  and  create  a  feminist  iden- 
tity apart  from  the  definitions  of 
women  created  by  men.  Women  have 
begun  to  explore  the  sources  of  their 
oppression  and  worked  to  establish  a 
new  woman-identified  image  of  them- 
selves. The  praxis  has  begun,  but 
we  must  do  more  than  reflect  upon  our 
social    reality:    we   must  act   upon   it. 


Feminist  Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water/35 


Through  praxis,  we  commit  our- 
selves to  transforming  our  social  real- 
ity, and  reach  a  state  of  'critical 
consciousness'  characterized  by  rethink- 
ing which  perceives  reality  as  process, 
as  transformation  .  .  .  thinking  which 
does  not  separate  itself  from  action. . .  ." 
Freire  terms  a  leadership  which  can 
help  oppressed  people  progress  to 
critical  consciousness,  "revolutionary 
leadership."1^ 

The  Oppression  of  Women: 
The  Lost  Identity 

Trying  to  develop  a  critical  con- 
sciousness is  an  extraordinarily  difficult 
task.  Freire,  through  his  work  with 
Third  World  people,  recognized  that 
oppression  reduced  people  to  objects 
blind  to  their  own  ability  to  transform 
reality.  Yet  they  can  recognize  the 
historical  process  which  created  their 
oppression  and  can  move  toward  crit- 
ical consciousness.  This,  however,  is 
considerably  more  difficult  in  the  case 
of  women.  At  all  times  and  in  all 
cultures,  we  have  been  treated  as 
objects,  as  the  "inessential  other"; 
in  every  culture,  we  are  invented  by 
men  just  as  the  oppressor  always  in- 
vents the  oppressed-by  attributing  to 
the  oppressed  traits  and  qualities  that 
justify  their  oppression.  But  because 
our  oppression  is  grounded  in  our 
physiology  rather  than  in  historical 
accident,  it  is  more  difficult  for  us  to 
see  that  it  does  indeed  result  from 
historical  process.  While  the  oppres- 
sion of  the  Third  World  has  its  basis  in 
economics,  and  was  later  justified  by 


stereotypes  and  myths,  the  oppression 
of  women  seems  to  be  a  condition 
which  came  out  of  the  mist  of  prime- 
val human  history. 

Because  the  oppression  of  women 
goes  as  deep  as  human  culture  itself, 
the  feminist  revolutionary  leader  must 
be  willing  to  pursue  the  origins  of  her 
own  oppression  into  the  realm  of 
mythology,  spirituality,  and  philoso- 
phy. Because  our  oppression  is  based 
on  physiology,  adhesion  to  the  values 
of  the  oppressor  can  take  a  particularly 
virulent  form  of  self-hatred  in  women. 
In  our  devotion  to  the  male  oppressor 
we  cannot  help  but  come  to  view 
our  own  bodies  as  that  part  of  our- 
selves which  prevents  us  from  assuming 
the  oppressor's  superior  role.  We  come 
to  see  our  bodies  as  loathsome  and 
inferior. 

If  acting  upon  and  transforming 
the  world  is  the  essence  of  human 
freedom,  then  we  who  are  defined 
as  'object'  are  prevented  from  taking 
responsibility  for  our  lives  and  are 
denied  our  humanity.  In  other  words, 
the  norm  for  humanity  is  the  same 
as  the  norm  for  the  male;  women  are 
something  other  than  the  norm-and 
have  been  defined  by  just  those  traits 
that  deviate  from  the  "human"  norm.  1 4 
"In  actuality,  the  relation  of  the  two 
sexes  is  not  quite  like  that  of  two 
electrical  poles,  for  man  represents 
both  the  positive  and  the  neutral, 
as  is  indicated  by  the  common  use 
of  'man'  to  designate  human  beings  in 
general  whereas  woman  represents  only 
the  negative,  defined  by  limiting  cri- 
teria, without  reciprocity.  .  .  ."15 


36/Quest 


What,  then,  is  the  real  nature  of 
the  female  half  of  the  human  race? 
And  how  do  we,  as  women,  after  all 
these  thousands  of  years,  begin  to 
define  ourselves?  In  a  world  where 
art  means  male  art,  culture  means  male 
culture,  language  means  male  language- 
when  every  tool  we  need  to  discover 
our  heritage  is  a  male  tool-we  must 
find  the  courage  and  the  patience  to 
challenge  all  our  assumptions,  values, 
and  discoveries-to  scrutinize  every  con- 
cept and  idea  we  use.  As  we  begin 
to  explore  the  sources  of  our  oppres- 
sion, the  tools  of  the  search  will  be 
as  important  as  anything  we  find 
along  the  way. 

The  female/woman  person  who  e- 
merges  at  the  end  of  that  search  may 
or  may  not  resemble  the  creatures 
called  women  now.  We  cannot  know 
now,  at  the  beginning  of  our  search, 
who  we  can  become,  or  what  we  are 
capable  of  doing.  We  can  only  know 
that  being  human  is  an  ongoing  pro- 
cess of  self-definition,  and  the  human 
person  known  as  woman  must  be 
self-defined. 


MONTHLY  ACTION 

BULLETIN 
$10.00  per  yr« 

FREE  SAMPLE 


The  Woman  Activist,  Inc. 

2310  Barbour  Road 
Falls  Church,  VA     22043 

703/573/8716 


Pedagogy  of  the  Oppressed: 
A  Tool  for  Liberation 

The  feminist  revolutionary  leader  is 
a  person  who  has  begun  to  assess  the 
tools  that  must  be  used  in  our  search 
for  woman  identity-ana  who  has  re- 
cognized that  this  is  a  process  that 
cannot  be  completed  alone.  We  are 
seeking  our  commonality  as  women 
as  we  examine  our  past,  present,  and 
future,  and  must  do  it  with  other 
women  rather  than  alone.  Because 
our  social  reality  is  created  by  the 
collective  consciousness  of  all  who 
exist  within  that  reality,  there  can 
be  no  truly  humanizing  transformation 
of  social  reality  unless  we  work  in 
solidarity  and  reiect  individual  solu- 
tions. 

In  Pedagogy  of  the  Oppressed,  Freire 
describes  a  revolutionary  process  which 
can  provide  feminist  revolutionary  lead- 
ership with  a  methodology,  a  "tool," 
to  discover  our  collective  woman-iden- 
tity and  therefore  become  the  subject 
of  the  social  reality  in  which  we 
exist.  According  to  Freire,  this  percep- 
tion of  ourselves  as  subject  is  the 
prerequisite  for  achieving  true  liber- 
ation. 

There  are  two  distinct  phases  in 
Freire's  pedgaogy  of  the  oppressed. 
In  the  first  stage,  we  must  develop 
a  consciousness  of  our  own  oppression 
and  its  true  causes.  The  primary 
purpose  of  this  stage  is  to  help  us 
perceive  the  oppressor  within  our- 
selves. In  the  second  stage,  the  ped- 
agogy of  the  oppressed  becomes  the 
pedagogy  of  all  people,  and  insures  a 


Feminist  Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water/37 


process  of  permanent,  on-going  libera- 


tion. 


The  process  within  which  the  fem- 
inist revolutionary  leader  can  bring 
other  women  to  the  moment  of  self- 
discovery  is  called  "dialogical  educa- 
tion." In  it,  "the  revolutionary  lead- 
ership establishes  a  permanent  relation- 
ship of  dialogue  with  the  oppressed." 
The  commitment  many  feminists  have 
already  made  to  non-hierarchy,  con- 
sensual decision-making,  shared  lead- 
ership, anti-capitalist  ideology,  and 
other  kinds  of  egalitarian  structures, 
indicates  that  feminist  revolutionary 
leadership  has  already  begun  to  use 
some  of  these  principles. 

There  are  three  major  aspects  to 
this  dialogical  or  problem-posing  educ- 
tion. First,  there  must  be  the  elimina- 
tion of  the  power  disparity  between 
teacher  and  student  (or  leader  and 
oppressed).  This  cannot  be  achieved 
as  long  as  the  leader-teacher  sees  her- 
self as  one  who  possesses  a  truth 
that  must  be  conveyed  to  the  student. 
In  assuming  the  role  of  an  authority 
who  interprets  social  reality  for  them, 
the  teacher  denies  the  students  ex- 
istence as  subjects,  because  she  denies 
them  the  opportunity  to  achieve  prax- 
is by  reflecting  and  acting  together  on 
the  social  reality  in  which  they  exist. 
Thus  the  oppressed  are  condemned  to 
continue  in  a  passive  role-they  are 
once  again  made  victims  of  their  envir- 
onment. 

The  second  major  aspect  of  dial- 
ogical education  is  that  the  knowledge 
to  be  examined  or  shared  is  not  the 
private  property  of  any  one  member  of 


the  group  but  something  brought  to 
the  group  and  examined  by  the  group 
together.  It  is  important  to  remem- 
ber that  for  Freire,  humanity  and 
the  social  reality  (culture)  it  creates 
are  in  a  continual  process  of  be- 
coming. To  be  valid,  then,  any  know- 
ledge brought  before  a  group  must  be 
reflected  upon  and  then  acted  upon 
by  the  group-even  if  only  to  con- 
firm the  reliability  of  the  knowledge 
it  has  examined.  In  this  process 
we  must  be  willing  to  re-examine  all 
the  truths  we  take  most  for  granted. 
Third,  Freire  maintains  that  the 
authentic  revolutionary  leader  does 
not  focus  her  energies  upon  trying 
to  change  the  oppressed,  because  by 
doing  so,  she  reduces  the  oppressed  to 
objects.  Instead  her  role  is  to  work 
with  the  oppressed  to  organize  and 
"re-present"  the  things  we  must  know 
in  order  to  change  social  reality.  As 
feminist  leaders,  we  must  not  make 
the  mistake  of  focusing  our  attentions 
and  efforts  so  exclusively  upon  an 
ideal  of  the  liberated  woman  that  we 
overlook  the  "concrete,  existential, 
present  situation"  of  real  women. "1° 
Freire  suggests  that  the  way  to  keep 
a  focus  on  the  real  situation  is  to 
merge  the  process  and  content  of 
dialogical  education  into  what  he  calls 
the  "great  generative  themes  of  an 
epoch."  Freire  believes  that  the  fun- 
damental generative  theme  of  our  ep- 
och is  domination,  which  in  turn 
implies  its  opposite,  liberation.  As 
long  as  the  oppressed  are  submerged 
and  unable  to  see  that  the  limits  on 
their  freedom  can  be  changed  by  their 


38/Quest 


own  efforts,  the  generative  themes 
are  hidden  from  them.  Because  the 
themes  are  the  concrete  representation 
of  praxis  itself,  the  oppressed  will  be 
unable  to  perceive  the  themes  until 
they  have  developed  the  level  of  crit- 
ical consciousness  that  will  allow  them 
to  participate  in  transforming  their 
reality   and   creating  their  own  libera- 


tion. 


Beginning  a  Strategy 


The  fundamental  generative  theme 
that  we  as  feminists  confront  is  that 
of  patriarchy-which  implies  its  op- 
posite-feminist liberation.  Patriarchy 
differs  from  culture  to  culture  and 
class  to  class  both  in  the  degree  to 
which  it  manifests  itself  and  the  ways 
it  oppresses  people.  Yet  there  is  no 
culture  on  earth  where  women  are  not, 
at   some   level,   valued   less   than  men. 

Feminist  revolutionary  leadership 
can  use  Freire's  methodology  to  trans- 
form patriarchal  oppression  into  true 
liberation.  Of  course  the  specific 
ways  in  which  we  choose  to  utilize 
this  tool  will  differ  from  leader  to 
leader  and  place  to  place.  But  I 
believe  that  feminists  have  already 
seen  its  applicability.  The  conscious- 
ness-raising group  and  its  structure 
grew  out  of  an  intuitive  understanding 
on  the  part  of  oppressed  women  that 
we  must  begin  to  fight  oppression  by 
organizing  around  the  issues  of  our 
oppression  as  we  see  them.  In  the 
first  place,  the  non-hierarchical  struc- 
ture of  consciousness-raising  groups 
reflects  a  deep  understanding  that  we 
must  grapple  with  our  social  reality  as 


subjects,  without  the  mediation  of  a 
leader,  since  leaders  deny  us  the  exper- 
ience of  praxis.  Second,  the  fact 
that  we  chose  to  come  together  in 
groups  at  all  indicates  that  we  recognize 
the  need  to  work  with  other  women  to 
transform  the  reality  of  patriarchal 
domination.  Finally,  though  many 
CR  groups  have  found  it  very  difficult 
to  make  the  transition  from  the  mem- 
bers' personal  concerns  to  political 
action,  Freire's  analysis  of  praxis  pro- 
vides a  conceptual  framework  that 
would  allow  CR  groups  to  make  the 
transition. 

Moreover  the  process  is  not  limited 
to  CR  groups.  Feminist  revolutionary 
leaders  should  also  be  able  to  employ 
the  concepts  of  dialogical  education 
in  a  variety  of  situations.  We  must 
be  prepared  for  the  inevitable  fum- 
blings  and  false  paths  as  we  seek  the 
best  way  to  use  the  concepts  of  dialogi- 
cal education  to  develop  a  feminist 
revolutionary  force  capable  of  trans- 
forming patriarchy  into  the  liberation 
of  all  women. 

What  I've  outlined  here  is  less  a 
strategy  than  a  concept.  Yet  I  believe 
it  can  begin  to  help  those  of  us 
looking  for  leadership  models  find  a 
basis  for  our  actions.  Because  dialogi- 
cal education  is  based  upon  a  humanity 


L  M00N5T0RM 


Sen <J    „. 
W't'f1tfQnd 


&  Lows,  f*\o. 

754  «*  issue 
"TSo  /  (,  issues 

P.oBoxVAjo/ 
Tow»«fc.6*o>je  .S-hrtK>n 
Sf.LouiSj  Mo.  &JIIO 
NflpE - 

fccUre&s 

S4ate lip 


Feminist  Leaders  Can't  Walk  on  Water/39 


that  is  forever  in  the  process  of  be- 
coming more  fully  human  through  its 
own  liberation,  the  strategies  must 
also  be  evolving—changing  with  the 
needs  and  perceptions  of  the  women 
with  whom  we  work  and  fight. 


Footnotes 

ISimone  de  Beauvoir,  The  Second  Sex 
(New  York:  Vintage  Books,  1974). 

^Paul  Hershey  and  Kenneth  Blanchard, 
Management  of  Organizational  Behavior 
(Englewood  Cliffs:  Prentice  Hall,  1972) 
p.     134. 

^Simone  de  Beauvoir,  The  Second  Sex, 
pp.  779-780. 

^Robert  Townsend,  Up  the  Organization 
(Greenwich,  Ct.,  Fawcett,  1971);  see  also 
Caroline  Bird,  Everything  a  Woman  Needs  to 
Know  to  Get  Paid  What  She's  Worth,  ed. 
Helen  Mandelbaum  (New  York:  Bantam, 
1974). 

^Ti-Grace  Atkinson,  Amazon  Odyssey 
New  York:  Links  Books,  1974),  pp.  10-11. 

^See  Joreen,  "The  Tyranny  of  Structure- 
lessness,"  Second  Wave,  II,  1,  131. 

7peggy  Kornegger,  "Anarchism:  The 
Feminist  Connection,"  Second  Wave  IV,  1, 
33. 

°Judy  Henderson,  "On  Integrating  the 
Personal  and  the  Political,"  Socialism/ 'l-'em- 
nism,  Papers  from  the  New  American  Move- 
ment Conference  on  Feminism  and  Social- 
ism, 1972,  p.  8. 

"Paulo  Freire,  Pedagogy  of  the  Oppressed 
tr.  Myra  Bergman  Ramos  (New  York:  Sea- 
bury  Press,  1974). 

10Ibid.,  p.  36. 

llIbid.,  p.  30. 

Ulbid,  p.  36. 

13Ibid.,  p.  81. 

l^Sce  Phyllis  Chesler,  Women  and  Mad- 
ness (New  York:  Avon  Books,  1972). 


15Simone  De  Beauvoir,  The  Second 
Sex,  p.  sviii. 

loPaulo  Freire,  Pedagogy  of  the  Op- 
pressed,   p.    13. 

17 Ibid.,    p.    67. 

18Ibid„    p.    82. 

Lorraine  Master  son  is  a  graduate 
student  in  the  School  of  Education  at 
the  University  of  Massachusetts,  with 
a  special  interest  in  adult  education 
and  life-long  learning. 


WOMEN  BEHIND  BARS 

AN  ORGANIZING  TOOL 

...  an  important  new  booklet  which  provides 
an  overview  of  conditions  women  face  in  this 
country's  jails  and  prisons  with  an  eye  toward 
what  can  and  is  being  done  to  bring  about  fun- 
damental change.    Included  are  over  100  cap- 
sule descriptions  of  groups  giving  prisoners 
political  support  and  services,  such  as  legal  ed- 
ucation projects,  bail  funds  and  prisoner  unions. 
Articles  detail  the  problems  of  female  prisoners, 
analyse  the  role  of  prisons  in  society,  suggest 
organizing  tactics,  and  outline  the  legal  system 
of  the  People's  Republic  of  China.   There  are 
also  sketches  of  six  U.S.  women  political  pris- 
oners and  interviews  with  three  ex-cons.  An- 
notated listings  describe  print  and  audio-visual 
resources.   56pp.,  $1 .75,  free  to   prisoners. 
Resources  for  Community  Change,  PO  Box 
21066,  Washington,  DC  20009 


In  Quest's  Report  to  Our  Readers  1., 
Volume  II,  Number  3,  we  omitted  the  dates 
of  the  financial  statement  on  Page  41.  The 
financial  statement  was  for  the  nine  months 
ending  September  30,  1975. 


40/Quest 


Report  to  Our  Readers  2. 


In  our  last  issue,  "Organizations 
and  Strategies,"  we  discussed  the  fi- 
nancial development  of  Quest.  Here 
we  would  like  to  explain  the  evolu- 
tion of  our  editorial  and  administrative 
process.  The  feminist  movement  has 
placed  much  emphasis  on  process,  rec- 
ognizing that  success  in  achieving 
goals,  such  as  the  setting  up  and  run- 
ning of  a  particular  project,  is  not  a 
full  measure  of  movement  effective- 
ness. In  order  to  structure  new  institu- 
tions, organizational  models,  leader- 
ship concepts  and,  most  importantly, 
power  relationships,  feminist  groups 
must  examine  their  own  internal  mech- 
anisms as  part  of  an  evolving,  experi- 
ential approach  to  change.  Thus  it  is 
especially  appropriate  that  Quest  dis- 
cuss its  internal  process  within  these 
issues  on  organization  and  leadership. 

Quest's  process  is  tied  internally  to 
its  historical  development.  The  journal 
grew  from  a  series  of  meetings  com- 
menced in  November  1972,  called  by 
feminists  in  the  Washington  area  who 
wanted  to  find  a  way  to  further  the 
movement's  political  development.  Af- 
ter months  of  discussion,  we  decided 
that  the  movement  needed  a  national 
forum  for  feminist  analysis  and  ideo- 
logy that  was  linked  with  practical 
feminist  experience.  As  a  group  of 
activists,  we  were  primarily  interested 
in  movement  building,  and  not,  per  se, 
in  producing  a  journal. 


A  number  of  important  factors 
have  affected  Quest's  process.  First, 
the  original  group  had  a  common 
(although  nqt  identical)  politics  which 
recognized  the  importance  of  class, 
lesbian  feminism  and  power  to  fem- 
inist ideology.  We  had  also,  by  this 
time,  worked  together  over  a  period  of 
months  and  had  started  Quest  on  a 
solid  base  of  trust  in  one  another. 
Too,  we  had  a  common  history  of 
political  activism,  had  stable  ties  to 
D.C.,  and  most  of  us  had  already  made 
initial-if  differing— decisions  about  out- 
side jobs  vs.  jobs  within  the  move- 
ment. All  these  factors  led  to  group 
cohesiveness  and  to  a  long-range  com- 
mitment to  producing  a  high  quality 
journal.  Over  the  life  of  Quest,  our 
staff  has  changed  relatively  little;  this 
has  provided  the  continuity  necessary 
for  the  gradual  development  and  re- 
finement of  a  process  which  is  suited 
to  the  needs  both  of  individuals  and 
of  producing  a  journal.  Moreover,  we 
represent  a  diversity  in  class,  age,  sex- 
ual preference,  family  responsibility, 
etc.,  which  has  insured  a  varied  per- 
spective on  feminist  issues  and  analy- 
ses. 

Our  process  sprang  initially  from 
certain  necessities,  as  well  as  from 
political  analysis.  That  is,  to  some  ex- 
tent our  process  was  determined  by 
the  practicalities  of  putting  out  a  jour- 
nal and  by   each   individual's  outside 


Report  to  Our  Readers,  Part  11/41 


commitments  (e.g.,  many  of  us  have 
full-time,  outside  jobs).  A  particularly 
important  factor  in  our  early  develop- 
ment was  that  we  received  both  office 
space  and  two  salaries  from  the  Insti- 
tute for  Policy  Studies;  one  of  our 
staff  is  an  Institute  fellow  who  was 
entitled  to  hire  another  person  to 
work  with  her.  The  rest  of  us,  how- 
ever, were  not  paid  staff,  which  im- 
mediately raised  the  question  of  time 
commitment.  After  discussing  Quest's 
needs  and  the  time  each  person  had 
available,  we  agreed  that  with  some 
flexibility,  each  staff  person  would 
spend  between  15  and  20  hours  week- 
ly on  Quest.  This  commitment  is,  and 
always  has  been,  enforced  through  a 
system  of  accountability,  trust  and 
responsibility,  integrally  related  to  our 
leadership  structure. 

Quest  is  not  a  collective  in  that  we 
do  acknowledge  leadership  and  are  not 
all  involved  in  making  all  decisions. 
In  essence  we  have  a  system  of  shift- 
ing, horizontal  leadership  based  on  our 
individual  skills  and  time  commit- 
ments. The  first  process  we  apply  in 
this  kind  of  leadership  is  assignment 
of  specific  areas  of  responsibility. 
This  involves  learning  how  to  recog- 
nize, acknowledge  and  further  develop 
our  different  skills.  For  instance,  we 
found  that  while  some  of  us  could 
edit,  others  were  good  at  proofreading, 
art  and  layout,  promotion,  and  bus- 
iness managing.  We  see  ourselves  as 
equals  in  that  we  all  perform  essential 
tasks  for  Quest,  but  we  do  not  see 
ourselves  as  identical.  Each  individual 
staff  member  must  take  responsibility 


for  the  work  within  some  given  area. 
In  that  work,  she  is  delegated  authority 
to  make  certain  kinds  of  decisions  and 
handles  both  the  creative  and  mun- 
dane parts  of  the  task.  Thus,  while  we 
do  not  all  do  the  same  things,  our  div- 
ision of  labor  is  horizontal  and  no  one 
does  only  the  "best"  or  the  "worst" 
parts  of  a  job. 

Ultimately,  of  course,  each  member 
is  accountable  to  the  group;  most 
importantly,  we  have  found  that  this 
shifting  responsibility  can  only  work 
if  we  trust  each  other  to  fulfill  our 
commitments.  The  resolution  of  which 
decisions  were  to  be  made  by  the 
whole  group  and  which  by  individuals 
evolved  as  it  became  clear  that  the 
group  was  spending  too  much  time  on 
day-to-day  decisions.  Gradually,  as  we 
became  comfortable  with  each  other's 
particular  roles,  we  also  became  com- 
fortable with  the  idea  that  certain 
problems  did  not  have  to  be  brought 
to  the  whole  staff.  All  policy,  edi- 
torial, copy,  staff  and  fundraising  de- 
cisions, however,  are  always  made  by 
the  entire  staff. 

Although  we  do  not  have  a  hier- 
archy, those  who  work  full-time  on 
Quest  have  more  responsibility  for  and 
knowledge  of  the  intricacies  and  prob- 
lems of  day-to-day  operations,  and 
therefore,  have  more  decision-making 
authority.  Different  personalities  tend 
to  have  more  power  to  affect  decisions 
for  the  whole  group.  There  is  some 
correlation  between  full-time  staff  vs. 
part-time  staff  and  this  power  balance, 
which  may  be  a  function  of  per- 
sonality, is  also  probably  accentuated 


42/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  4,  spring,  1976 


by  the  fact  that  the  degree  of  expertise 
and  familiarity  with  a  particular  prob- 
lem affects  persuasiveness.  In  any 
case,  we  are  committed  to  developing 
forms  of  interaction  that  take  personal 
needs  into  account.  For  instance,  we 
attempt  to  work  out  new  job  assign- 
ments before  dissatisfaction  reaches 
crisis  proportions.  This  is  done,  in 
part,  through  criticism/self-criticism 
which  follows  each  of  our  weekly 
meetings.  This  process  is  meant  to 
draw  out  constructive  suggestions  a- 
bout  how  our  meetings  could  run  more 
efficiently  as  well  as  individual  prob- 
lems, cither  with  staff  members  or 
with  the  group  process.  For  instance, 
we  realized  that  our  meetings  would 
run  more  smoothly  if  we  had  a  con- 
venor (rotating  weekly)  responsible 
for  starting  the  meeting  and  keeping 
things  moving.  Being  a  convenor  is  a 
chore  shared  by  all,  not  a  status.  It  is 
done  for  the  sake  of  efficiency,  not 
power. 

Similarly,  we  schedule  periodic  re- 
examinations of  our  job  responsi- 
bilities, necessary  in  part  because  job 
needs  change  as  we  grow,  because  we 
have  farmed  out  jobs  previously  per- 
formed by  staff  members,  because 
some  jobs  grow  too  large  to  be  handled 
by  one  person,  because  we  discover 
our  skills  lie  elsewhere,  or  simply 
because  we  need  a  change.  And  also, 
we  have  learned  methods  of  organ- 
ization from  talking  to  other  groups. 
For  example,  the  Valley  Women's 
Center  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  sug- 
gested both  criticism/self-criticism  and 
the     idea     that     we     might    be    more 


efficient  if  we  began  our  meetings  with 
substantive  material  and  ended  with 
business. 

As  the  need  and  desire  for  add- 
itional staff  developed,  we  had  to  set 
out  more  specific  criteria  for  staff. 
We  developed  written  criteria  aimed 
both  at  evaluating  persons  interested 
in  joining  Quest  (e.g.,  extent  of  pre- 
vious political  experience,  prior  work 
with  Quest,  etc.)  and  at  giving  those 
interested  an  accurate  picture  of  the 
commitment  we  would  expect.  We  are 
still  grappling  with  how  to  integrate 
new  people  into  the  journal  so  that 
there  is  a  meaningful  basis  for  evalu- 
ation and  contribution  on  both  sides. 
The  idea  of  requiring  substantial  in- 
volvement with  the  journal  before 
joining  the  staff  has  both  enabled  new 
staff  to  become  familiar  with  our 
process  and  has  allowed  for  conti- 
nuity. It  has  also  allowed  political 
trust  to  develop  so  that  new  staff  can 
come  into  our  process  on  an  equal 
basis. 

We  have  found  that  a  number  of 
decisions  are  dictated  by  business,  edi- 
torial and  political  necessity.  Before 
the  publication  of  our  first  issue,  most 
of  the  business  of  Quest  could  be 
handled  by  one  person,  and  the  rest  of 
us  spent  our  time  on  copy,  fundraising 
and  substantive  development.  As  the 
business  of  the  journal  expanded,  we 
assigned  one  full-time  person  over-all 
supervision  of  the  business  and  office 
work,  and  other  business-related  jobs 
had  to  be  divided  among  us.  Yet  the 
business  end  has  continued  to  expand, 
necessitating    both    a    mailing    and    a 


Report  to  Our  Readers,  Part  11/43 


distribution  service.  And  still  there  is  a 
desperate  need  for  one  or  more  new 
full-time  persons  in  the  office.  Last 
fall,  Quest  hired  its  first  full-time 
worker  paid  from  Quest  funds-specifi- 
cally  accountable  to  Quest  alone  for 
her  salary  and  whose  sole  job  commit- 
ment is  to  Quest. 

Our  editorial  policy  has  undergone 
similar  changes.  In  order  to  begin 
planning  issues  sufficiently  in  advance, 
it  was  necessary  to  take  the  initial 
planning  stage  away  from  the  group  as 
a  whole.  Although  each  topic  is  chosen 
and  discussed  by  the  v/hole  staff,  a 
Development  Committee  is  formed 
consisting  of  at  least  one  staff  member 
(responsible  for  putting  together  the 
Committee  and  for  communication 
between  the  Committee  and  the  staff) 
and  several  persons  not  on  Quest  staff. 
This  has  allowed  a  more  direct  role  for 
non-staff  persons  in  issue  development 
and  has  been  a  place  for  people 
interested  in  working  with  us  to  play 
an  important  role.  Essentially,  the 
Development  Committee  outlines  the 
kinds  of  questions  it  would  like 
articles  to  consider  and  solicits  articles. 
It  also  takes  care  of  initial  correspon- 
dence and  article  development  with 
potential  authors  and  makes  prelim- 
inary copy  judgments.  The  staff  person 
on  the  Committee  keeps  the  entire 
staff  informed  as  to  progress  and 
reports  staff  decisions  to  the  Com- 
mittee. After  copy  deadline,  the  entire 
staff  reads  all  copy  being  considered 
and,  in  conjunction  with  the  Develop- 
ment Committee,  makes  final  decisions 
and    assigns    editors.        Our    editorial 


process  consists  of  a  first  and  second 
content  editor  and  a  technical  editor. 
Once  an  article  is  edited,  it  must  be 
typeset,  its  place  in  the  journal  de- 
signed and  laid  out,  and  then  it  can 
be  sent  to  the  printer.  Thus,  after 
articles  are  accepted,  there  is  still 
over  two  months'  worth  of  work 
before  the  journal  is  completed. 

Since  we  are  a  group  of  political 
activists  primarily  interested  in  move- 
ment building  and  not  just  in  pro- 
ducing a  journal,, our  process  has  had 
to  take  into  account  our  political 
needs.  Since  every  minute  of  meeting 
time  and  of  our  lives  could  be  taken 
up  in  the  details  and  decisions  related 
to  producing  a  journal,  we  found  that 
we  had  to  insure  that  we  kept  in  touch 
with  politics  generally,  and  with  move- 
ment activity  in  particular.  We  decided 
to  begin  each  of  our  weekly  meetings 
with  a  one-hour  political  discussion, 
our  subjects  ranging  from  internal 
politics  (such  as  our  attitudes  toward 
our  Quest  jobs)  to  more  general  polit- 
ical questions  such  as  our  responsi- 
bility toward  children,  our  attitudes 
toward  money,  and  so  on.  Second,  in 
an  attempt  to  reach  out  more  to  the 
feminist  community  in  D.C.,  we  have 
conducted  a  political  seminar  follow- 
ing each  Quest  issue  and  are  initiating 
a  feminist  political  theory  course.  We 
are  still  struggling  to  develop  more 
ways  to  keep  ourselves  actively  in- 
volved in  politics,  while  maintaining 
Quest  as  a  journal.  We  will  discuss  this 
and  other  questions  that  we  have 
concerning  our  future  in  the  next 
issue    of  Quest   (Volume    III,   No.    1). 


44/Quest 


metamorphosis 


I  sit  at  the  mirror 

to  make  myself  old 

spread  out 

my  mummer's  palette 

of  ochre 

acid  yellow 

and  clown  white 

burnt  umber 

all  bruise 

and  shadow 

traces  the  clues  of  age  across  my  brow 

frowns  and  grimaces 

revealing  time's  itinerary 

I  watch  expectantly 

for  high  cheekbones 

hawk-beaked  hills  and  hollows 

withered  by  the  sun 

but  this  is  my  mother's  face  falling  on  mine 

round   and  full 

lucent  with  foxfire: 

we  are  the  Celtic  people 

our  mothers  worshipped  the  moon 

and  coupled  with  forest  spirits 

these  girlish  hands 

tie  back  my  mossy  hair 

with  fingers  firm  and  straight 

they  mock  my  age 


by  Elizabeth  Frazer 

Metamorphosis,  A  Poem/45 


Notes  on  a 

Feminist 

Economics 


by  Bat-Ami  Bar  On 

graphics  by  Jackie  MacMillan 


Editors'  Introduction:  Last  Spring, 
we  first  heard  via  the  feminist  grape- 
vine of  the  beginnings  oj  a  national 
feminist  economic  network.  Without 
knowing  much  more  than  that,  the 
concept  sounded  good  to  many  of  us. 
We  had  been  waiting  for  some  time  for 
some  radical  feminists  to  do  something 
on  a  national  level  concerning  women's 
economic  situation. 

In  May,  1975,  an  initial  planning 
meeting  was  held  in  New  Haven,  Con- 
necticut. In  it,  the  first  conceptions  of 
the  network  focussed  primarily  on 
newly-forming  feminist  credit  unions 
and  ways  they  could  cooperate  for 
mutual  growth.  And  it  was  largely  the 
political  foresight  and  organizing  of 
Joanne  Parrent  and  Valerie  Angers  of 
the  Detroit  Feminist  Federal  Credit 
Union  which  led  to  this  meeting  and 
to  the  subsequent  first  annual  confer- 
ence of  FEN  (the  Feminist  Economic 
Network),  Thanksgiving  weekend  in 
Detroit. 


At  the  May  planning  session,  which 
only  feminist  credit  unions  had  at- 
tended, tasks  were  delegated  to  the 
regional  credit  unions  concerning  pre- 
parations for  the  annual  conference. 
The  Washington  Area  Feminist  Federal 
Credit  Union  was  delegated  the  task  of 
preparing  a  draft  of  by-laws  for  FEN. 
But  when  the  75  to  100  women  who 
came  to  the  conference  registered,  they 
found  enclosed  in  the  registration 
packet  a  set  of  by-laws  prepared  by 
the  Detroit  FFCU. 

While  most  of  the  women  attending 
the  conference  spent  Saturday  in  work- 
shops discussing  such  subjects  as  fem- 
inist structure,  loan  policy  and  fem- 
inism and  economic  theory,  a  smaller 
group  met  to  discuss  FEN's  organiza- 
tional structure  and  the  now-existing 
three  sets  of  proposed  by-laws:  Wash- 
ington's, Detroit's,  and  New  Haven's. 
It  was  in  this  by-laws  session  that 
significant  differences  first  emerged 
among  the  Credit  Unions. 

A  plenary  session  had  been  sched- 
uled for  Saturday  night  to  discuss 
FEN  purposes  and  the  by-laws.  This 
plenary  session  resulted  in  the  high- 
ly charged  walkout  of  the  Detroit 
delegation,  some  of  the  Washington 
group  and  other  women  when  it  be- 
came clear  that  the  assembly  was  not 
going  to  accept  the  Detroit  by-laws 
d)id  structure  in  toto,  without  discus- 
sion and  change.  Thus  Sunday  found 
two  groups  meeting  separately,  one 
retaining  the  FEN  name,  and  com- 
prised primarily  of  Detroit  and  some 
Washington  women,  and  the  other 
comprised  of  the  vast  majority  of  con- 


46/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  4,  spring,  1976 


ference  participants,  which  chose  to  be 
called  the  Feminist  Economic  Alliance. 

It  should  be  clarified  that  it  is  not 
within  the  function  of  either  umbrella 
organization  to  lend  directly  to  in- 
dividuals, but  rather,  to  assist  member 
groups  through  loans,  materials  and 
expertise.  Thus  the  discussion  below 
concerning  differential  treatment  in 
lending  criteria  should  not  be  con- 
strued as  relating  to  individuals  in  the 
loan  process,  though  the  theory  applies 
equally  whether  for  member  organiza- 
tions or  for  individuals. 

The  FEN  Conference  in  Detroit 
resulted  in  the  establishment  of  two 
separate  organizations-the  Feminist 
Economic  Alliance  (FEA),  and  the 
Feminist  Economic  Network  (FEN). 
While  I  do  not  know  yet  how  anyone 
is  going  to  respond  to  one  more  split 
in  the  movement,  I  find  it  necessary  to 
reflect  on  and  analyze  the  happenings 
that  led  to  such  a  result.  I  went  to  the 
Conference  hopeful  and  excited;  I 
came  out  of  it  tired  and  depressed, 
and  while  in  some  ways  I  regret  that 
it  ended  the  way  it  did-with  the  estab- 
lishment of  two  organizations,  both  of 
which  have  to  appeal  to  the  same  pool 
of  feminists,  the  future  of  both  de- 
pending not  only  on  the  initial  organ- 
izers, but  on  this  pool-I  believe  that 
that  this  particular  split  is  in  essence 
healthy.  More  precisely,  I  believe  that 
the  establishment  of  FEA  was  a  healthy 
response  on  the  part  of  its  organ- 
izers to  their  conflicts  with  the  or- 
ganizers of  FEN. 

The  conflicts  between  the  two 
groups    reside   in   philosophical,    polit- 


ical and  pragmatic  disagreements.  Spe- 
cifically, I  feel  that  there  are  four  basic 
points  around  which  the  split  arose, 
all  of  which  have  significant  implica- 
tions for  the  movement,  both  in  theory 
and  in  practice.  As  I  felt  they  emerged 
at  the  Conference,  the  four  points  arc: 
(1)  the  philosophy  ofleadcrship;  (2)  the 
problem  of  democratic  process-in  this 
case,  the  assumptions  underlying  the 
participants'  freedom  to  create  alter- 
natives to  the  FEN  proposal;  (3)  the 
question  of  decision-making,  and  (4)  the 
implications  of  these  points  on  the 
exercise  of  power  in  the  feminist  move- 
ment. As  I  will  show,  each  of  these 
considerations  is  both  implied  in  the 
FEN  statement  of  purpose  and  was 
acted    out    in    the    Conference    itself. 

The    Politics    of  Leadership 

At  face  value,  it  may  seem  that 
none  of  the  positions  advanced  by  the 
organizers  of  FEN  was  unreasonable. 
For  example,  the  calling  and  orga- 
nizing of  a  Conference  open  to  all 
women  from  feminist  enterprises  can 
easily  be  construed  as  indicating  the 
organizers'  willingness  to  dialogue.  But 
in  fact  the  Conference  was  not  open 
to  all  women  from  feminist  enter- 
prises; most  of  the  groups  contacted 
were  either  credit  unions  or  Feminist 
Women's  Health  Centers.*  Given  that 


To  my  knowledge  only  four  enter- 
prises other  than  the  12  or  13  credit 
unions  and  two  health  centers  (Oakland 
and  Detroit  TWHC's)  participated 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/47 


the  intention  of  the  Conference  organ- 
izers was  to  establish  a  nation-wide  um- 
brella organization  of  feminist  enter- 
prises, this  selectivity  is  at  least  sur- 
prising, particularly  when  viewed  in  the 
context  of  FEN's  expressed  statement 
of  purpose:  "The  purpose  of  this 
association  shall  be:  1.  to  provide 
economic  development  and  accept  fin- 
ancial leadership?  for  the  Feminist 
Movement. "  ■*• 

First,  even  if  all  the  Conference 
participants  had  agreed  to  such  a  state- 
ment of  purpose,  the  fact  that  most  of 
them  were  from  credit  unions  only- 
not  from  other  feminist  enterprises- 
makes  the  statement  quite  presump- 
tuous. Second,  the  ultimate  accep- 
tance of  such  a  statement  by  one 
faction  of  the  participants,  and  in 
spite  of  the  split  and  the  fact  that  the 
organizers  of  FEN  are  a  substantially 
smaller  group,  is  even  more  presump- 
tuous, in  my  judgment.  Such  a  state- 
ment of  purpose  is  to  me  dangerously 
broad  as  well  as  unverifiable,  given 
both  the  diversity  of  the  movement 
and  its  lack  of  structure,  and  given  the 
Conference's  lack  of  representation 
from   all  segments   of  the  movement. 

But  I  have  a  more  basic  objection 
to  the  stated  purpose,  which  concerns 
the  organizers'  assumptions  about  the 
nature  of  leadership.  The  FEN  orga- 
nizers claimed  during  Conference  dis- 
cussions that  there  is  no  difference  be- 
tween "accepting"  leadership  and  "tak- 
ing" or  "assuming"  it.  Since  the  FEN 
bylaws  give  its  board  of  directors  all 
decision-making  powers,  all  powers 
necessary    to    supervise    FEN's   imple- 


mentation and  all  powers  to  appoint 
and  dismiss  officers,  as  well  as  other 
such  powers  (and  given  the  style  in 
which  the  FEN  organizers  actually 
exercised  their  powers  during  the  Con- 
ference), it  seems  quite  clear  to  me 
that  they  in  fact  do  intend  to  take 
financial  leadership  of  the  feminist 
movement  regardless  of  what  other 
group  and  individual  members  of  the 
movement  are  willing  to  accept. 

A  basic  confusion  seems  to  under- 
line this  manner  of  thinking  and  act- 
ing. One  of  the  first  assumptions  the 
radical  feminist  philosophy  of  leader- 
ship involves  is  that  in  a  group  that 
operates  organically,  leadership  is  as- 
sumed (or  taken)  by  some  members 
when  necessary,  and  that  different 
members  will  rotate  in  and  out  of 
leadership  positions,  depending  on  the 
tasks  at  hand,  the  members'  skills  and 
other  factors.  But  this  assumption 
cannot  exist  without  its  complement: 
that  those  members  who  are  not 
leaders  have  to  be  willing  to  accept 
the  members  who  assume  leadership. 
If  they  are  not,  several  results  are 
possible,     one    of    which    is    a    split. 

When  only  the  first  assumption 
exists  openly,  and  when  one  claims  to 
accept  leadership  in  behalf  of  the 
group,  she  assumes  the  complement 
implicitly.  In  this  context,  the  assump- 
tion of  group  acceptance  takes  an 
interesting  turn.  Those  who  assume 
leadership  also  assume  that  they  are, 
or  at  least  should  be,  accepted  as  such 
by  others  because  they  best  represent 
the  interests  and  the  will  of  all  and 
thus    can    best    serve    the    group   as   a 


48/Quest 


whole.**  That  the  organizers  of  FEN 
assumed  the  complement  in  such  a 
manner  was  and  is  quite  evident. 
First,  for  example,  they  claimed  that 
feminists  (and  themselves  as  such) 
should  be  trusted  because  feminists 
cannot  oppress  or  exploit  others,  es- 
pecially women;  because  feminists  will 
do  their  best  to  serve  others,  especially 
women;  and  because  feminists  under- 
stand what  is  in  the  best  interests  of 
others,  especially  women.  Second, 
when  these  claims  were  challenged  by 
Conference  participants  whose  experi- 
ence had  been  that  these  claims  arc 
not  necessarily  true,  the  challengers' 
feminist  credentials  were  questioned 
in  response-a  dialectic  especially  evi- 
dent when  the  FEA  organizers  were 
construed  to  be  wrong  or  at  least  mis- 
taken in  their  rejection  of  FEN  by- 
laws, and  when  their  refusal  to  ratify 
the  FEN  bylaws  was  not  even  con- 
sidered by  way  of  resolving  the  di- 
lemma. My  perception  is  that  the  orga- 
nizers of  FEN  left  no  space  for  resolu- 
tion of  differences-that  the  lack  of 
space  for  dialogue  was  in  fact  one 
of  the  main  features  of  the  Conference. 


The  problem  is  quite  old,  and  the 
women's  movement  should  look  at  it  ser- 
iously. Plato  struggled  ivith  it  and  suggested 
a  benevolent  dictatorship  as  a  solution  hav- 
ing the  same  assumptions.  Rousseau  tried 
to  work  around  it,  but  when  his  solutio>i 
was  practiced  in  the  French  Revolution,  it 
resulted  in  disaster  because  the  assumptions 
were  the  same.  Moreover,  absolute  obe- 
dience to  party  line,  as  expressed  by  some 
communist  parties  and  in  fascist  ideologies, 
is  justified  on  the  same  grounds. 


In  other  words,  the  internal  political 
process  between  the  two  groups  was 
not  allowed  to  evolve  as  a  cooperative 
exchange;  instead,  it  was  forced  to 
evolve  along  competitive  lines. 

In  my  view,  the  Conference  re- 
volved around  the  distribution  of-and 
thus  the  possession  of-financial,  if  not 
also  political  power.  While  I  do  not 
want  to  believe  that  competition  is  a 
necessary  result  of  encounters  involv- 
ing the  distribution  of  power,  the  Con- 
ference convinced  me  once  more  that 
it  is  one  real  possibility.  However,  if 
such  encounters  are  to  evolve  along 
different  lines,  some  preconditions 
must  hold.  Insofar  as  cooperation  is 
possible  not  only  among  equals  but 
also  among  unequals,  one  such  pre- 
condition is  that  the  powerful  need  to 
be  at  least  willing  to  cooperate,  wil- 
ling to  construct  arrangements  that 
will  allow  the  powerless  and  the 
powerful  to  develop  without  hinder- 
either. 

The  issue  here,  though,  is  that  in 
this  world,  the  possessors  of  financial 
power  have  much  influence  on  the 
direction  the  political  wind  blows. 
The  possessors  of  such  power  do  not 
need  to  be  also  the  possessors  of 
direct  political  power;  they  exercise 
their  financial  power  in  order  to 
influence  the  political  process.  And  by 
controlling  the  resources  whose  dis- 
tribution is  the  main  variable  around 
which  all  political  encounters  revolve, 
they  also  control  the  movements  of 
participants  in  that  encounter. 2  To 
lack  financial  resources,  or  to  fall  out 
of  grace  with  those  who  have  them,  is 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/49 


thus  almost  the  same  as  to  lack,  or  to 
lose  political  power.  Much  is  necessary 
in  order  to  insure  that  this  will  not  be 
the  case-mostly  the  exercise  of  some 
set  of  controls  over  those  in  charge  of 
material  and  other  resources.  Insofar 
as  no  such  set  of  controls  was  provided 
for  by  FEN,  "acceptance"  of  financial 
leadership  here  can  adequately  be  con- 
strued as  "acceptance"  of  political 
leadership  as  well. 

The  organizers  of  FEN,  while  fewer 
in  number,  were  and  are  at  least  as 
powerful,  if  not  more  powerful,  than 
the  organizers  of  FEA.  As  the  different 
participants  entered  the  Conference 
negotiations,  FEN  had  (and  still  has) 
at  its  disposal  as  much  (if  not  more) 
money,  time,  information  and  other 
resources,  as  the  organizers  of  FEA. 
More  precisely,  from  the  start  the 
powerful  negotiators  were  the  Detroit 
credit  union  and  its  branches  (present 
and  future)  and  the  Oakland  Feminist 
Women's  Health  Center  and  some 
others.  These  organizations  came  to 
the  Conference  as  a  unified  front.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  members  of  the 
other  participating  credit  unions  and 
enterprises  were  the  relatively  power- 
less negotiators.  They  had  (and  have) 
fewer  resources,  and  they  came  to  the 
Conference  without  a  pre-established 
unity;  instead,  they  (or  rather,  most  of 
them)  united  in  direct  response  to  the 
others,  as  the  relatively  powerless 
often  do.  Lacking  a  pre-established 
unity  and  lacking  resources  equal  to 
those  of  the  Detroit-Oakland  coalition, 
the  other  Conference  participants  also 
lacked  a  power  base  for  participating 


SO/ Quest 


in    an    effective    dialogue    about    the 
money/power  equation. 

The  surprising  selectivity  in  the 
enterprises  contacted  about  the  Con- 
ference makes  this  problem  an  acute 
one,  given  the  fact  that  most  were 
credit  unions.  Credit  unions  are  a 
money-making-money  kind  of  enter- 
prise. No  production  or  service  related 
to  production  is  involved  in  the  way 
the  money  is  made.  In  other  words, 
while  other  enterprises  accumulate 
capital  via  production  or  the  provision 
of  services,  credit  unions  accumulate 
capital  because  they  have  it  to  start 
with.  They  control  one  of  the  factors 
necessary  in  the  establishment  of  other 
enterprises-money.  Thus  they  are  ca- 
pable of  determining  the  survival  of  ex- 
isting enterprises  and  the  establish- 
ment of  future  ones.  If  the  Conference 
had  resulted  in  one  organization,  most 
of  whose  members  were  credit  unions, 
then  under  the  stringent  bylaws  pro- 
posed by  FEN,  this  kind  of  control 
would  have  been  assured  in  the  hands 
of  FEN  leaders. 

The  converging  of  economic  and 
political  power,  specifically  in  the  con- 
text of  money-making-money  organ- 
izations, is  a  subject  to  which  I  will 
return.  At  this  point,  however,  I 
suggest  that  there  are  dangerous  ten- 
dencies inherent  in  the  bylaws'  assump- 
tions about  the  rights  of  would-be 
leaders  and  in  the  prospective  conver- 
gence of  economic  and  political  power 
that  FEN  would  represent.  From  my 
point-of-view,  these  are  tendencies 
that  actually  operated  in  the  Confer- 
ence,  and   if  we   allow   for  their  free 


n 


!:-■■■ 


■  il 


*A 


L 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/51 


play,  we  allow  for  their  consequences: 
the  formation  of  nation-wide  feminist 
organizations  operating  in  the  same 
way  that  any  other  nation-wide  eco- 
nomic organization  operates  in  a  free- 
market  society.  This  consequence  leads 
into  another  position  that  at  face 
value  does  not  seem  unreasonable,  but 
which  cannot  stand  up  under  close 
analysis. 

The  Democratic  Process  and 
Freedom  of  Alternatives 

One  of  the  principles  espoused  by 
the  organizers  of  FEN  was  that  if  one 
does  not  like  what  FEN  proposes,  one 
is  free  to  do  what  one  wishes  to  do. 
The  organizers  of  FEA  did  exactly 
that;  now  it  is  apparently  up  to  the 
feminist  public  at  large  to  choose  be- 
tween the  two  organizations,  or  if  the 
principle  is  extended,  to  choose  nei- 
ther and  create  a  third  organization  or 
more.  The  problem,  however,  is  that 
the  principle  can  be  acted  on  only 
when  viable  alternatives  exist.  The 
problem  here  is  also  that  there  are  not 
too  many  viable  alternatives.  More- 
over, the  principle  implies  refusal  to 
change. 

As  to  the  latter  implication,  in  the 
Conference,  the  "freedom  of  alter- 
natives" principle  was  actually  acted 
on  to  cut  down  on  objections  and 
criticisms  rather  than  to  encourage 
dialogue.  If  one  did  not  like  the  sug- 
gested FEN  bylaws,  one  had  one's 
choice.. .but  one  choice  was  excluded- 
cooperative  work.  To  some  extent,  one 
could  state  one's  objections,  but  most- 


ly they  were  not  listened  to,  and  when 
they  were,  they  were  hardly  ever 
considered. ***If  one  is  willing  to  co- 
operate with  others,  one  must  also  be 
willing  to  allow  for  change;  thus  one 
must  be  willing  to  listen  to  and 
consider  what  others  have  to  say. 
To  act  otherwise  is  to  imply  that  one 
is  beyond  criticism  or,  at  best,  to 
leave  resolution  to  future  develop- 
ments by  default. +  Neither  is  accept- 
able because  each  allows  ample  room 
for  the  abuse  of  power. 

In  my  view,  the  present  question  of 
leadership  and  the  freedom  of  choice 
is  about  power.  This  was  also  demon- 
strated at  the  Conference.  For  ex- 
ample, the  organizers  of  FEN  claimed 
that  we  should  not  look  at  power  as  a 
limited  commodity-that  not  only  is 
there  enough  of  it  for  all  to  share,  but 
also  that  each  of  us  creates  her  own 
power.  If  this  is  acceptable,  one  need 
not  worry  about  the  existence  of  via- 
ble alternatives;  one  simply  goes  out 
into  the  world  and  creates  them. 
Reality,  however,  is  somewhat  more 
complicated.  At  any  given  time,  the 
amount  of  existing  and  potential  pow- 
er is  limited:  there  are  always  limits  in 

/  will  go  so  far  as  to  claim  that  the 
slight  changes  made  in  the  bylaws  suggested 
by  Detroit's  credit  union  (and  accepted  as 
l;EN  bylaivs)  resulted  from  an  urgoit  need 
to  accommodate  Washuigton's  credit  union 
(givcti  the  split),  and  because  of  omissions- 
e.g.,  the  statement  of  a  process  by  which 
the  board  is  selected.  WAVVCV  is  current- 
ly a  member  of  neither  organization. 

+AJa)iy  have  appealed  to  history,  claim- 
ing that  in  the  long  run  it  will  absolve  them. 
Hut  history  does  not  absolve  easily;  it  con- 
siders both  the  means  and  the  consequences. 


52/Quest 


. 


i    hr'  \ 


i 


;   <  "),■ 


..••,■  ■  • 


: 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/51 


play,  we  allow  for  their  consequences: 
the  formation  of  nation-wide  feminist 
organizations  operating  in  the  same 
way  that  any  other  nation-wide  eco- 
nomic organization  operates  in  a  free- 
market  society.  This  consequence  leads 
into  another  position  that  at  face 
value  does  not  seem  unreasonable,  but 
which  cannot  stand  up  under  close 
analysis. 

The  Democratic  Process  and 
Freedom  of  Alternatives 

One  of  the  principles  espoused  by 
the  organizers  of  FEN  was  that  if  one 
does  not  like  what  FEN  proposes,  one 
is  free  to  do  what  one  wishes  to  do. 
The  organizers  of  FEA  did  exactly 
that;  now  it  is  apparently  up  to  the 
feminist  public  at  large  to  choose  be- 
tween the  two  organizations,  or  if  the 
principle  is  extended,  to  choose  nei- 
ther and  create  a  third  organization  or 
more.  The  problem,  however,  is  that 
the  principle  can  be  acted  on  only 
when  viable  alternatives  exist.  The 
problem  here  is  also  that  there  are  not 
too  many  viable  alternatives.  More- 
over, the  principle  implies  refusal  to 
change. 

As  to  the  latter  implication,  in  the 
Conference,  the  "freedom  of  alter- 
natives" principle  was  actually  acted 
on  to  cut  down  on  objections  and 
criticisms  rather  than  to  encourage 
dialogue.  If  one  did  not  like  the  sug- 
gested FEN  bylaws,  one  had  one's 
choice.. .but  one  choice  was  excluded- 
cooperative  work.  To  some  extent,  one 
could  state  one's  objections,  but  most- 


ly they  were  not  listened  to,  and  when 
they  were,  they  were  hardly  ever 
considered. ***lf  one  is  willing  to  co- 
operate with  others,  one  must  also  be 
willing  to  allow  for  change;  thus  one 
must  be  willing  to  listen  to  and 
consider  what  others  have  to  say. 
To  act  otherwise  is  to  imply  that  one 
is  beyond  criticism  or,  at  best,  to 
leave  resolution  to  future  develop- 
ments by  default. +  Neither  is  accept- 
able because  each  allows  ample  room 
for  the  abuse  of  power. 

In  my  view,  the  present  question  of 
leadership  and  the  freedom  of  choice 
is  about  power.  This  was  also  demon- 
strated at  the  Conference.  For  ex- 
ample, the  organizers  of  FEN  claimed 
that  we  should  not  look  at  power  as  a 
limited  commodity-that  not  only  is 
there  enough  of  it  for  all  to  share,  but 
also  that  each  of  us  creates  her  own 
power.  If  this  is  acceptable,  one  need 
not  worry  about  the  existence  of  via- 
ble alternatives;  one  simply  goes  out 
into  the  world  and  creates  them. 
Reality,  however,  is  somewhat  more 
complicated.  At  any  given  time,  the 
amount  of  existing  and  potential  pow- 
er is  limited:  there  are  always  limits  in 

/  will  go  so  far  as  to  claim  that  the 
slight  changes  made  in  the  bylaws  suggested 
by  Detroit's  credit  union  (and  accepted  as 
il-N  bylaws)  resulted  from  an  urgent  need 
to  accommodate  Washington's  credit  union 
(given  the  split),  and  because  of  omissions- 
e.g.,  the  statement  of  a  process  by  which 
the  board  is  selected.  WAi'l'CU  is  current- 
ly a  member  of  neither  organization. 

+Many  have  appealed  to  history,  claim- 
ing that  in  the  long  run  it  will  absolve  them. 
But  history  does  not  absolve  easily;  it  co>i- 
siders  both  the  mcaiis  and  the  consequences. 


52/Quest 


resources,  tin.e,  opportunity  and  skills. 
Moreover,  the  job  of  getting  power 
requires  having  some  in  order  to 
create  more.  Given  these  complexities, 
the  question  of  viable  alternatives 
cannot  be  brushed  away.  Alternatives 
are  not  created  via  some  mysterious 
process;  they  can  be  created  only 
when  one  has  the  means  necessary  to 
create  them,  and  if  and  when  these 
means  are  controlled  by  someone 
else,  one  simply  cannot  create  viable 
alternatives. 

Let  us  look  at  what  happened  in 
the  Conference.  The  organizers  of 
FEA  had  some  of  the  means  necessary 
to  create  alternatives  for  themselves, 
and  they  did  so.  But  as  a  result  of  the 
Conference,  most  of  the  existing  and 
forming  credit  unions  are  aligned  with 
either  one  or  the  other  umbrella 
organization.  The  problem  is  that  if 
each  organization  decides  to  provide 
information,  training,  financial  support 
and  other  kinds  of  help  only  to  the 
credit  unions  that  pledge  allegiance  to 
it,  then  the  range  of  alternatives  open 
to  women  interested  in  the  creation  of 
new  credit  unions  is  seriously  limited. 
At  best,  they  will  be  required  either  to 
accept  the  terms  of  the  existing  organ- 
izations, or  to  recreate  the  wheel  if  they 
only  can.  Moreover,  if  forming  organ- 
izations are  to  be  treated  differently, 
depending  on  their  pledge  or  refusal, 
those  who  adopt  the  terms  of  either 
organization  will  automatically  be  con- 
sidered as  better  financial  risks  than 
those  who  do  not.  The  forming  organ- 
ization will  not  be  left  with  much 
choice. 


One  of  the  main  problems  at  this 
point  is  that  such  differential  treat- 
ment does  not  have  to  be  consciously 
instituted-whenever  one  has  the  pow- 
er to  provide  services  or  to  help 
another  who  is  in  need,  the  person  in 
need  is  up  against  the  dangers  of 
differential  treatment. "H~  While  profes- 
sional ethics  may  prevent  abuses  in 
some  cases,  the  rules  of  the  game  are 
not  the  same  when  what  is  needed  is  a 
loan. 

In  such  cases,  the  person  in  need  is 
almost  at  the  mercy  of  the  person(s) 
making  decisions  about  what  consti- 
tutes a  good  credit  risk.  More  pre- 
cisely, the  decision  is  whether  it  is 
worthwhile  to  invest  one's  money  in 
the  enterprises  of  another.  This  has  to 
be  decided  before  the  loan  is  made; 
not  all  people  are  good  credit  risks 
and  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  be- 
tween them  and,  to  this  end,  some  set 
of  criteria  is  established.  But  all  that 
any  set  of  objective  criteria  can  define 
is  that  the  person  is  capable  of  repay- 
ing the  sum  of  money  loaned  plus 
interest.  The  criteria,  if  they  are  objec- 
tive, cannot  determine  that  the  person 
is  both  capable  and  willing.  Since  it 
is  not  only  one's  possibilities  for  future 
loans  that  are  dependent  on  one's  punc- 
tuality in  repaying  a  loan,  but  also 
one's    reputation   as   a    "good"    credit 


'H'The  danger  of  differential  treatment 
is  greater  within  a  movement  like  the 
women's  movement,  because  one  almost 
constantly  distinguishes  between  those  who 
are  "with  us"  and  those  who  are  "against 
us,  "  or  who  are  potentially  so. 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/53 


risk,  a  moral  judgment  is  involved. 
What  we  need  to  be  clear  about  is  that 
whenever  one  qualifies  as  a  "good" 
credit  risk  according  to  objective  cri- 
teria, one  passes  only  the  first  of  the 
judgments;  one  also  needs  to  qualify 
as  a  "good"  credit  risk  according  to 
the  lender's  moral  values.  It  is  at  this 
point  that  the  danger  of  differential 
treatment  arises.  Only  a  well  delineated 
system  of  controls  can  reduce  the  poss- 
ibility that  the  judgment  will  be  arbi- 
trary or  personal;  the  market  can 
hardly  control  such  possibilities. 3 

Since  more  people  are  seeking  loans 
than  there  are  those  able  to  give  them, 
the  choices  the  powerful  have  are 
much  greater  than  those  of  the  needy. 
This  is  especially  true  in  the  situation 
which  is  developing  in  the  feminist 
credit  community,  for  normally  when 
one  is  judged  to  be  a  "bad"  credit 
risk  by  one  organization,  she  can  try 
other  organizations,  if  they  exist.  But 
if  the  organizations  operate  in  similar 
ways  and  with  similar  values,  her 
chances  to  qualify  as  a  "good"  credit 
risk  somewhere  else  are  slight. 

That  the  question  of  viable  alter- 
natives is  an  important  one  and  cannot 
be  ignored  is  clearer  when  we  look  at 
women  subgrouped  into  their  socio- 
economic classes.  Upper-class  women 
have  more  resources  than  others,  so 
that  if  they  do  not  like  existing  alter- 
natives, they  can  create  others.  But 
lower-class  women  are  not  in  the  same 
position.  They  may  be  able  to  strength- 
en their  own  power,  but  because  of 
lack  of  resources,  they  are  dependent 
on    existing  alternatives.  They  simply 


do  not  have  the  resources  necessary  to 
create  others. 

Liberal  economists  (for  example, 
Milton  Friedman),  espouse  a  notion  of 
freedom  similar  to  the  principle  es- 
poused by  the  organizers  of  FEN. 
According  to  them,  one  is  free  when 
one  can  refuse  to  participate  in  any 
given  enterprise.  They  too  rely  on  the 
market  to  establish  as  perfect  a  system 
of  competition  as  possible  to  assure 
fairness  for  all,  and  they  too  ignore 
the  problem  of  viable  alternatives. 
When  they  do  agree  that  such  alter- 
natives may  not  exist  or  be  created, 
they  claim  either  that  this  is  a  result 
of  centralized  governmental  control  of 
the  market,  or  that  no  other  concept 
of  freedom  is  realistic.  The  outstand- 
ing contradiction  here  is  that  feminists 
who  espouse  cooperation  cannot  rely 
on  perfect  market  competition  to 
assure  fairness  for  all,  nor  can  they 
espouse  the  negative  concept  of  free- 
dom (i.e.,  freedom  to  refuse  to  partici- 
pate) when  they  claim  to  be  looking 
for  positive  alternatives  to  the  status 
quo. 

The  Decision-Making  Process 

This  contradictory  thinking  which 
seems  to  have  underlined  FEN's  "free- 
dom of  alternatives"  concept  of  fair 
play  has  a  parallel  in  FEN's  apparent 
theory  of  the  decision-making  process. 
The  organizers  of  FEN  claimed  that 
only  those  who  do  the  work  are 
entitled  to  make  decisions,  and  some- 
times, they  seemed  even  to  claim  that 
in    a    decision-making    process,    those 


54/Quest 


who  work  more  should  be  considered 
more.  On  its  face,  such  a  theory  seems 
to  make  sense,  but  in  this  case  it 
ignores  the  fact  that  the  working  pro- 
cedures required  by  any  organization 
depend  on  several  variables-size  and 
purpose,  to  point  to  two.  In  other 
words,  not  all  principles  applicable  to 
small  organizations  are  applicable  to 
big  ones,  especially  when  they  art- 
nation-wide  umbrella  organizations. 
Moreover,  not  all  principles  that  apply 
to  enterprises  directly  connected  with 
production  of  goods  or  with  the  pro- 
vision of  services  apply  co  organi- 
zations of  the  money-making-money 
type. 

Let's  look  at  the  last  claim  first. 
In  the  case  of  an  enterprise  whose 
main  objective  is  the  production  of 
some  object,  the  process  of  decision- 
making does  not  need  to  be  open  to 
the  persons  supplying  the  producers 
with  the  raw  material  necessary  for 
production.  As  providers  of  raw  mater- 
ials, they  are  affected  by  the  producers 


if  the  resources  they  provide  are  abused. 
They  can  evaluate  the  use  of  their 
materials  by  evaluating  the  producer's 
end  product  both  quantitatively  and 
qualitatively.  It  is  up  to  the  actual 
producers,  given  that  they  have  input 
from  the  consumers,  to  decide  how  to 
produce,  since  they  are  the  only  ones 
who  can  assess  the  consumers'  require- 
ments, the  resources  available  for  pro- 
duction, their  own  needs  from  the 
production  process,  and  the  possible 
ways  for  producing  the  product  in 
question. 

In  a  moncy-making-moncy  orga- 
nization, things  are  not  the  same  since 
there  is  one  essential  difference  be- 
tween this  kind  of  enterprise  and 
others.  The  person  investing  money  in 
such  an  enterprise  provides  its  workers 
with  the  most  essential  resource  need- 
ed for  its  operation,  and  yet  has  no 
way  to  evaluate  the  use  of  the  money 
in  qualitative  terms.  The  investor  can 
judge  the  product  (the  interest  made 
on     a     deposit)     only     quantitatively. 


-?** 


*"W 


Mil  fcl  1 

N      *■■■  ^.,, 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/55 


Hence  she  cannot  know  if  her  money 
was  abused.  The  only  way  the  use  of 
money  can  be  evaluated  qualitatively 
is  indirectly,  through  evaluating  the 
process  by  which  it  is  produced.  Since 
this  is  the  case,  the  decision-making 
process  in  a  money-making-money 
enterprise  cannot  be  open  only  to 
those  who  do  the  work;  it  must  in- 
clude the  investor  who,  among  other 
things,  is  directly  affected  by  the 
decisions. 

My  second  concern  is  that  the 
decision-making  process  also  must  re- 
flect the  purpose  of  the  organization 
which  it  serves.  This  consideration, 
too,  seems  to  have  been  overlooked.  If 
we  accept  the  principle  that  only  those 
doing  the  work  are  entitled  to  make 
decisions:  if  the  decisions  in  question 
are  not  only  work-place  decision.,  but 
policy  decisions  affecting  the  organ- 
ization as  a  whole;  and  if  the  organ- 
ization in  question  is  an  umbrella  organ- 
ization, then  we  are  up  against  some 
severe  problems  not  faced  by  small 
organizations  to  which  the  principle 
may  apply.  We  institute  a  lack  of 
freedom  on  the  part  of  the  member 
organizations  to  make  their  own  policy 
decisions  and  plan  on  their  own  so  as 
to  best  serve  their  communities  and 
themselves.  When  these  decisions  are 
made  elsewhere,  the  only  thing  mem- 
ber organizations  can  decide  is  how 
policy  should  be  implemented.  And  if 
they  are  also  given  guidelines  for 
implementation,  all  they  are  left  with 
are  work-place  decisions.  No  organiza- 
tion, no  enterprise  that  evolves  organi- 
cally   in   and  with   a   community   op- 


erates in  such  a  manner.  Only  organ- 
izations and  enterprises  planted  in  a 
community    by    an    outsider    do    so. 

This  problem  could  be  minimized 
if  the  member  organizations  could 
participate  in  decision-making  for  the 
umbrella  organization.  But  as  long  as 
at  least  one  woman  from  each  member 
organization  does  not  work  in  and  for 
the  umbrella  organization  too,  we 
institute  an  inability  on  the  part  of 
the  member  organizations  to  take  part 
in  the  process  of  decision-making  for 
the  organization  as  a  whole.  And  this 
is  another  problem.  I  believe  that  no 
realistic  solution  to  it  is  compatible 
with  the  principle  that  those  who  do 
the  work  make  the  decisions.  First, 
the  more  member  organizations  there 
are,  the  less  likely  it  is  that  there  will 
be  enough  positions  in  the  umbrella 
organization  for  a  representative  from 
each.  Second,  the  more  specialized  the 
skills  necessary  to  run  the  umbrella 
organization,  the  less  likely  it  is  that 
there  will  be  at  least  one  woman  from 
each  member  organization  having  or 
willing  to  acquire  these  skills,  particu- 
larly since  the  kind  of  work  will 
probably  differ  from  that  which  she 
did  in  the  member  organization.  And 
finally,  the  larger  the  umbrella  organ- 
ization's territory,  the  more  physically 
impossible  it  is  for  any  one  person  to 
perform  day-to-day  activities  in  both 
the  member  organization  and  the  um- 
brella organization  unless,  of  course, 
the  umbrella  headquarters  is  located 
in  the  member  enterprises's  commu- 
nity. 

If  these  problems  can  be  resolved 


56/Quest 


and  a  member  organization  is  able  to 
give  up  one  of  its  members  for  a  rela- 
tively long  time  (a  year  or  so)  to  work 
in  the  umbrella  organization  and  at 
the  same  time  represent  the  member 
organization  in  it,  there  are  still  other 
problems.  For  example,  the  interests 
of  the  umbrella  organization  as  an 
entity  differ  from  those  of  the  mem- 
ber organization  (e.g.,  preservation  of 
unity  vs.  autonomy  for  the  member 
groups).  Moreover,  the  relatively  long- 
term  removal  of  the  worker/represen- 
tative from  the  member  organization 
and  the  community  it  serves,  and  her 
new  identification  with  the  umbrella 
organization  may  result  in  the  worker/ 
representative  becoming  less  a  "rep- 
resentative" of  her  original  organiza- 
tion and  more  a  representative  of  the 
umbrella  organization  and  its  interests. 

In  short,  the  requirement  that  those 
who  do  the  work  (of  the  umbrella 
group)  make  the  decisions  is  not  com- 
patible with  the  basic  requirements 
for  a  participatory  democracy.  If  it  is 
imposed,  we  confront  not  only  impos- 
sible physical  problems,  but  also  basic, 
real  differences  in  the  needs  and  pur- 
poses of  the  umbrella  and  member 
organizations.  We  also  ignore  the  dif- 
ferences between  product  and  money- 
making-money  enterprises  that  ought 
to  determine  who  makes  decisions 
and  in  what  ways. 

In  reality,  then,  it  means  the  insti- 
tution of  a  hierarchical  structure,  no 
matter  how  much  we  claim  that  this 
is  not  so.  In  reality,  the  philosophy  of 
decision-making  espoused  by  FEN 
means    the  exclusion  of  the  member- 


ship from  the  process  of  decision-mak- 
ing, no  matter  how  much  we  claim 
that  we  aspire  to  establish  the  best 
form  of  participatory  democracy. 
Worst,  in  reality,  it  means  accepting  a 
principle  basic  to  any  oppressive  struc- 
ture -that  those  who  have  the  power 
are  also  those  who  rule. 

It  is  at  this  point  that  the  philoso- 
phies apparently  espoused  by  FEN 
concerning  leadership,  the  freedom  of 
alternatives,  and  decision-making  con- 
verge. At  the  Conference's  conclusion, 
at  least,  the  Detroit-Oakland  coalition 
had  assured  its  prerogative  to  "assume 
leadership,"  and  had  also,  through  its 
principles  of  decision-making,  assum- 
ed sole  decision-making  powers  for 
the  network  it  had  established.  More- 
over, it  had  combined  these  powers 
with  its  existing  economic  clout  as 
the    wealthiest    of   organizations    rep- 


THE  LESBIANFEMINIST 
SATIRE   MAGAZENE 

NEWS-VIEWS -RE VIEWS-INTERVIEWS- 
POETRY-FICTION-HUMOR-COMIX  ! 

SUBSCRIPTION  PER  YEAR  $7.00 


Name 

SEND    TO: 

ALBATROSS 

82   S.    HARRISON 

Address 
Cry 

7,n 

E.    ORANGE,    NJ. 
07017 

Sample  copies   are  available  at  the  incredibly 

high  price  of  $1.50  Neatness  doesn't  count 

but  it  certainly  helps  a  lot  I       Thank  you- 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/57 


resented-i.e.,  it  had  assured  its  po- 
litical and  economic  control.  In 
point  of  fact,  however,  it  is  not  the 
organization,  but  rather  a  select  group 
of  people  within  it  who  have  proposed 
"to  provide  economic  development 
and  accept  financial  leadership  for  the 
Feminist  Movement"-the  people  who 
can  afford  to  work  in  and  for  the 
organization.  For  only  those  who  have 
the  power  of  resources  can  afford  to 
work    for  the   umbrella   organization. 

Summary 

Much  more  can  probably  be  said 
about  the  Conference,  and  especially 
about  the  views  expressed  and  the 
extent  to  which  the  actual  events 
showed  these  views  to  be  real  tend- 
encies of  behavior  and  development. 
I  touched,  however,  on  what  I  con- 
sider to  be  the  most  critical  of  these 
views  and  tendencies.  I  believe  that 
they  constitute  the  point  of  departure 
for  the  two  resulting  organizations, 
and  that  what  we  have  on  our  hands  is 
a  set  of  problems  to  which  the  fem- 
inist movement  must  provide  clear 
answers. 

While  presumptuousness  can  be  and 
in  this  case  was  construed  as  vision, 
while  authoritarian  attitudes  can  be 
and  in  this  case  were  construed  as 
benevolence,  the  proposed  exercise  of 
both  political  and  economic  power 
cannot  be  masked.  It  is  my  belief  that 
only  in  some  few  instances  can  we,  as 
a  diverse  population  with  diverse 
needs,  count  on  such  vision  and  bene- 
volence   to    accommodate    us    all.    In 


fact,  we  need  structures  to  assure  that 
all  necessary  information  in  fact  gets 
to  those  who  would  lead,  and  most 
importantly,  is  considered  by  them. 
Moreover,  we  need  structures  to  assure 
that  power  is  not  abused  (even  un- 
intentionally). Indeed,  the  more  eco- 
nomically independent  women  become 
individually  and  collectively,  the  more 
careful  and  critical  we  need  to  be, 
since  the  way  we  exercise  our  eco- 
nomic and  political  power  both  chal- 
lenges and  reflects  our  visions  and 
good  will.  Neither  is  going  to  auto- 
matically assure  a  better  world  for 
all,  nor  will  they  assure,  in  the  short 
run  (as  long  as  it  may  be)  a  better 
world  for  women. 

Footnotes 

iFEN  bylaws,  Article  II,  as  accepted  in 
this  Conference.  (Emphasis  added.) 

2See  C.  Wright  Mills,  Vie  Power  Elite 
(New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1956), 
for  a  good  exemplified  analysis. 

^Marx  has  a  short  and  enlightening  cri- 
tique of  credit.  See,  for  example,  Lloyd  D. 
Easton  and  Kurt  H.  Guddat  (eds.),  Writings 
of  the  Young  Marx  on  Philosophy  and  Soci- 
ety (Garden  City,  NY:  Doubleday  and  Co., 
Inc.,  1967),  pp.  269-271.  I  also  find  the 
institution  of  "value  auditing"  proposed  by 
FEN  enlightening  in  this  respect,  for  it 
seems  to  accentuate  some  of  my  points. 
See  the  claims  made  by  the  Delinquency 
Committee  of  the  Detroit  Feminist  Federal 
Credit  Union  contained  in  documents  dis- 
tributed at  the  Conference,  available  frfcrn 
DFFCU. 

Copyright  <D  1976  by  Bat-Ami  Bar  On 

Bat-Ami  Bar  On  is  a  Ph.D  candi- 
date in  philosophy  at  the  Ohio  State 
University. 


58/Quest 


A  si  •SIGNS 


I  Journal  of  Women  in  Culture  and  Society 

SIGNS:  JOURNAL  OF  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  AND  SOCIETY,  a  new 

quarterly  from  The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  is  an  international  voice 
for  scholarship  about  women. 

A  sampling  of  articles  from  the  first  volume: 

Carroll  Smith-Rosenberg,  The  Female  World  of  Love  and  Ritual:  Relations 

between  Women  in  Nineteenth-Century  America 

Helene  Cixous,  The  Laughter  of  the  Medusa 

Marnie  Mueller,  The  Economic  Determinants  of  Volunteer  Work  by  Women 

Janet  M.  Todd,  Images  of  a  Feminist:  The  Biographies  of  Mary  Wollstonecraft 

Nancy  Tanner  and  Adrienne  Zihlman,  Women  in  Evolution:  Subsistence  and 

Social  Organization  in  Early  Hominids. 

James  A.  Brundage,  Prostitution  in  Medieval  Canon  Law 

In  every  issue: 

REVIEW  ESSAYS.  Regular  assessments  of  research  and  publications  on 
women  in  the  various  disciplines  and  professions.  A  different  group  of  related 
disciplines  is  covered  in  each  issue;  each  group  is  treated  once  annually. 
ARCHIVES.  Important  documents,  essays,  and  fiction  retrieved  from  the 
past,  accompanied  by  historical  notes  and  commentary. 
REPORTS/REVISIONS.  Notes  on  research-in-progress,  meetings,  new 
periodicals,  programs,  etc. 
BOOK  REVIEWS.  Concise  reviews  of  current  titles. 

A  SUPPLEMENTARY  ISSUE  in  Spring  1976:  Proceedings  of  the  Conference 
on  Occupational  Segregation  held  at  Wellesley  College  in  May  1975. 

Editor  Catharine  R.  Stimpson,  Barnard  College 

Associate  Editors,  Joan  N.  Burstyn,  Douglass  College,  Rutgers  University; 

Domna  C.  Stanton, Barnard  College      Managing  Editor,  Sandra  M.  Whisler 


ORDER  FORM         A  |SS  ||  SIGNS 


Please  enter  my  subscription  for  one  year,  beginning  with  the  inaugural  issue, 
Autumn  1975. 

Institutions,  $16.00     Individuals,  $12.00     Students  (with  professor's 
signature),  $9.60      Outside  the  United  States,  add  $1 .00  to  cover  postage. 

Name 


Address 


City State    Zip    

Mail  with  your  check  or  purchase  order  to: 

SIGNS:  JOURNAL  OF  WOMEN  IN  CULTURE  AND  SOCIETY 

The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  11030  Langley  Avenue, 

Chicago, 'Illinois  60628  Que 


Notes  on  a  Feminist  Economics/59 


IL®aad3®GPdQQ8g) 


0 


Q      _Q 


0 


by    Flora    Crater  graphics  by  Meredith  Rode 


60IQuest,  vol.  II  no.  4,  spring,  1976 


Those  who,  either  by  luck  or  con- 
scious intent,  find  themselves  in  a 
leadership  position,  owe  it  to  other 
women  to  transmit  this  experience  and 
whatever  skills  they  have  developed  so 
that  the  women's  movement  will  con- 
tinue. The  struggle  of  women  against 
the  almost  insurmountable  power  of 
the  male  establishment  requires  that 
we  adopt  a  type  of  guerilla  mentality 
about  tactics  while  developing  a  univ- 
ersal mentality  about  the  objectives  of 
free  and  equal  women. 

We  are  a  small  band  working  against 
an  overwhelming  encrustation  of  injus- 
tice upon  injustice.  Wc  are  a  small  band 
dependent  on  each  other.  There  must 
be  an  economy  of  effort,  and  our 
activities  must  be  multi-purpose.  No 
action  must  be  lost  or  wasted.  Our 
leaders  and  followers  must  be  inter- 
changeable, and  our  conflict  must  be 
productive. 

Leadership  must  become  an  active 
concept  open  to  all.  It,  too,  must  be 
multi-purpose.  It  must  not  only  serve 
its  immediate  objective,  but  in  the 
process,  it  must  also  function  as  an 
instrument  for  individual  movement 
and  spiritual  growth. 

To  affect  the  institutions  of  this 
country,  numbers  are  important.  Lead- 
ership in  the  women's  movement  must 
accelerate  if  we  plan  to  make  political 
change  in  government  and  the  political 
system-institutions  at  best  unrepre- 
sentative of  women.  Therefore,  the 
development  of  leaders  as  an  ongoing 
process  is  a  very  important  element  in 
the  dynamics  of  our  revolution.  Lead- 
ership   is    a    function    of  growth;  the 


question  is  not  whether  we  should  have 
leaders,  but  how  we  develop  all  women 
as  leaders. 

Leadership  is  the  key  to  action,  It 
is  an  individual  matter,  but  as  such,  it 
is  the  temporary  location  of  the  stimu- 
lus for  a  particular  act.  Its  rotation 
among  all  of  us  gives  it  the  dynamic  it 
must  have  as  a  means  for  the  develop- 
ment of  woman  and  her  progress.  But 
leadership  is  not  only  a  function  of 
growth;  it  is  also  a  function  of  spirit. 
Woman  is  a  living  system  of  individual 
expression  whose  vital  center  is  spirit. 
Thus  leadership  is  more  .than  com- 
municator and  director:  leadership 
must  feed  the  spirit. 

This  begins  by  way  of  common 
objectives.  With  common  objectives 
comes  common  experience  (action): 
there  is,  then,  a  reciprocal  under- 
standing and  empathy  among  us  for 
what  is  being  attempted.  Thus  the  key 
word  in  developing  and  using  leader- 
ship as  a  function  of  spirit  is  "empa- 
thy"-entering  into  the  feeling  and 
spirit  of  another  person,  feeling  what 
another  person  feels.  This,  then,  is  to 
be  like  her. 

Leadership  as  a  function  of  growth 
and  as  a  function  of  spirit,  however,  is 
not  an  end  in  itself.  It  is  a  process.  It  is 
a  series  of  steps  from  one  woman  to 
another  which  fosters  the  readiness  to 
act.  It  gives  living  meaning  to  an  act. 
Moreover,  leadership  requires  and  im- 
plies a  certain  security,  for  action  is  a 
form  of  confrontation.  Thus  it  prepares 
for  more  leadership  by  promoting  the 
qualities  necessary  for  its  acceptance. 
Leadership     as     process     makes    itself 


Leadership,  Growth  and  Spirit/61 


possible,  believable  and  transmitable. 
Leadership  as  process  is  the  search 
for,  the  discovery  or  creation  of  wom- 
an's common  ground.  Leadership  at- 
tempts to  end  our  isolation,  and  there- 
fore, the  state  of  the  women's  move- 
ment is  directly  related  to  the  state  of 
this  search.  An  examination  of  leader- 
ship as  it  fulfills  its  functions  of  growth 
and  spirit  is  the  movement's  most 
basic  examination,  and  it  is  a  cumu- 
lative process. 

Leadership  As  a  Function 
of  Growth 

Leadership  is  a  function  of  growth 
because  it  stimulates  women  to  act  and 
communicate.  This  stimulus  works  to 
extend  feelings,  thought  and  action, 
and  through  it,  leaders  and  followers 
reinforce  each  other.  But  this  stimulus 
can  take  two  forms:  leadership  may 
relate  directly  to  other  women's  needs 
as  they  see  them,  in  which  case  the 
resulting  action  of  movement  is  spon- 
taneous. Or  there  may  be  a  gap 
between  what  the  leader  perceives  and 
what  others  perceive,  in  which  case 
there  is  a  lack  of  understanding 
(learning)  and  little  resulting  move- 
ment. 

Growth  can  be  circular;  increased 
consciousness  and  awareness,  whether 
it  affects  two  or  two  million,  is  growth 
to  those  involved.  However,  before 
the  political  system  will  respond  to  us, 
our  development  must  accelerate:  po- 
litical institutions  respond  to  large 
numbers.  And  along  with  an  accelera- 
tion of  action,  there  must  be  an  accel- 


eration of  information.  Active  femi- 
nism is  not  a  game  to  be  played 
close  to  the  chest.  Since  our  financial 
limitations  affect  our  ability  to  circu- 
late feminist  information  and  thought, 
we  are  faced  with  a  real  limit  on  the 
number  of  informed  women.  And 
uninformed  women  cannot  act.  Thus 
leadership  as  a  function  of  growth 
involves  the  quick  and  clear  circulation 
of  information. 

Leaders  are  the  carriers  of  experi- 
ence, and  as  such,  they  have  a  responsi- 
bility to  communicate  their  experi- 
ence-and  not  only  to  communicate  it, 
but  to  simplify  it-to  extract  its  bare 
essentials  and  to  print  them.  The  need 
for  simplified  information  does  not 
arise  out  of  any  inability  to  under- 
stand complexities,  but  out  of  our 
common  need  to  know  and  to  act 
quickly. 

Experience  and  information  are  the 
two  main  essentials  separating  the 
leader  from  the  follower.  In  the  polit- 
ical process,  leadership  is  in  direct 
touch  with  reality;  its  objective  is  to 
make  institutions  responsive  to  wom- 
en's needs.  The  clearer  the  leader's 
grasp  of  the  real  situation,  the  more 
likely  it  is  that  her  initiative  or  re- 
sponse will  be  suitable. 

At  this  point,  another  element  fos- 
tering leadership  growth  comes  into 
play:  innovation.  Innovation  occurs 
when  in  a  particular  instance,  all  known 
methods  have  been  tried  and  have  not 
worked.  Then  the  need  to  act  provides 
the  stimulus  to  innovate,  and  if  the 
need  is  great  enough,  the  lack  of 
extensive    experience    will    not    be    a 


62/ Quest 


deterrent.  This  is  desirable,  for  while 
we  try  to  utilize  experience  so  as  not 
to  reinvent  the  wheel,  there  is  always 
the  possibility  that  we  don't  need  the 
wagon.  So  innovation  is  possible,  and 
in  some  instances  even  more  likely,  on 
the  part  of  the  less  experienced. 

Innovative  leadership,  however, 
poses  problems.  For  example,  a  given 
action  may  not  always  be  subject  to 
effective  articulation.  In  thinking  and 
designing  new  projects,  there  may  not 
be  time  or  even  words  for  expressing 
it  to  others  in  ways  that  are  readily 
understandable  or  relative  to  their 
experience.  Though  innovation  pro- 
vides opportunities  for  touching  others 


success  in  working  with  each  other  as 
we  expand  our  acts  and  thoughts  into 
new  areas,  is  the  adoption  of  trust  and 
good  faith.  Leadership  as  a  function  of 
growth  is  also,  then,  the  process  of 
building  confidence,  not  only  so  that 
others  will  follow,  but  also  so  that 
others  will  attempt  leadership  them- 
selves. Basic  to  leadership  and  growth, 
therefore,  is  respect  for  each  other  as 
individuals  and  the  consciousness  that 
each  of  us  is  in  the  process  of  creating 
self-autonomy.  This  respect  mandates 
that  we  do  no  harm  to  each  other.  A 
damaged  individual  is  a  testament  to 
failure;  a  damaged  individual  is  not 
helpful  to  herself  or  to  the  movement. 


in  ways  that  create  possibilities  for 
further  individual  acts  and  new  leader- 
ship, it  requires  and  implies  flexibility 
and  trust.  As  women  act,  we  will  be 
confronted  with  situations  that  are 
new  to  us  (if  not,  we  are  not  going 
anywhere).  So,  though  there  may  be  a 
tentativeness,  confusion  or  what  may 
appear  to  be  vacillation,  it  is  in  fact  a 
testing.  And  this  testing  is  a  necessary 
part  of  the  innovation  process. 

Thus    one    ingredient    in    women's 


This  is  not  to  say  that  the  leadership 
process  is  free  from  pain.  Growth  is 
change,  and  change  can  be  painful.  All 
leadership,  moreover,  involves  risk,  and 
therefore  risks  the  possibility  of  in- 
flicting "damage"  either  to  self  or  to 
others.  But  responsible  leadership  in- 
volves a  mutual  respect  which  helps  to 
insure  that  pain  of  growth  and  ex- 
change does  not  become  incapacitating 
and  destructive-a  mutual  respect  for 
each    woman's    vital    center    that    can 


Leadership,  Growth  and  Spirit/63 


distinguish  between  the  woman  as 
actor  and  the  action  taken.  Therefore, 
it  is  especially  important  that  leader- 
ship be  considered  a  form  of  steward- 
ship. 

As  a  function  of  growth,  leadership 
must  instill  in  others  the  notion  that 
they  can  do  things  well-and  this 
responsibility  is  part  of  leadership  as 
stewardship.  It  must  emphasize  that 
individuals  as  separate  entities  have  the 
capacity  to  survive,  that  women  are 
not  naturally  unable  to  do  what  has  to 
be  done  for  our  own  freedom.  Thus 
leadership  as  a  function  of  growth 
must  develop  in  each  woman  a  sense 
of  her  ability  to  provide  an  equal  con- 
tribution. It  must  foster  in  her  a 
sense  of  herself  as  an  autonomous 
individual,  for  leadership  is  tied  up 
with  the  sense  of  one's  autonomy. 
Such  autonomy  is  developed  as  a 
person  encounters  obstacles  and  learns 
how  to  handle  or  remove  them. 

Here,  especially,  it  is  important  that 
we  remember  that  leadership  is  not 
always  sought  after.  It  is  frequently 
forced,  because  of  one's  feeling  that  it 
is  imperative  to  act  in  a  particular 
situation.  Your  sense  of  what  is  right 
and  what  you  are  makes  an  undeniable 
claim  on  your  life-a  claim  that  de- 
mands action  and  leadership.  This 
does  not  come  from  somebody  out- 
side, but  from  within  yourself.  A 
leader  will  respect  this  process,  and  all 
of  us,  in  turn,  must  respect  it  in 
others.  And  through  this  process  there 
will  be  a  growth  of  individuals,  a 
growth  of  leaders,  and  growth  of  the 
women's  movement. 


Leadership  As  a  Function 
of  Spirit 

All  considerations  of  leadership  as  a 
function  of  spirit  for  the  women's 
movement  emanate  from  the  fact  of 
woman  as  a  living  being,  a  dynamic 
entity,  versatile  and  capable  of  strength 
and  action.  Our  obligation  as  women  is 
to  recognize  and  nourish  this  potential: 
the  goals  and  objectives  of  the  wom- 
en's movement  are  endless;  the  life  and 
spirit  of  the  individual,  through  whom 
and  for  whom  these  goals  are  set,  is 
not. 

The  present  strength  and  activity  of 
the  movement  lies  in  the  aspirations 
and  hopes  of  individual  women  cap- 
able of  a  feminist  vision.  Individually, 
we  are  innately  capable  of  creating  our 
own  reality,  and  as  a  movement,  we 
must  create  our  reality  in  common. 
If,  however,  in  the  pursuit  of  goals  and 
objectives  on  behalf  of  the  whole, 
individuals  are  destroyed,  the  whole 
will  also  eventually  be  destroyed. 

When  women  come  together  from 
so  many  different  places  and  join  to- 
gether for  entirely  new  action,  there  is 
bound  to  be  conflict.  For  example, 
many  of  us  have  developed  traits  and 
habits  which,  although  they  are  neces- 
sary in  an  individual  pursuit,  are  not 
helpful  to  a  joint  effort;  others  carry 
with  them  the  scars  from  a  hostile 
environment.  But  differences  arising 
from  such  sources  can  be  overcome 
through  considering  each  woman  as  an 
entity  who  carries  within  her  the  fuel 
for  our  movement.  Through  this  con- 
sideration,  the  woman's  spirit  can  be 


64/Quest 


preserved,  and  conflict  can  be  tem- 
pered. 

The  growth  and  development  of 
individual  spirits  is  mandatory  for  the 
growth  and  development  of  the  spirit 
of  the  movement.  Leadership  must 
help  us  to  consider  each  woman  as 
part  of  the  embodiment  of  what  we 
all  want  and  need.  Ideas  and  acts  are 
received  individually  by  this  dynamic 
entity-woman.  She  may  change  them, 
augment  them  or  replace  them;  this 
capacity  for  response  is  within  us  all, 
and  is  the  genesis  of  leadership.  It  is  an 
expression  of  individual  autonomy. 
But  our  universality-which  is  in  our 
purpose  and  in  our  sex— has  yet  to  rest 
in  our  hearts. 

The    maintenance    of  the   spirit   of 


the  women's  movement  must  be  a 
function  of  leadership.  And  it  is  an  art. 
Leadership  by  example,  persuasion  or 
purpose  attempts  to  instill  the  spirit  of 
the  work,  the  word  or  the  idea  in  each 
woman,  attempts  to  find  that  vital 
center  in  each.  And  the  maintenance 
of  the  spirit  of  the  movement  is  a 
function  of  leadership  which  calls  for 
the  ability  to  empathize.  Leadership  as 
spiritual  maintenance  calls  for  sharing 
in  each  woman's  vital  center,  per- 
ceiving and  nurturing  her  autonomy 
and  her  capacity  for  response.  It  calls 
for  the  ability  to  create  a  spiritual 
bond  among  women. 

But  nurturing  and  inspiring  each 
others'  spirits  also  calls  for  courage. 
Women  need  courage,  and  we  must  get 


Leadership,  Growth  and  Spirit/65 


it  from  each  other.  Courage  feeds  the 
spirit,  and  enables  us  to  overcome  the 
fear  of  taking  action.  It  comes  from  a 
knowledge  of  the  consequences  of  an 
act  and  from  the  determination  to  risk 
what  may  come  because  "the  act  itself  is 
essential.  As  each  of  us  develops  the 
capacity  to  act  and  to  assume  leader- 
ship responsibilities,  each  of  us  de- 
velops courage,  and  builds  her  po- 
tential   to    share    it   with    her   sisters. 

Conclusion 

The  concept  of  leadership  as  a 
function  of  growth  and  a  function  of 
spirit  enables  us  to  examine  the  process 
of  leadership  within  the  movement  and 
its  effect  on  political  change.  For  all 
intents  and  purposes,  the  53%  of  the 
population  who  are  women  are  politi- 
cally ununited.  Though  men  as  men  are 
politically  united  in  their  sense  of 
superiority  and  its  resulting  invest- 
ment in  maintaining  power,  we  lack 
political  unity  despite  our  oppression. 
Thus,  as  activists  in  the  women's  move- 
ment, we  are  concerned  with  impor- 
tant individual  and  specific  actions, 
but  we  must  also  be  engaged  in  finding 
the  universals  of  women's  condition 
and   in    the    search   and    discovery  of 

f=  Subscribe  to  = 


common  ground.  Women  have  yet  to 
share  a  universal  sense  of  ourselves-but 
we  are  beginning  to  share  an  immut- 
able resolve  that  justice  for  women 
will  be   done. 

Flora  Crater,  editor  of  the  Woman 
Activist  and  long  time  NOW  member 
fighting  for  the  ERA,  was  a  candi- 
date for  Lieutenant-Governor  in  Vir- 
ginia in  1973. 


T 


A  LITTLE  k  , 
SOMETHING 
FOR  YOUR  * 
HOLE-IN 
THE-WALL 


THE  BIRD      M , 
CALENDAR   |$0 

1976  \ 

"Bird  News  Makes  History"-illustrated 
annotated  calendar  recording  8  years  of 
struggle  in  Atlanta,  the  South,  the  coun- 
try, the  world.  From  THE  GREAT  SPECK- 
LED BIRD,  Box  7847,  Atlanta,  Ga.    30309. 
Send  name  and  address  plus  $2.50. 


COME  OUT 


6814*4  Sunset  Blvd.  Los  Anqeles,  Ca.  90028 


1 


FIGHTING 


12  issues  $2.50 
for  sinqle  issue 
send  25C 

The  Newspaper  of  the  Lavender  &  Red  Union 

A  r.AY  L  I  BF.  RATION/COMMUNIST  ORGANIZATION 


66IQuest 


Who  Was 
Rembrandt's  Mother  ? 


by  Jackie  St.  Joan 

Once  women  wove  blankets 

To  warm  their  children 

Out  of  love 

And,  out  of  love  and  the 

fierce  desire  of  their  own 

hearts, 

they  made  them  beautiful 

Their  art  did  not  hang  on 

museum  walls 

But  covered  the  bodies  of 

sleeping  children. 

(Where  is  your  Rembrandt?) 

The  men  ash*  us. 

She  was  a  Navaho 

And  the  white  man  killed  her."1 


As  this  poem  suggests,  many  of 
women's  artistic  leaders  never  have 
been  recognized  or  allowed  to  flourish 
in  their  work,  because  white  male 
supremacy  has  circumscribed  their  ex- 
istence and  limited  their  roles.  Simi- 
larly, many  of  women's  political  lead- 
ers never  have  been  recognized  or 
allowed  to  flourish  in  their  work  for 
the  same  reasons.  Today  in  America, 
women  are  not  so  restricted,  yet  the 
women's  movement  is  suffering  from  a 
lack  of  political  leadership  and  a  lack 


graphics  by  Bar  bra  Beers 

of  political  theory  by  which  to  under- 
stand the  function  of  feminist  leader- 
ship. In  creating  such  a  theory  women 
must  start  from  what  is  familiar  to 
them.  The  Navaho  artist  based  her 
work  in  the  artistic  perceptions  she 
had  as  a  Navaho  and  as  a  woman. 
Likewise,  the  political  theorist  can 
base  her  work  on  the  political  percep- 
tions she  has  as  a  mother,  as  a  leader  in 
the  family  unit. 

It  would  appear  that  within  the 
family  unit,  in  the  role  of  mother, 
there  is  an  underlying  system  by 
which  women  operate  as  leaders.  In 
this  article,  I  propose  to  examine 
motherhood  as  a  model  of  feminist 
leadership,  to  identify  some  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  function  of 
mother  as  they  apply  to  the  function 
of  leader,  and  to  compare  how  so- 
ciety's treatment  of  mothers  is  similar 
to  the  women's  movement's  treatment 
of  its  leaders.  In  naming  these  charac- 
teristics, I  turn  to  my  own  and  others' 
experiences  as  mothers,  and  to  lesbian- 
feminist  literature  as  sources  of  in- 
formation. 

Many  women  carry  the  common 
experience  as  mothers,  as  leaders  in  a 


Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother?/67 


unit  in  which  others  have  looked  to 
them  for  group  survival.  In  addition, 
lesbian-feminist  writers  often  carry 
within  their  work  a  sense  of  ethnicity- 
of  women's  identification  as  a  people. 
Literature  is  a  good  source  because 
there  is  at  least  one  thing  that  good 
writers  and  good  political  leaders  have 
in  common-they  pay  attention  to 
what  inspires  people  (art)  or  to  what 
moves  people  to  act  (politics). 

At  this  point  I  want  to  make  clear 
what  I  am  not  saying.  I  am  not  saying 
that  only  mothers  or  only  lesbian- 
feminists  understand  feminist  consci- 
ousness or  are  capable  of  being  leaders. 
All  women  carry,  to  a  greater  or  lesser 
extent,  the  experiences  of  motherhood 
and  lesbianism.  Most  women  have,  at 
some  point  in  their  lives,  taken  respon- 
sibility for  someone  else,  whether  that 
person  was  a  husband,  a  child,  a  boss, 
or  an  aging  parent.  Also,  most  women 
have  experienced  the  emotional,  if  not 
the  physical  communion  of  women, 
whether  as  a  child  among  girlfriends, 
in  the  secretarial  pool,  or  in  family 
relationships.  What  I  am  saying  is  that 
lesbianism  and  motherhood  are  condi- 
tions, either  or  both  of  which  contain 
a  concentration  of  experience  related 
to  feminist  ethics  and  feminist  leader- 
ship. 

The  Motherhood  Model 

To  begin  with,  I  see  mothering 
(or  parenting)  as  a  function,  and 
"mother"  as  a  role.  How  that  function 
and  role  are  performed  varies  greatly 
according  to   the   society,  race,  class, 


education,  and  personal  style  of  the 
woman.  In  many  societies,  however,  a 
woman  is  allowed  only  her  identity  as 
a  mother  because  the  survival  of  the 
family,  as  it  is  structured,  depends  on 
a  woman's  commitment  to  that  role, 
and  the  family  members'  perception 
of  her  in  that  role  only.  When  a 
woman  puts  a  priority  on  her  personal 
survival  and  wants  to  be  seen  beyond 
the  mother  role,  or  outside  of  it  com- 
pletely, she  often  is  seen  as  a  betrayer 
who  is  weakening  the  group.  In  fact, 
she  is  upsetting  the  power  relation- 
ships in  the  family  and  expecting 
others  to  assume  some  of  her  responsi- 
bility, an  expectation  against  which 
family  members  often  will  rabel,  and 
for  which  she  often  is  punished  (guilt). 
She  then  is  expected  either  to  return 
to  the  mother  role,  or  to  become 
Supermom  (Margaret  Anderson  Plus). 
Many  of  the  same  dynamics  which 
operate  to  limit  the  power  of  women 
as  mothers  operate  to  limit  their 
power  as  leaders  in  the  women's  move- 
ment. 

Many  women  whom  I  know  are 
looking  for  a  new  model  of  mother- 
hood to  replace  the  Margaret  Anderson 
image  which  we  were  fed  as  children 
by  television.  Such  a  model  would 
allow  mothers  to  be  real,  which  in- 
cludes being  angry,  not  only  as  women, 
but  in  that  motherhood  role  itself.  A 
woman  who  is  allowed  to  be  herself 
and  who  also  chooses  to  function  as 
a  mother,  can  function  more  freely  to 

Margaret  Anderson  is  the  mother  in  "Father 
Knows  Best. " 


68/Quest,  vol.  II  no.  4,  spring,  1976 


the  betterment  of  herself  both  as  a 
person  and  as  a  mother.  Susan  Griffin 
expresses  that  image  in  her  poem, 
"I  Like  to  Think  of  Harriet  Tubman": 

And  when  I  think  of  the  President 

and  the  law,  and  the  problem  of 

feeding  children,  I  like  to 

think  of  Harriet  Tubman 

and  her  revolver... 

I  want  men 

to  take  us  seriously. 

I  am  tired  wanting  them  to  think 

about  right  and  wrong. 

I  want  them  to  fear 

I  want  them  to  feel  fear  now 

as  I  have  felt  suffering  in  the  womb... 

Mother-  As-Leader 

In  this  article,  I  will  make  broad 
statements  about  mothers.  I  am,  there- 
fore, stating  in  advance  that  all  those 
statements  need  qualification.  Al- 
though all  mothers  do  carry  some 
body  of  common  experience,  not  all 
mothers  deal  with  situations  in  the 
same  way.  I  am  exploring  a  new  image 
of  mother  as  leader  and  am  drawing 
from  my  own  experiences,  from  les- 
bian-feminist literature,  and  from  the 
experiences  of  others  I  have  known. 

When  a  woman  is  pregnant,  gives 
birth,  and  mothers  a  child,  she  goes 
through  a  process  of  accepting  total, 
and  then,  less  and  less,  responsibility 
for  someone  else's  survival.  Her  letting 
go  of  that  power  and  of  that  responsi- 
bility is  part  of  the  process  which  is 
required  for  her  own  survival  as  a 
person  and  for  her  children's  survival 


as  independent  human  beings.  In  the 
process  of  letting  go,  her  responsibility 
is  to  give  accurate  information  to  the 
child,  to  inspire  her  or  his  spirit,  to 
teach  what  survival  skills  she  knows  to 
her  young,  and  to  make  decisions  for 
the  group  when  they  need  to  be  made. 
Eventually,  the  mother  will  have  to 
let  go  of  her  mothering  role,  or  she 
herself  will  not  survive  as  a  whole 
person.  A  mother  is  more  than  that 
function  which  she  performs  for  a 
time.  If  she  does  not  let  go  of  that 
role,  her  children  will  rebel  and  leave 
her  behind.  So  many  women  have 
experienced  this  painful  process  from 
one  side  or  another,  that  it  is  a  clear 

lesson  of  women,  one  that  applies 
equally  well  to  political  leadership  as 
to  motherhood. 

Other  characteristics  of  a  mother's 
power  are  her  children's  dependency 
on  her  for  their  survival,  and  the 
intimacy  of  the  mother-child  relation- 
ship. No  one  wants  to  be  totally 
dependent  on  someone  else  for  her 
survival,  and  ideally,  in  a  woman-crea- 
ted society,  that  would  not  be  the 
case  for  either  mother  or  child.  How- 
ever, that  dependency  does  exist, 
although  one  saving  grace  to  the 
relationship  is  that  eventually  every- 
one can  outgrow  it.  Part  of  a  mother's 
job  is  to  foster  independence,  a  by- 
product of  which  is  to  teach  children 
how  to  be  their  own  mothers  and  how 
to  function  as  a  mother  to  others  when 
the  situation  requires  it.  In  addition, 
time,  over  which  we  have  no  control, 
will  change  the  relationship-in  fact, 
time  often  reverses  it. 


Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother?/69 


The  source  of  authority  for  a 
mother  in  the  family  group  is  derived 
from  the  intimacy  of  her  relationship 
with  her  children  that  holds  her  ac- 
countable to  them  for  their  survival 
as  a  group.  As  they  become  more 
independent,  they  become  more  em- 
powered to  call  her  to  an  accounting, 
and  ultimately  have  the  power  to 
leave  the  group  or  to  withdraw  their 
active  participation  (and  love)  from 
the  group,  thus  breaking  the  intimacy 
which  is  the  source  of  a  mother's 
authority. 

Another  characteristic  of  mother- 
hood, which  some  may  call  spiritual, 
but  which  I  see  more  pragmatically  as 
a  survival  mechanism,  is  faith.  Mothers 

tend  to  be  worriers  because  they 
know  that  their  powers  are  limited, 
and  that  they  can  do  only  so  much  to 
protect  and  prepare  a  child.  A  mother, 


to  survive  this  worrying  and  to  allow 
the  child  to  be  independent,  must 
operate  with  an  assumption  that  some- 
how all  the  lessons  got  through  and 
that  this  child  will  decide  what  is  best 
for  herself.  A  mother  must  "act  as  if" 
a  child  will  make  the  proper  decision, 
knowing  at  the  same  time  that  she/he 
may  not. 

It  may  appear  to  be  a  contra- 
diction to  act  as  if  you  believe  one 
thing  while  knowing  that  the  opposite 
thing  is  possible.  The  ability  to  live 
with  contradictions,  diversity,  and  ten- 
sion is  another  characteristic  of  moth- 
erhood. Judy  Grahn's  poem,  "A  Worn- 
man  is  Talking  to  Death,"  beautifully 
presents  a  woman's  ability  to  relate  to 
the  connections  among  people,  "in  an 
attempt  to  embrace  contradictory  ele- 
ments of  experience  and  responsi- 
bility. "3   She   describes  hating  a  man 


70/Quest 


who  called  her  a  queer  and  slugged 
her.  She  describes  how  she 
...fantasized  the  scene  again,  this  time 
grabbing  the  chair  and  smashing  it 
over  the  bastard's  head,  killing  himA 
Then,  remembering  her  first  love,  an 
ostracized  pregnant  teenager,  she  points 
to  the  contradiction  in  the  situation: 
"now  when  I  remember,  I  think: 
maybe  he  was  Josie's  baby,  all  the 
chickens  come  home  to  roost,  all  of 
them."5 

Contradictions,  tensions,  and  di- 
versity within  a  group  require  that 
a  mother  be  flexible,  have  a  sense  of 
humor,  and  allow  herself  to  react  as 
well  as  to  act  on  others  in  the  group. 

Demystifying  Motherhood 

A  mother  empowers  her  children  by 
feeding  their  spirits,  not  by  breaking 
them.  A  mother  can  provide  some  of 
the  conditions  by  which  children  can 
be  free  to  make  choices.  Part  of  pro- 
viding those  conditions  is  to  disclose 
facts,  goals,  and  process  within  the 
group.  Moreover,  a  mother  can  demys- 
tify her  role  and  her  function  by 
teaching  her  children  how  she  learned 
what  she's  trying  to  teach  them.  This 
process  allows  her  to  let  go  of  what 
appears  to  be  secret  knowledge  and 
mystery.  Alta  describes  this  process  in 
her  poem,  "The  Ten  Commandments 
of  Liberation."  She  lists  nine  do's  and 
don'ts,  some  of  which  are: 
Thou  shalt  clean  up  thine  own  messes... 
Thou  shalt  not  use  other  people.  As 
Tom  Hay  den  used  James  Rector  to 
advertise   people's   park,    as   marxists 


use  workers  to  overthrow  the  ruling 
class,  as  I  just  used  Tom  Hay  den  for 
demonstration  purposes... 
Thou  shalt  revel  in  what  you  really  are 
don't  change  your  looks,  don't  stop 
talking,  go  ahead  and  be. 
Thou  shalt  not  endanger  other  people 
for  an  idea. 

Thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed.  We  are  all 
perverts.  We  all  have  pasts  we  could 
spend  our  whole  lives  denying...." 
Alta  then  ends  with  the  tenth  Comm- 
andment: 

"Write  your  own  commandments.  I 
am  only  a  person  like  you.  Burn  this 
and  memorize  yourself. "' 

Similarly,  a  mother  eventually  says, 
like  Alta,  "Burn  this"  (what  I  have 
taught  you-you're  on  your  own)  "and 
memorize  yourself."  Not  only  can  a 
mother  demystify  her  role  by  sharing 
the  process  about  how  she  came  to 
understand  things,  but  the  very  fact  of 
not  sharing  that  process  can  be  a 
means  of  domination  in  itself. 

One  of  the  sub-functions  of  moth- 
ering is  teaching.  In  general,  a  mother 
teaches  two  things:  1)  individual  and 
group  survival  skills,  and  2)  how  to  be 
a  mother.  The  first  is  more  conscious 
than  the  second;  the  second  often  is  a 
by-product  of  teaching  the  first.  In 
trying  to  communicate  ethics  to  child- 
ren, using  abstractions  such  as  truth, 
freedom,  justice,  and  love,  is  a  com- 
plete dead-end.  Children  simply  want 
to  know  what  makes  sense.  They  have 
no  pre-conceptions  and  therefore  hold 
no  sancity  to  the  terms  themselves. 
Being  concrete  is  a  good  teaching 
technique. 


Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother?/71 


More  often  than  men,  women  pay 
attention  to  the  connections  in  life, 
and  can  focus  on  the  relationships 
between  things,  events,  ideas,  people. 
The  two  sides  of  our  brains  can  com- 
municate with  each  other. °  At  our 
best,  women  can  communicate  very 
concretely,  without  the  splits  between 
mind,  body,  emotion,  and  values. 
Women  can  combine  the  rational  and 
the  intuitive -hold  two  contradictory 
beliefs  at  the  same  time,  accept  that  as 
reality,  and  still  make  a  decision-still 
use  our  power. 


And  finally,  a  re-definition  of  the 
role  of  mother  must  allow  her  to  have 
faults,  to  be  an  ordinary,  common 
woman,  and  not  a  model  of  virtue- 
feminist  virtue  or  otherwise.  Mothers 
are  under  incredible  social  pressure  to 
be  perfect,  and  often  internalize  the 
pressure  to  be  a  perfect  mother  by 
setting  unreasonably  high  expectations 
for  themselves.  They  are  also  very 
aware  of  being  in  the  spotlight  among 
others,  especially  family,  in  dealing 
with  their  children  (since  mothering 
has    been    defined    as    their   function 


72/Quest 


alone).  Therefore,  a  mother  feels  guilty 
if  she's  tired,  or  if  she  even  wants  a 
private  life  of  her  own.  The  guilt, 
justifiably,  turns  to  anger,  and  she 
may  become  unable  or  unwilling  to 
function  in  her  role  at  all.  Society 
focuses  on  the  unique  significance  of 
her  role  (one  false  move  and  the  kid's 
ruined)  and  blames  her  for  mistakes 
which  may  be  her  child's  (or  others') 
responsibility. 

The    Common    Woman 

Several  lesbian-feminist  poets  have 
written  about  the  "ordinariness"  of 
women-that  it  is  often  the  common 
woman  who  will  rise  to  an  occasion  to 
play  an  important  role,  but  that  it  is 
because  it  was  necessary  to  do  so  and 
she  learned  how  to  do  so,  not  because 
she  possessed  a  certain  genius.  Judy 
Grahn  has  written  of  the  common 
woman: 

the  common  woman  is  as  common  as 
good  bread 

as  common  as  when  you  couldn't  go 
on  but  did.  For  all  the  world  we  didn't 
know  we  held  in  common 
all  along 

the  common  woman  is  as  common  as 
the  breast  of  bread 
and  will  rise 

and  will  become  strong-I  swear  it  to 
you 

I  swear  it  to  you  on  my  own  head 
I  swear  it  to  you  on  my  common 
woman's  head.° 

And  Susan  Griffin  writes  about 
Harriet  Tubman,  a  common  slave,  who 
did  what  was   necessary  to  be  done: 


and  she  lived  in  swamps 

and  wore  the  clothes  of  a  man 

bringing  hundreds  of  fugitives  from 

slavery,  and  was  never  caught, 

and  led  an  army 

and  won  a  battle, 

and  defied  the  laws 

because  the  laws  were  wrong.  *  " 

The  motherhood  model  which  I 
have  described  reveals  that  women 
always  have  functioned  as  leaders  in 
family  and  in  small  groups,  and  when 
allowed,  or  when  necessary,  in  large 
groups  as  well.  Certain  qualities  of 
feminist  leadership  can  be  extrapolated 
from  this  motherhood  model,  and  can 
be  useful  to  the  women's  movement  in 
forming  a  political  theory  of  leader- 
ship. 

Like  motherhood,  I  consider  leader- 
ship to  be  a  function  which  is  teach- 
able by  some  and  learnable  by  others. 
It  is  not  a  given  quality  with  which  one 
is  born,  although  some  may  perform 
the  function  better  than  others,  de- 
pending, at  least,  on  the  type  of 
task  to  be  accomplished  and  the  group 
to  be  affected. 

It  is  also  possible  that  women 
already  have  some  notions  about  lead- 
ership by  which  women  have  operated 
and  which  we  are  in  the  process  of 
naming  and  creating.  Writer  Joanna 
Russ  has  pointed  out  that  there  is 
a  theme  in  women's  science  fiction  of 
the  hero  with  her  apprentice,  and  that 
hero-apprentice  theme  is  conspicuously 
absent  from  male  science  fiction,  which 
is  usually  dominated  by  the  Men 
Among  Men.  She  also  notes  that  in 
women's    science    fiction,    heroes    are 


Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother?/73 


often  groups  of  women,  and  that  a 
hero  in  one  group  may  be  on  the 
periphery  in  another  group.  Similarly, 
in  the  lesbian-feminist  novels  of  June 
Arnold,  ^  while  one  or  two  women 
may  take  leadership  in  a  specific 
situation,  it  is  the  combined  efforts 
and  consciousness  of  the  group  of 
women  which  succeeds. 

These  concepts  suggest  a  pattern 
of  leadership  far  different  from  mens', 
in  which  the  group  focuses  on  the 
leader  in  the  center,  with  him  and  his 
constituents  fortifying  their  egos  back 
and  forth.  The  expectation  is  that  he 
is  the  leader  now,  and  always  and 
everywhere  will  be  the  leader.  Male-de- 
fined leadership  necessarily  implies  a 
political  inequality  between  the  leader 
and  the  constituents.  Although  it  is 
important  that  women  recognize  that 
we  do  not  have  equal  abilities  (we  are 
not  all  the  same),  leadership  among 
women  implies,  perhaps  for  the  first 
time  in  history,  a  possibility  of  a 
relationship  between  political  equals. 
This  is  especially  true  when  leadership 
relationships  cross/or  reverse  class  and 
race  lines. 

Leadership  As  a  Function 

The  idea  of  leadership  among  pol- 
itical equals,  if  leadership  is  seen  as  a 
function,  is  not  the  contradiction  it 
appears  to  be.  Just  as  sexual  relation- 
ships between  women  provide  the 
condition  for  equality  in  that  sexual 
relationship,  political  relationships  be- 
tween women  are  not  necessarily  equal 
in  all  respects;  those  relationships  are 


merely  a  necessary  condition  of  equal- 
ity but  not  sufficient  in  and  of  them- 
selves. 

Women's  organic  (i.e.,  not  con- 
taminated by  male  systems)  ways  of 
leading  may  be  a  kind  of  "shifting 
leadership,"  which  does  not  expect  a 
leader  to  always  and  everywhere  per- 
form that  function.  Marge  Piercy  ex- 
presses the  feeling  of  this  leadership 
pattern: 

/  want  to  be  with  people  who  submerge 
in  the  task,  who  go  into  the  fields 
to  harvest 

and  work  in  a  row  and  pass  the  bags 
along, 

who  stand  in  line  and  haul  in  their 
places, 

who  are  not  parlor  generals  ay  id  field 
deserters 

but  move  in  a  common  rhythm 
when  the  food  must  come  in,  or  the 
fire  be  put  out.-* 

This  quality  of  people  "who  do 
what  has  to  be  done,  again  and  again," 
is  a  quality  of  a  good  leader  also,  who 
knows  how  to  join  in  the  task  with 
others.  If  shifting  leadership  is  a  valid 
assumption  about  female  leadership, 
then  it  is  important  that  feminists 
consider  that  concept  and  take  advan- 
tage    of    that    knowledge    politically. 

In  searching  for  models  of  leader- 
ship, feminists  can  examine  what  they 
know  about  male  leadership  and  fe- 
male leadership  as  they  have  been.  To 
the  extent  that  feminists  need  to  be 
organized  to  gain  power,  we  are  de- 
pendent on  our  leaders  for  our  sur- 
vival also.  Viewed  as  a  function,  leader- 
ship    involves     a     pattern    of    mutual 


74/Quest 


dependency  and  responsibility.  A 
group  empowers  a  leader  with  certain 
responsibilities.  The  leader,  however, 
requires  that  the  constituents  take 
responsibility  for  their  own  tasks  with- 
in the  group,  and  that  they  perceive 
the  leader  not  only  as  the  role  which 
she  plays  within  the  group.  For  her 
own  survival  as  a  person,  the  leader 
must  not  be  seen  only  in  that  role. 
Her  letting  go  of  power  depends  on 
the  ability  of  others  to  learn  her 
functions  and  to  be  willing  to  perform 
her  role  when  her  leadership  time  is 
spent.  This  not-being-willing-to-let-go- 
of-power  and  the  not-being-willing-to- 
accept-responsibility  dynamic  often 
destroys  feminist  organizations.  Clear- 
ly naming  the  process  which  takes 
place  in  any  transfer  of  power  in  an 
organization  is  one  step  in  easing  that 
change  itself. 

What  gives  a  leader  authority?  Like 
mothers,  many  political  leaders  learn 
how  to  function  as  leaders  from  other 
leaders  before  them,  and  may  pose 
them  as  models  in  their  own  minds. 
So,  to  some  extent,  a  leader's  authority 
may  come  from  the  sense  of  responsi- 
bility which  the  leader  has  learned 
from  her  model.  However,  the  ultimate 
authority  of  a  political  leader,  both 
politically  and  ethically,  comes  from 
the  quality  of  her  relationship  with 
her  constituents.  It  is  to  them  that  she 
must  give  an  accounting  of  her  steward- 
ship. No  woman  is  going  to  pay  her 
dues  (to  some  one  or  some  thing)  and 
have  no  say  about  what  those  dues  go 
for.  If  a  leader  does  not  account 
(take    responsibility   for)   her  actions, 


her  constituents  have  the  ultimate 
control  to  deny  the  leadership  function 
to  her. 

In  the  women's  movement,  how- 
ever, this  denial  of  leadership  often 
takes  the  form  of  attack  on  one's 
personal  style  and  characteristics,  and 
is  more  often  backbiting  than  an 
objective  evaluation  of  a  woman's 
capacity  in  her  role  as  a  leader.  By 
not  viewing  leadership  as  a  function 
(which  includes  a  large  investment  of 
power  in  one  individual),  feminists 
often  destroy  the  political  work  they 
have  accomplished,  and  the  very  wom- 
en who  have  helped  them  to  accom- 
plish it.  Expecting  a  woman  to  ac- 
count for  her  function  as  a  leader  is 
valid  politically;  expecting  her  to  ac- 
count for  herself  personally  because 
she  is  a  leader,  is  not. 

Leaders  and  constituents  alike  need 
to  operate  from  an  assumption  of 
good  faith.  Like  a  mother's  attitude 
towards  her  children,  faith  is  "acting 
as  if"  women  have  the  courage  when 
we  know  that  many  ot  us  are  cowards. 
Faith  is  the  opposite  of  defensiveness 
and  paranoia.  Elitism,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  having  no  faith.  Rather,  it  is 
developing  a  prejudice  against  either 
the  Led  or  the  Leader.  From  the 
leader's  perspective,  it  is  assuming  that 
women  cannot  think  for  themselves, 
and  results  in  leaving  the  weak  ones 
behind,  powerless  and  confused.  From 
the  constituent's  perspective,  elitism 
is  assuming  that  the  leader  is  not 
looking  out  for  the  best  interests  of 
the  group,  and  results  in  the  destruc- 
tion and  loss  of  many  valuable  women 


Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother?/75 


as  leaders  in  the  movement.  Politically, 
faith  is  a  survival  mechanism  that 
assumes  women  are  becoming  free 
as  individuals  and  responsible  as  pol- 
itical women. 

Sharing  the  Process 

Elitism  also  includes  not  sharing 
the  process  of  decision-making  and 
experience  with  constituents.  Leaders 
can  demystify  that  function  (as  moth- 
ers demystify  their  role)  by  letting  go 
of  what  appears  to  be  secret  know- 
ledge and  mysteries  of  decision-mak- 
ing. Male  leaders  often  just  arrive  at 
a  certain  point  and  proceed  to  give 
orders.  They  often  present  their  pos- 
ition on  certain  issues  as  accomplished 
fact,  without  sharing  with  their  con- 
stituents how  they  got  to  that  position 
from  having  no  position  at  all.  Much 
like  male  journalists,  who  present  only 
the  facts,  the  news,  the  headlines  of  a 
story,  many  male  political  leaders  fail 
to  present  the  contradictions,  the  div- 
ersity, and  the  struggle  which  com- 
prised the  decision. 

A  feminist  leader,  like  a  mother, 
must  empower  her  constituents  by 
listening  to  them  and  by  teaching 
them  what  she  knows  about  getting 
things  done.  A  leader  can  do  this  by 
sharing  the  process  of  her  thinking 
and  her  experience  with  her  con- 
stituents. Good  leaders  do  not  break 
our  spirits  or  leave  us  feeling  like 
losers.  Leaders,  like  mothers,  should 
provide  the  conditions  by  which  wom- 
en can  be  free  to  make  choices-dis- 
closure of  facts,  goals,  process.  There- 


fore, leaders  have  an  obligation  to  tell 
truly  what  is  happening,  rather  than 
to  contrive  a  situation  so  that  it  will 
be  to  their  advantage.  This  is  not  to 
say  that  leaders  cannot  plan  strategy, 
goals,  or  intent.  In  fact,  they  must,  as 
part  of  their  function  as  leaders.  It  is 
to  say,  however,  that  those  plans  must 
be  part  of  the  disclosure,  upfront, 
where  everyone  can  judge  for  herself. 

This  process  also  implies  that  a 
leader  must  be  concrete  about  what 
she  is  saying,  and  not  explain  in  vague 
or  general  terms  that  are,  in  effect, 
meaningless  to  others.  Not  being  spec- 
ific often  means  not  communicating, 
which  can  develop  into  a  means  of 
domination  itself.  Constituent;  respon- 
sibility in  this  regard  is  to  be  attentive, 
and  when  practical,  to  interact  with 
the  leader  to  a  point  of  understanding. 

Men  have  developed  the  Great  Man 
theory  of  leadership:  a  leader  possesses 
special  qualities  that  account  for  his 
achievements,  and  which  others  can 
aspire  to,  but  somehow  will  never 
attain.  4  Women  know  better  than  to 
believe  this  myth  about  male  leaders, 
and  should  know  better  than  to  believe 
the  myth  about  mothers.  Women  have 
given  birth  to,  have  raised,  have  com- 
forted, have  been  brutalized  by,  and 
have  buried  all  those  Great  Men.  They 
have  seen  him  from  all  sides.  ^  Per- 
haps this  is  one  explanation  of  why 
feminists  have  been  so  distrustful  of 
leaders  who  pretend  to  be,  or  who  are 
presented  by  the  media  as  The  Great 
Woman. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  often 
these    same    feminists    who    will    not 


76/Quest 


allow  their  leaders  to  have  failings,  and 
who  exert  the  same  social  pressure  on 
political  leaders  that  is  put  on  the 
individual  mother  by  society.  Some- 
one is  looking  for  a  scapegoat  and  for 
both  mothers  and  leaders,  it's  a  set-up. 
People  want  a  leader  (mother)  who 
has  no  failings,  yet  they  want  to  blame 
her  for  the  group's  failings  by  exposing 
her  faults  and  destroying  her  person- 
ally. The  result  of  this  dynamic  is  a 
reluctance  on  the  part  of  many  women 
to  accept  leaders  who  pretend  to  be 
faultless;  and,  more  seriously,  a  reluc- 
tance or  refusal  on  the  part  of  many 


competent  women  to  accept  leadership 
in  the  movement  as  long  as  they  arc 
expected  by  others  to  be  faultless. 
Another  aspect  of  this  dilemma  is 
that  not  all  women  have  identical 
skills,  and  that  many  women  arc 
denied  their  own  ability  to  lead  by 
feminists  who  insist  that  women  arc 
all  the  same.  Some  women  are  better 
leaders  than  others,  just  as  some  wom- 
en are  better  mothers  than  others. 
And  just  as  society  expects  all  women 
to  function  equally  well  at  mothering, 
the  women's  movement  expects  all 
women    to    function    equally    well    at 


Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother?/77 


leading.  The  attitude  is  that  no  matter 
what  skills  the  job  requires,  the  job 
can  be  rotated.  While  it  is  true  that 
most  skills  can  be  learned,  and  that 
leadership  is  one  of  those  skills,  it  is 
destructive  to  the  task  of  the  group  to 
expect  everyone  to  perform  equally 
well  at  any  task.  It  is  also  destructive 
to  the  group's  task  to  postpone  or 
limit  the  scope  of  the  work  that  needs 
to  be  done,  until  each  woman  can 
acquire  the  skills  of  everyone  else.  In 
this  way,  our  work  becomes  a  personal 
workshop  and  our  political  work  in- 
effective. 

It  also  is  true  that  in  a  family  every- 
one is  not  the  same.  However,  in  the 
heterosexual  nuclear  family  structure, 
leadership  functions  are  usually  div- 
ided up  along  sex  role  lines.  In  an 
efficient  family  which  is  not  modeled 
on  the  nuclear  family  model,  dif- 
ferences in  ability  are  recognized,  and 
although  skills  are  taught  and  shared, 
the  survival  and  efficiency  of  the  group 
depends  on  its  using  the  best  of  its 
group  in  certain  capacities  when  spe- 
cific skills  are  needed. 

Women  will  not  accept  leaders  or 
heroes  imposed  on  them,  especially 
ones  who  are  unwilling  to  share  rec- 
ognition, when  that  sharing  is  due. 
Likewise,  women  will  not  accept  lead- 
ers who  display  no  fear,  no  doubts,  no 
conflicts,  and  who  have  all  the  answers. 
I  believe  that  women  will  accept 
leadership  from  the  common  woman 
who  knows  what  she  is  doing,  and 
who  will  tell  you  woman-to-woman 
what  she  knows  about  getting  things 
done.     She     will    deserve    recognition 


herself,  and  will  share  that  recognition 
with  others  when  it  is  due. 

However,  leaders  will  not  emerge  if 
they  receive  no  recognition  for  what 
they  have  done.  No  one  wants  to  lead 
(or  to  mother,  or  to  anything  else  for 
that  matter)  without  receiving  some 
recognition  for  having  performed  that 
function.  Male  society  rewards  its 
achievers  in  one  way  or  another,  thus 
reinforcing  that  behavior  and  encour- 
aging participation  in  that  system.  The 
women's  movement  seldom  does  the 
same,  and  often  is  more  likely  to 
negatively  reinforce  women's  accomp- 
lishments. Until-  feminists  are  willing 
to  accept  leadership  as  a  valuable  and 
necessary  function  in  a  political  move- 
ment, and  are  willing  to  reward  its 
leaders  when  they  deserve  credit  for 
their  work,  the  movement  will  be 
crippled  as  a  political  force  and  talent- 
ed women  will  be  continually  frust- 
rated. If  the  romantic  rewards  attached 
to  motherhood  were  removed,  and 
women  were  given  a  free  choice  about 
becoming  mothers,  how  many  women 
would  actually  choose  to  do  work  for 
which  they  receive  little  if  any  recog- 
nition. 


Concl 


usion 


Feminists  must  define  our  relation- 
ships to  our  leaders,  and  as  leaders,  to 
our  constituents.  If  we  don't,  our 
leaders  may  well  define  us,  or  we  may 
find  ourselves  without  women  will- 
ing to  emerge  as  leaders.  This  pro- 
cess requires  looking  at  our  respon- 
sibilities   both    as    leaders    and    con- 


78/Quest 


stituents.  Taking  responsibility  for 
what  one  does,  whether  in  a  leader- 
ship function  or  not,  is  the  first 
step  towards  framing  a  concept  of 
feminist  ethics,  and  of  feminsit  lead- 
ership. The  motherhood  model  of 
leadership  is  an  attempt  to  uncover 
what  women  already  know  about  lead- 
ership in  a  small  group,  and  to  create 
one  possibility  of  a  model  for  women 
as  political  leaders,  an  adaptation  of 
an  already  existent  framework  of  lead- 
ership. This  characterizing  of  the  qual- 
ities of  feminist  leadership  should  not, 
and  need  not,  be  thought  of  as  a  creed. 
It  is  merely  a  beginning,  with  a  few 
clues,  a  few  openers,  a  maximization 
of  what  we  need  to  define  about 
leadership. 

Footnotes 

^Taken  from  a  poster  by  Kathleen 
Thompson  of  Chicago,  Illinois. 

2Susan  Griffin,  "I  Like  To  Think  Of 
Harriet  Tubman,"  Shameless  Hussy  Press, 
P.O.  Box  424,  San  Lorenzo,  CA. 

3lnez  Martinez,  "The  Poetry  of  Judy 
Grahn,  "Margins,  August,  1975,  2919.  N. 
Hackett,   Milwaukee,  WI,  Beth  Hodges,  ed. 

\Judy  Grahn,  "A  Woman  Is  Talking  To 
Death,"  The  Woman's  Press  Collective,  5251 
Broadway,  Oakland,  CA. 

"Alta,  "The  Ten  Commandments  Of 
Liberation,"  Burn  This  And  Memorize  Your- 
self, Times  Change  Press,  Penwell  Road, 
Washington,    NJ    07882. 

7lbid 

^Gina  Covina,  "Rosy  Rightbrain's  Exor- 
cism/Invocation,"   The      Lesbian    Reader, 
Amazon    Press,     395     60th    St.,    Oakland, 
CA.    94618. 

"Judy  Grahn,  The  Common  Woman, 
The  Woman's  Press  Collective,  5251  Broad- 
way, Oakland,  CA  94618. 


l^Susan  Griffin,  supra  note  2. 

HFrom  a  lecture  by  Joanna  Russ, 
author  of  The  Female  Man,  (Bantam  Books), 
Woman  To  Woman  Bookcenter,  Denver, 
Colorado,    December    14,    1975. 

12jurie  Arnold,  Sister  Gin,  The  Cook 
and  the  Carpenter,  Daughters,  Inc.,  54  7th 
Ave.  South,  New  York,  NY  10014. 

l^Marge  Piercy,  "To  Be  Of  Use,"  To  Be 
Of  Use,  Doubleday  &  Company,  Inc., 
Garden  City,  New  York. 

l^From  lectures  by  Rita  Mae  Brown, 
Sagaris,  June  1975. 

l^This  point  is  dramatically  made  in 
the  film,  "The  Women's  Happy  Time  Com- 
mune," Women  Make  Movies,  New  York, 
N.Y. 

My  thanks  to  Barbra  Beers  for 
performing  the  mothering  function 
for  my  children,  during  the  time  it 
took  me  to  write  this  article. 

Jackie  St.  Joan  is  a  lesbian-feminist 
writer,  law  student,  and  organizer  of 
the  Colorado  Feminist  Federal  Credit 
Union,  who  lives  in  an  old  house  with 
a  leaky  toilet. 


m~  GAIA'S  GUIDE,  1976  "•» 
for  Gay  Women 

The  pocket  size  international  bar/club  guide  and 
directory  to  resorts,  restaurants,  centers,  switch- 
boards, organizations,  publications,  bookstores, 
mail  order  houses  plus  many  resources  and  ser- 
vices. This  third  edition  :  all  U.S.A.  plus  40  other 
countries.  2000  listings.  $5.00  only.  On  sale  at: 
LAMMAS  WOMEN'S  SHOP,  321  7th  St.,  S.E. 
and  LAMBDA  RISING,  1724  20th  St.,  N.W.  in 
D.C.  Or  sendS5.oowithyournameandaddress  to 
GAIA'S  GUIDE 
115  New  Montgomery  Street 
San  Francisco,  California;  94105 


Who  Was  Rembrandt's  Mother?/79 


WorkingPapers 

«-*     For  a  M  New  Society 

A  Special  Issue 

left  with 


Politics 

and  Programs 

for  1976 


the 
democrats? 


Gar  Alperovitz 
Peter  Barnes 
Jeff  Faux 
Tom  Hayden 
Christopher  Jencks 
Andrew  Kopkind 
James  R.  Polk 
James  Ridgeway 
Emma  Rothschild 
Stephen  Schlesinger 
Derek  Shearer 


Send  $2.50  for  this  issue  or  $10  for  a  one-year 
subscription  to:  Working  Papers.  Dept.  S31, 
123  Mt.  Auburn  St.,  Cambridge,  Mass.  02138 


Name 
Street . 
City 


State 


Zip 


(institutional  rate  $12.  overseas  rate  $15) 


S0/Quest 


Notes  for  prospective  contributors 

We  would  like  to  describe  our  processes  for  handling  material 
for  each  issue.  About  9  months  before  an  issue  comes  off  the 
presses,  a  small  development  committee  prepares  a  list  of  ques- 
tions and  ideas  which  we  hope  that  particular  issue  will  cover.  This 
list  is  available  to  anyone  who  is  considering  submitting  ideas  for 
the  issue,  outlines  for  potential  articles,  manuscripts,  poetry,  gra- 
phics, etc.  We  accept  unsolicited  material  and  seek  out  writers  and 
artists  known  to  have  definitive  political  perspectives  on  issues 
related  to  the  theme. 

All  material  is  reviewed  by  several  staff  members.  If  it  is  not 
appropriate  for  Quest  purposes  the  manuscript  or  graphic  will  be 
returned  to  the  author.  If  a  manuscript  is  to  be  considered,  it  is 
then  assigned  to  one  Quest  editor.  This  editor  is  responsible  for 
working  with  the  author  through  whatever  processes  of  rewriting 
and  editing  required.  This  process  includes  soliciting  comments  and 
suggestions  from  various  Quest  staff  and  Advisory  Committee 
members.  Authors  will  receive  final  edited  manuscripts  for  review 
before  printing. 

Manuscripts  should  be  double  spaced  on  8V2  by  11  paper,  using 
a  black  ribbon,  submitted  in  duplicate  (original  plus  one  copy). 
Length  of  submissions  should  be  from  2,500  words  (10  type- 
written pages)  for  reviews,  responses  and  short  articles,  to, 
at  most,  7,500  words  (25  pages)  for  longer  articles.  Where 
appropriate,  bibliographic  footnotes  should  be  collected  and 
typed  at  the  end  of  the  paper  in  numerical  order.  All  manu- 
scripts, poems,  and  graphic  material  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
stamped,  self-addressed  envelope.  Only  original,  unpublished 
manuscripts  and  graphics  are  acceptable. 

Graphics,  cartoons,  photographs  are  requested.  For  information 
concerning  graphic  specifications,  please  address  all  correspondence 
to  the  attention  of  Alexa  Freeman. 


future  issues 

KALEIDOSCOPE  ONE 

Summer,  1976  vol.  Ill  no.l 

Are  we  connecting  our  lives  to  our  ideas?  This  issue  will  be  an  open 
forum  for  substantive  response  to  our  first  two  years  of  publication  and 
for  your  input  to  help  chart  our  future.  We  seek  discussion  of  topics 
and  ideas  that  you  consider  vital,  as  well  as  commentary  on  previous 
articles.  Copy  Deadline:  February  15,  1976 

COMMUNICATION  and  CONTROL 

Fall ,1976  vol.  Ill  no.  2 

The  selection  and  transmission  of  information  is  an  index  to  power 
in  mass  society:  feminists  must  analyze  how  this  power  affects  women 
and  determine  how  we  can  use  it  to  better  political  effect.  Areas  for  ar- 
ticles include:  the  role  and  functions  fo  the  media  in  our  society;  com- 
munication and  art;  communication  and  political  organization;  feminist 
forms  of  communication.  Copy  Deadline:  May  15,  1976 

WORK,  WORK,  WORK 

Winter,  1976-77  vol.  Ill  no.   3 

Work  is  an  essential  part  of  our  lives:  of  our  survival,  our  self-identity, 
and  our  group  identification.  Crucial  to  feminist  vision  are  new  ways  of 
viewing  and  organizing  work.  Areas  for  articles  include:  What  is  defined 
and  rewarded  as  work— for  men  or  women;  how  does  work  affect  our 
self-concept,  especially  in  regard  to  class,  race,  and  sex;  what  are 
feminist  modes  of  organizing  work.  Copy  Deadline:  August  15,  1976 

RACE,  CLASS,  and  CULTURE 

Spring,    1977  vol. Ill  no.  4 

While  feminists  create  a  "women's  culture,"  we  learn  about  our  dif- 
ferences as  women;  we  must  examine  how  race  goes  beyond  the  color 
of  our  skin  and  class  means  more  than  just  the  money  we  make.  We  seek 
articles  for  this  issue  that  discuss  various  aspects  of  the  relationship  be- 
tween political  development  and  culture,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the 
issues  of  class  and  race.  Copy  Deadline:  November  15,  1976 


